
Article 1
General Provisions
Section Contents

Chapter 1.1    Introduction to Article 1

1.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 1.2    Authority of the Municipal Code

1.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

1.2.20    Title and References

1.2.30    Effective Date

1.2.40    Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations

1.2.50    References to Specific Ordinances

1.2.60    Severability and Validity of this Code

Chapter 1.3    Violations of this Code

1.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

1.3.20    Violations of this Code (Misdemeanors)

1.3.30    Violations of this Code (Infractions)

1.3.40    Ongoing and/or Continuous Violations

1.3.50    Enforcement of Misdemeanors

Chapter 1.4    Rules of Construction

1.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

1.4.20    Construction

1.4.30    Rules of Convention

1.4.40    Defined Terms

1.4.50    Interpretation in the Use of Other Codes by Reference

1.4.60    Interpretation and Application of All Other Ordinances

1.4.70    Effect of Headings

1.4.80    Acts by Deputy

1.4.90    Reference Applies to Amendments

1.4.100    Service of Notices

Chapter 1.1 Introduction to Article 1
1.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish the authority for the Municipal Code of the City of La Habra Heights and to define the categories of violations and the enforcement of this Code and the rules of construction that are applicable.

Chapter 1.2 Authority of the Municipal Code
1.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the authority of the Municipal Code and the City’s regulations, ordinances, and administrative procedures contained herein.

1.2.20 Title and References
This Municipal Code shall be known as the La Habra Heights Municipal Code. This La Habra Heights Municipal Code may also be referred to hereinafter as the Municipal Code or the Code.

1.2.30 Effective Date
The provisions of this Municipal Code shall take effect upon the date of its adoption by the City Council of the City of La Habra Heights.

1.2.40 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations
The adoption of the Municipal Code shall not affect any of the following:

A.    Municipal Code’s Effect on Prosecution. The adoption of this Municipal Code shall not effect the prosecution of any violations of ordinances that were committed prior to the date of this Code’s adoption.

B.    Municipal Code is Not a Waiver. This Municipal Code shall not be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty or other provisions of any other ordinance.

C.    Municipal Code’s Effect on Other Ordinances. The adoption of this Municipal Code shall not be construed as affecting any provisions of other ordinances related to the collection of any license, penalty, or fee. The adoption of this Municipal Code shall not be construed as affecting the provisions applicable to any violation of any other ordinance.

D.    Municipal Code’s Effect on Cash Deposits. The adoption of this Municipal Code shall not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit that is required pursuant to any other ordinance.

1.2.50 References to Specific Ordinances
This Municipal Code shall not affect deposits, notices, signs, warnings or other matters of record that refer to, or are connected with, ordinances that are specifically designated by number. Any such references shall apply to the corresponding provisions established in this Municipal Code.

1.2.60 Severability and Validity of this Code
If any portion of this Municipal Code is legally determined to be invalid or unconstitutional, any such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Municipal Code.

Chapter 1.3 Violations of this Code
1.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to discuss violations of this Municipal Code including those that are misdemeanors, infractions, or ongoing violations and to specify the method of enforcement of the violation.

1.3.20 Violations of this Code (Misdemeanors)
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions or requirements of this Municipal Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation or failure to comply is expressly stated by this Code to be an infraction. The penalties for any misdemeanor violations of this Municipal Code are described in Article 8 of this Municipal Code.

1.3.30 Violations of this Code (Infractions)
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions or requirements of this Municipal Code that are expressly stated by this Code to be an infraction shall be guilty of an infraction. The penalties for any infraction violation of this Municipal Code are described in Article 8 of this Code.

1.3.40 Ongoing and/or Continuous Violations
A violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day any violation is committed or continued. In addition to any penalty, any condition resulting in the violation of the provisions or requirements of this Municipal Code shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any such nuisance may be summarily abated. Additionally, every day any such nuisance continues or is permitted to continue shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

1.3.50 Enforcement of Misdemeanors
Infractions and misdemeanors shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of State of California Penal Code.

Chapter 1.4 Rules of Construction
1.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the rules of construction and interpretation of this Municipal Code.

1.4.20 Construction
This La Habra Heights Municipal Code is intended to be internally consistent. Wherever the provisions of this Municipal Code and the provisions of any applicable Los Angeles County Code or any other Code that has or will be adopted by reference are in conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall be applicable, unless otherwise stated.

1.4.30 Rules of Convention
The following grammatical rules shall apply in this Municipal Code and any Ordinances in the City unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

A.    Time of Day. Whenever a certain hour or time of day is specified in this Municipal Code or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given, such hour shall be Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in current use in the City.

B.    Number of Days. Whenever a number of days are specified in this article or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this Municipal Code, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days, unless the number of days is specifically identified as business days.

C.    Other Terms. Any term not specifically defined in this chapter shall correspond to that provided in a dictionary.

D.    Gender. The masculine gender, where used, also includes the feminine.

E.    Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

F.    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present unless otherwise noted.

G.    Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive unless the context dictates otherwise.

1.4.40 Defined Terms
Words or terms that are italicized have distinct meanings in this Municipal Code. The definitions of these words are as provided in Article 12 of this Municipal Code. For all words not defined in this Municipal Code, conventional meanings shall apply.

1.4.50 Interpretation in the Use of Other Codes by Reference
Certain sections or provisions of the Los Angeles County Code and state statutes have been adopted by reference in this La Habra Heights Municipal Code. The following references in the Los Angeles County ordinances or statutes shall have the following meanings when incorporated in the La Habra Heights Municipal Code unless the context requires otherwise:

A.    "County of Los Angeles" and "County" shall mean the City of La Habra Heights.

B.    "Board of Supervisors" shall mean the City Council of the City of La Habra Heights.

C.    "Unincorporated territory" shall mean the City of La Habra Heights.

D.    "County officer" shall mean the appropriate or designated office of the City of La Habra Heights as designated by the City Manager.

E.    "Public Welfare Commission" shall mean the City Council of the City of La Habra Heights.

F.    "Planning Director" shall mean the Community Development Director of the City of La Habra Heights or any other such person designated by the City Manager.

1.4.60 Interpretation and Application of All Other Ordinances
For the purpose of this Municipal Code, and in the interpretation and application of all other existing and future City ordinances, except as the context may otherwise require, the following terms shall be applicable:

A.    "City" shall mean the City of La Habra Heights.

B.    "Council" shall mean the City of La Habra Heights City Council.

C.    "County" shall mean the County of Los Angeles

D.    "Oath" shall mean and include affirmation.

E.    "Office." The use of the title of any officer, employee, or official shall mean such officer, employee or official of the City La Habra Heights, or his or her duly authorized representative.

F.    "Person" shall mean and include any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, company or corporation and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the City of La Habra Heights.

G.    "State" shall mean the State of California.

1.4.70 Effect of Headings
Article, chapter, section and subsection headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any article, chapter, section or subsection hereof.

1.4.80 Acts by Deputy
Whenever in this Municipal Code a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, or by an officer of the County of Los Angeles, or by an employee of such officer when by contract with the City of La Habra Heights. Such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the City, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.

1.4.90 Reference Applies to Amendments
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Municipal Code, or to any ordinance of this City, the reference shall refer to the most current version of such code or ordinance as it may be amended from time to time.

1.4.100 Service of Notices
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Municipal Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address as the address appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Whenever any service of notice is required, it shall be written in English unless expressly provided otherwise. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit at the post office.

Article 2
City Administration
Section Contents

Chapter 2.1    Introduction to Article 2

2.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 2.2    City Offices

2.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.2.20    Hours of City Business

2.2.30    Civic Center

Chapter 2.3    City Council

2.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.3.20    Officers and Duties of the City Council

2.3.30    Date of Municipal General Election

2.3.40    Term of Office

2.3.50    General Rules for City Council Meetings

2.3.60    Adoption of City Ordinances, Resolutions, and Orders for Payment

Chapter 2.4    Commissions and Other Committees

2.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.4.20    Planning Commission

2.4.30    Special Advisory Committees

Chapter 2.5    Meeting Rules and Conduct

2.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.5.20    Agendas

2.5.30    Rules Governing Public Meetings

Chapter 2.6    City Manager

2.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.6.20    Duties of the Office of the City Manager

2.6.30    Appointment, Removal and Compensation of City Manager

Chapter 2.7    City Personnel System

2.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.7.20    Unclassified Service

2.7.30    Classified Service

2.7.40    Adoption and Amendment of Rules for Classified Employees

2.7.50    Appointments and Dismissal

Chapter 2.8    City Finance and Accounting

2.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.8.20    Payment and Method of Approval

2.8.30    Register of Demands

2.8.40    Claims

2.8.50    Purchasing Policy

2.8.60    Bidding Procedures

2.8.70    Purchases on the Open Market

2.8.80    Exceptions to Bidding and Open Market Purchasing Procedures

2.8.90    Inspection and Testing

2.8.100    Disposition of Surplus Supplies and Equipment

2.8.110    Assessor and Tax Collector

Chapter 2.9    Establishment of the Fire Department

2.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

2.9.20    Established; Composition; Authority Generally

2.9.30    Fire Chief Position Created; Appointment

2.9.40    Powers and Duties of the Fire Chief

2.9.50    Compensation of Volunteer Firefighters

Chapter 2.1 Introduction to Article 2
2.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish the governance and administration of the City of La Habra Heights.

Chapter 2.2 City Offices
2.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the time and place for the conduct of City business.

2.2.20 Hours of City Business
The City offices shall be open to the public for business as specified by resolution of the City Council of La Habra Heights.

2.2.30 Location of City Offices
City offices shall be located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of La Habra Heights.

Chapter 2.3 City Council
2.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the organization and operation of the City Council.

2.3.20 Officers and Duties of the City Council
The City Council will consist of the following offices.

A.    Mayor. The Mayor is a member of the City Council and is annually selected by a majority vote of the City Council in December or upon certification of the election results. As a member of the City Council, the Mayor shall have all of the powers of a City Council member. Additionally, the Mayor shall represent the City Council in the preparation of agendas, serve as the presiding officer at City Council meetings, authorize certain financial transactions (as specified herein) and function as the City Council’s spokesperson.

B.    Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected by a majority vote of the City Council at the same meeting at which the Mayor is selected. The Mayor Pro Tem shall assist the Mayor in the performance of duties and serve as a presiding officer in the Mayor’s absence.

C.    Members. The City Council shall consist of five (5) members including the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. The City Council members shall be residents of the City of La Habra Heights and may not hold any paid position for the City of La Heights or otherwise be employed by the City.

D.    Council Delegate Appointments. Annually at the same meeting at which the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore are selected, the Mayor shall propose City Council members to serve on various committees that require a City Council representative or delegate. These appointments shall become effective upon their approval by the City Council.

E.    Appointments to Planning Commission. Each member of the City Council shall appoint a member of the Planning Commission. The whole Council shall appoint an alternate by majority approval.

F.    Prioritization of Goals and Objectives. On an annual basis consistent with the fiscal year budget, the City Council may prioritize goals and objectives for the Planning Commission and other commissions and committees for the following year. (Ord. 2017-02 § 2; Ord. 2015-07 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 2015-03 §§ 2, 3)

2.3.30 Date of Municipal General Election
Beginning in November of 2022, general municipal elections shall be conducted on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years. (Ord. 2017-02 § 2; Ord. 2015-03 § 4)

2.3.40 Term of Office
The following requirements are applicable to the City Council members’ terms of office:

A.    Regular Term of Office. City Council members’ term of office will be four (4) years.

B.    Staggered Terms of Office. The initiation and expiration of three (3) City Council members’ terms of office shall be separated by two (2) years from the other two (2) City Council members’ terms of office.

C.    Premature Vacation of City Council Office. The City Council shall, by majority vote, appoint a replacement City Council member for any City Council office that is vacated prior to the end of its term. The City Council shall appoint any replacement within 30-days of the vacation of office at a City Council meeting. The term of office for the replacement City Council member shall be limited to the remaining term of office of the original City Council member that vacated the office. This Subsection (2.3.40.C) does not apply to recalls.

2.3.50 General Rules for City Council Meetings
The following rules are applicable to the conduct of City Council meetings.

A.    Meeting Times. All regular meetings will convene on the day and time as set by City Council resolution unless noticed for a different time or on the next succeeding business day that is not an official holiday. Any meeting of the City Council may be adjourned to a later date, place, and time; provided, that no adjournment is to a date later than that of the next regularly scheduled meeting.

B.    Open Meetings. Except for closed sessions, all meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public and media and may be recorded by tape, radio, television, or photography, provided that such recordings do not interfere with the orderly conduct of the meeting.

C.    Quorum. Three (3) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum necessary to conduct normal business. In the event a quorum is not in attendance, the City Clerk will adjourn the meeting to a set date and time.

D.    City Staff Attendance at City Council Meetings. The following City staff are required to attend City Council meetings:

1.    The City Manager, unless excused, shall attend all City Council meetings.

2.    The City Attorney, unless excused, shall attend all City Council meetings. The City Attorney, upon request, shall give opinions, either written or oral, on questions of law and shall act as the City Council’s parliamentarian.

3.    The City Clerk, unless excused, shall attend all City Council meetings. The City Clerk shall record, prepare, and maintain the minutes of the City Council and perform other related duties as prescribed by the City Council.

4.    Department heads and other City employees, as directed by the City Manager, shall attend City Council meetings.

E.    Other Rules. Other applicable general rules of conduct for City Council meetings are identified in Chapter 2.5. (Ord. 2017-07 § 1)

2.3.60 Adoption of City Ordinances, Resolutions, and Orders for Payment
This Section establishes the procedures for the preparation, consideration and adoption of ordinances.

A.    Preparation of Ordinance. All draft ordinances must be reviewed by the City Attorney prior to submittal to the City Council.

B.    Ordinance Introduction and Adoption. A proposed ordinance will be read by title only unless a City Council member disagrees and the majority of the City Council orders a full reading. Ordinances introduced by first reading shall not be adopted within five (5) days of the introduction nor at other than a regular or an adjourned regular City Council meeting. After an Ordinance has been introduced for first reading, it can be placed on the Consent Calendar for adoption at a subsequent regular meeting. If the ordinance carries an urgency clause, introduction and adoption may occur at the same meeting.

C.    Majority Vote Required. An affirmative vote of a quorum shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance, a resolution, or an order for the payment of money. Motions and matters other than ordinances, resolutions, and orders for the payment of money may be adopted by a majority vote of the quorum. An Urgency Ordinance must be adopted by at least a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council.

D.    Ordinance Preservation. Following adoption of an ordinance, the City Clerk will assign it a number and post it in the manner required by law. All ordinances will be filed and maintained by the City Clerk.

Chapter 2.4 Commissions and Other Committees
2.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the establishment, organization, and conduct of City commissions and committees.

2.4.20 Planning Commission
The City of La Habra Heights Planning Commission is established in accordance with the Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws (PZDL) of the State of California.

A.    Responsibilities of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall exercise all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges and authorities provided in this Chapter.

B.    Organization of the Planning Commission. The City Council shall select the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may appoint from among its members other officers as may be necessary for the administration of Planning Commission business. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and shall keep a record of minutes, resolutions, actions, findings, and determinations that shall be filed with the City Clerk.

C.    Planning Commission Members and Appointments. The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five (5) members and one (1) alternate who must be residents of the City. The alternate shall serve as an active member of the Planning Commission but shall not vote unless one (1) regular member is absent or abstains from voting, in which case, the alternate shall have the same voting power as a regular member. Each member of the City Council shall appoint one Planning Commission member. The City Council as a whole shall appoint the alternate. Appointments of Planning Commission members shall be announced and appointments of an alternate shall be made at a regular City Council meeting typically following the general City Council election. No Planning Commissioner shall hold any paid position in the City of La Habra Heights or otherwise be employed by the City.

D.    Planning Commission Terms of Office. Planning Commission members shall be appointed after the appointing City Council member takes office. Members shall hold office until a successor has been appointed. Should a Planning Commission vacancy occur for any reason, an appointment shall be made for the un-expired portion of the term.

E.    Planning Commission Removal from Office. A Planning Commissioner may be removed by the appointing City Council member or by any successor to that Council member at any time. Any Planning Commission member may also be removed, with or without cause, by an action of the City Council by a four-fifths (4/5) vote. The Alternate may be removed with or without cause by an action of the City Council by a quorum vote. Any Planning Commissioner or alternate who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Planning Commission, unless excused by the Presiding Officer, shall automatically forfeit the position as a Planning Commission member.

F.    Planning Commission Meetings. The location, day and time of regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

G.    City Staff Attendance at Planning Commission Meetings. The following City staff are required to attend Planning Commission meetings:

1.    The Community Development Director, unless excused, shall attend all Planning Commission meetings.

2.    The City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney, unless excused, shall attend all meetings of the Planning Commission and shall, upon request, give opinions either written or oral on questions of law and shall act as the Commission’s parliamentarian.

3.    The Planning Commission Secretary, unless excused, shall attend all meetings of the Commission and record, prepare, and maintain the minutes of the Planning Commission and perform other related duties.

4.    Department heads and other City employees, as directed by the City Manager, shall attend Planning Commission meetings.

H.    Other Rules. Other applicable rules of conduct for Planning Commission meetings are identified in Chapter 2.5. (Ord. 2014-02 § 1)

2.4.30 Special Advisory Committees
The City Manager may establish special advisory committees. In certain instances, the City Council may establish a special committee. These special committees will be established for a specific purpose and for a specified period of time. Other requirements governing the establishment and conduct of these special committees include the following.

A.    Duties of Committees. Special committees shall be established as advisory bodies to assist the City and City Manager in fact-finding and for the purpose of recommending or implementing City policy.

B.    Organization of the Committees. The composition of committee membership will be determined by the City Manager unless established by the City Council.

C.    Terms of Office and Removal. Any vacancies in the committee shall be filled by appointment by the City Manager.

D.    Meetings. The committee, with the approval of the City Manager, will be responsible for the time and location of the committee meetings.

Chapter 2.5 Meeting Rules and Conduct
2.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter establishes the procedures and rules of decorum regarding the conduct of all public meetings.

2.5.20 Agendas
An agenda shall be prepared and made available prior to the public meeting in accordance with the applicable regulations.

2.5.30 Rules Governing Public Meetings
This section identifies rules governing the conduct of all public meetings.

A.    Rules of Order. The Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of all public meetings. However, no ordinance, resolution, proceeding or other action will be invalidated, or its legality affected, by the failure or omission to observe or follow said rules. The City of La Habra Heights Rules of Decorum shall apply to all public meetings.

B.    Presiding Officer. All public meetings shall have a presiding officer. The Mayor shall serve as the presiding officer at all City Council meetings. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as the presiding officer.

C.    Voting. Voting at public meetings shall be conducted pursuant to Robert’s Rules of Order.

D.    Continuance of an Item. Any member of a legislative body may request to continue an item (not subject to a deadline) to an agreed upon meeting. This continuance may only be approved by a majority vote. Any member of the public may request a continuance of an item and the City Council or Planning Commission may, by a majority vote, grant the requested continuance.

E.    Open Government. The provisions of the Brown Act shall be adhered to where applicable. All public meetings (except for authorized closed sessions of the City Council or Planning Commission) shall be open to media and may be recorded by tape, radio, television, or photography, provided such recordings do not interfere with the orderly conduct of the meetings.

F.    Quorum. A quorum is necessary to transact business at a public meeting. In the event a quorum is not in attendance, the meeting may be adjourned to a set date and time or may be conducted as a "committee of the whole", but no action may be taken without a quorum present.

G.    Minutes of Proceedings. An account of all public meeting proceedings, where appropriate, shall be recorded and entered into the official minute books of the City.

Chapter 2.6 City Manager
2.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the duties and conduct of the office of the City Manager.

2.6.20 Duties of the Office of the City Manager
The City Manager shall serve as the administrative head of the City of La Habra Heights under the direction and control of the City Council. The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration of all affairs of the City.

A.    City Manager as Chief Executive and City Administrator. The City Manager shall exercise control over and supervise all departments and divisions of the City Government, including but not limited to:

1.    The supervision of all public buildings, streets, and other public property that are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.

2.    The coordination and activities of all City departments and staff and personnel that provide services on a contract basis.

3.    The initiation of contracts, agreements and other written obligations on behalf of the City, including those that require City Council approval.

4.    The execution of contracts, agreements and other written obligations on behalf of the City, subject to the City’s purchasing ordinance.

B.    City Manager Duties. The duties of the City Manager shall include the following.

1.    The City Manager shall keep the City Council fully appraised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City, shall oversee the preparation of reports and recommendations as requested by City Council, and ensure the performance of other duties specified by the City Council.

2.    The City Manager shall be responsible the preparation and administration of the City’s annual budget.

3.    The City Manager shall administer the City’s personnel system including, but not limited to, the development of personnel rules, hiring and discipline, employee evaluations, and management of contract personnel. The City Manager shall administer all personnel policies except for those specifically reserved to the City Council.

4.    The City Manager, when acting in the capacity of City Clerk, shall be responsible for the maintenance of the official records of the City of La Habra Heights, the publication of all legal notices, the maintenance of election records and property used in connection with elections, the publication of appointments to all commissions and committees, the administration of oaths or affirmations, the certification of affidavits and depositions and the receipt of all claims against the City.

5.    The City Manager shall perform such additional duties as are prescribed by ordinance or the City Council.

6.    The City Manager shall conduct his duties without interference from the City Council in the day-to-day operation of the City. (Ord. 2007-04 § 1)

2.6.30 Appointment, Removal and Compensation of City Manager
The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and ability and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. No person elected to membership on the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one (1) year has elapsed after leaving the City Council. The following conditions shall apply to the office of City Manager:

A.    Absence of City Manager. In the case of a short absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Manager designee or Assistant City Manager shall perform the duties of the City Manager.

B.    Removal of City Manager. The City Council shall appoint the City Manager for an indefinite term and the City Manager may be removed by three (3) members of the City Council. The removal need not be for cause. The City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty but shall, in any case, cause to be paid any unpaid balance of the City Manager’s monthly salary during such suspension. Within thirty (30) days of the suspension, the City Council shall provide for either the dismissal or reinstatement of the City Manager.

C.    Removal After Municipal Election. The City Manager may not be removed from office within a period of ninety (90) days succeeding any general municipal election held at which a new member of the City Council is elected unless such removal is for good cause. After the expiration of the ninety (90) day period, the provisions of the preceding section (2.6.30.B) will apply.

D.    Compensation. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as determined by the City Council and as reflected in the employment contract. The terms of the employment contract may be modified by written agreement of the City Council and City Manager.

E.    Bond. The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond approved by the City Council. The fee for such surety bond shall be the responsibility of the City.

Chapter 2.7 City Personnel System
2.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the personnel system for the City of La Habra Heights.

2.7.20 Unclassified Service
Persons in Unclassified Service have no property right in their position and serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority and may be terminated or demoted without cause or notice. The Unclassified Service positions include all offices and positions noted in this section.

A.    City Manager/City Clerk, the City Treasurer, the City Attorney, the Fire Chief, and Department heads.

B.    Members of appointed commissions and committees.

C.    Persons engaged as contractors to provide expert, professional, technical, internship or any other service and retained pursuant to an employment agreement.

D.    Persons retained under contract on a temporary, seasonal, emergency or casual basis.

E.    Volunteers.

F.    Persons not employed in permanent positions.

G.    Any position primarily funded under a State or Federal employment program.

2.7.30 Classified Service
Classified service refers to persons regularly employed in permanent budgeted positions hired for an indefinite term and regularly scheduled to work not less than one thousand (1,000) hours per fiscal year. Classified employees must have successfully completed a probationary period. Classified employees include all offices, positions and employment in the service of the City except for those noted under Section 2.7.20.

2.7.40 Adoption and Amendment of Rules for Classified Employees
Personnel rules prepared by the City Manager shall be submitted for approval by the City Council. If approved, such rules shall be adopted or amended by City Council resolution. The personnel rules may establish policies and procedures governing the personnel system, including:

A.    The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including employment standards and qualifications for each position;

B.    The appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment;

C.    The preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment in the classified service;

D.    The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments;

E.    The establishment of probationary periods;

F.    The evaluation of employees during any probationary period;

G.    The transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the classified service;

H.    The separation of employees from City service;

I.    The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements;

J.    The establishment of any necessary disciplinary appeal and grievance procedures; and

K.    The establishment of vacation, sick leave and other leaves.

2.7.50 Appointments and Dismissal
This Section indicates the rules governing appointment and dismissal procedures for Classified and Unclassified employees. Except for the positions of the City Manager, the City Attorney, and the City Treasurer, the appointing authority of employees is the City Manager.

A.    Procedures for Classified Employees. Appointments to positions in the classified service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. The City Manager shall have the authority to reprimand, reduce in pay, demote, suspend or terminate any regular classified employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. The City Manager may delegate, in writing, the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the City. The City Council shall have the sole authority to appoint the City Manager, the City Attorney, and the City Treasurer.

B.    Procedures for Unclassified Employees. The City Manager shall have the authority to hire unclassified employees at the direction of the City Council. The City Manager may delegate, in writing, the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the City. Unclassified employees may be required to sign an employment contract that may terminate at will, by the City Manager.

Chapter 2.8 City Finance and Accounting
2.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter establishes general procedures regarding City finance and accounting.

2.8.20 Payment and Method of Approval
Each demand shall be presented to the City Manager for written approval. All demands, whether approved or not, shall be forwarded by the City Manager to the City Council for review except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.

2.8.30 Register of Demands
The following procedures apply to demands:

A.    Warrant Register. A register of all demands shall be submitted to the City Council prior to payment except as authorized by this Chapter. The warrant register shall specify for what purpose the demand is drawn and the fund from which it is to be paid.

B.    Payroll and Budgeted Demands. Payroll and budgeted demand warrants whose compensation has been previously fixed by the City Council need not be reviewed by the City Council prior to payment. Payrolls shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval at its first meeting after payment of the payroll warrants. Warrants of demands certified or approved by the City Manager as conforming to a budget approved by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, need not be reviewed by the City Council prior to payment. Budgeted demands paid prior to review by the City Council shall be stated on the register of demands separately from unpaid demands, and shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval at its first meeting after delivery of the warrants.

C.    Disposition of Warrant. If the City Council finds that any claim or demand is not a proper charge against the City, it shall be rejected. If any demand is determined to be a proper charge against the City, the same shall be allowed setting forth as to each demand, the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the demand, and the amount claimed. Any demand may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the City Council.

D.    Approved and Allowed. For any demand approved and allowed by the City Council, the Mayor or other authorized person shall sign the warrant upon the City Treasury for the claim that shall be countersigned by the City Manager. The warrant shall specify the purpose of the payment and from what fund the claim is to be paid. Warrants and checks drawn upon the City funds may be combined in one instrument.

E.    Check Authorization. For any demand approved and allowed by the City Council, the Mayor or other authorized person shall sign the check for the demand. The check shall be countersigned by the City Manager.

F.    Payroll Checks. The City Treasurer shall establish a separate payroll account on which all payroll checks shall be drawn. The payroll account shall be designated the "Payroll Revolving Fund" and shall be maintained and replenished out of the General Fund. All monies in this fund shall be expended exclusively for payroll purposes. Payroll checks shall only require the signature of the City Treasurer or City Manager. Before such payroll checks are issued, the Director of Finance shall certify, in writing, that the payroll is correct.

G.    Sufficient Money in Treasury. Except as otherwise provided, no warrant shall be paid until there is sufficient money in the City treasury legally applicable to the payment of the demand.

2.8.40 Claims
The following procedures must be followed in the consideration and payment of claims:

A.    Person to Present Claim. No City officer shall, except for his own service, present any claim against the City, or in any way, except in the discharge of his official duty, and advocate for the relief asked for in the claim made by any other person. Any person may appear before the City Council and oppose the allowance of any claim made against the City.

B.    Itemization Necessary. The City Council shall not hear, consider, allow, or approve any claim against the City unless such claim is itemized.

C.    Claims Against the City. The subsection is enacted pursuant to the California Government Code.

1.    All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Section 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this Chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that Part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this Section.

2.    All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this Section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910.

3.    In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.5, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the City Council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of Subsection (C)(1) of this Section.

4.    Any action brought against the City upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City shall conform to the requirements of Section 950-951 of the California Government Code.

2.8.50 Purchasing Policy
It shall be the policy of the City to obtain supplies and equipment of the highest quality for the lowest cost. (Ord. 2007-04 § 2)

2.8.60 Bidding Procedures
The following procedures apply to all bidding:

A.    Bid Notice Requirements. Purchases of or leases for supplies and equipment of an estimated value of greater than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder after notice. Such notice shall invite bids and include a general description of the supplies or equipment to be purchased or leased, where bid forms and specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for the submittal of bids.

B.    Publication of Bid Notice. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and/or by posting the bid notice. The City Manager shall also mail a copy of such notice to anyone who has requested to be so notified. All notices shall be published, posted, or mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the date specified for the submittal of bids.

C.    Security of Bidder. When deemed necessary by the City Manager, bidder security may be prescribed in public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit its bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The City Manager may, upon refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the City Manager awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied to the difference between the low bid and the next lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

D.    Bid Submittal. Bids shall be submitted to the City Manager and opened at the time specified by the City Manager. Bids received by the City shall be retained for public inspection during regular business hours for not less than the period specified in the City’s document retention policy.

E.    Bid Rejection. The City Council may reject any and all bids, waive any irregularity in any bid and readvertise for bids.

F.    Awards to Lowest Bid. In the event that the City Council decides to award the contract, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein based on a detailed analysis of the bid package which may consider the full life cycle analysis of the bid proposal.

G.    Performance Bond Requirement. The City Manager shall have authority to require a performance bond in an amount necessary to protect the best interests of the City before entering into a contract. If the City Manager requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

H.    Emergency Purchases. In the event of an emergency, the City Manager is authorized to enter into a public works contract and/or make purchases of equipment, services, and supplies in excess of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars but less than one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars, but only to repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and/or procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes. Such contracts or purchases shall only be made in cases where there is a high likelihood that the project is eligible for reimbursement from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In making such a contract or purchase, at least three (3) vendors shall be solicited to submit price quotations by use of sealed bidding methods, facsimile, or e-mail. Award shall be made to the vendor offering the lowest acceptable quotation that best meets the needs of the City. The names of vendors submitting quotations, their respective addresses and principal places of business, and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. If a contract or purchase is made pursuant to the authority granted in this section, the City Manager shall report the action to the City Council for review in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22050. (Ord. 2016-01 § 2; Ord. 2007-04 § 2)

2.8.70 Purchases on the Open Market
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars or less may be made by the City Manager on the open market after solicitations of written proposals from prospective sellers. Such solicitation may be made in writing, by telephone or otherwise, and shall be made to sufficient numbers of prospective sellers as may be deemed by the City Manager to be consistent with the policy of the City Council. Written proposals shall be submitted to the City Manager who shall keep a record of all proposals for the period corresponding to the City’s document retention policy. Such records shall be made available for public inspection (vendor proprietary data shall not be open to public inspection). (Ord. 2008-09 § 1; Ord. 2007-04 § 2)

2.8.80 Exceptions to Bidding and Open Market Purchasing Procedures
The bidding and proposal requirements of Sections 2.8.60 and 2.8.70 shall not apply to purchases of supplies and equipment in one or more of the following circumstances:

A.    Such supplies or equipment have an estimated value of less than five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars;

B.    Such supplies or equipment are unique because of their quality, durability, availability, or fitness for a particular use;

C.    Such supplies or equipment are available from only one source;

D.    The City Manager has determined that exigent circumstances require the immediate purchase of such supplies or equipment;

E.    Such supplies or equipment are provided by an independent contractor pursuant to an agreement with the City for the furnishing of labor and materials for other than the construction of a public works project;

F.    Where it is advantageous to combine purchase of such supplies or equipment with another governmental entity, and the governmental entity employs purchasing procedures adequate to ensure effective competition among responsible vendors;

G.    Whenever feasible and beneficial to the City, the City Manager may authorize the purchase of such supplies or equipment from vendors who have cooperative-type contracts with another governmental entity; or

H.    Such supplies or equipment are purchased through a public or private auction, to the extent that the City Manager has determined that such purchases are in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 2008-09 § 5)

2.8.90 Inspection and Testing
The City Manager shall inspect or oversee the inspection of supplies and equipment delivered to the City to determine their conformance with the specifications contained in the order or contract. The City Manager shall have authority to undertake sampling or other testing as necessary to determine the quality of any deliverables and their conformance with applicable specifications. (Ord. 2008-09 § 2. Formerly 2.8.80)

2.8.100 Disposition of Surplus Supplies and Equipment
All departments shall submit to the City Manager, when requested, reports showing all supplies and equipment that are no longer used or which have become obsolete. The City Manager shall have authority to sell, exchange or trade this equipment for new supplies and equipment. Any sale of equipment shall be made by the most effective method that may include formal sealed bids, informal bids, and negotiations. In addition, the City may hold a public auction when selling City supplies and equipment. In the event the supplies and equipment are offered at public auction, any person may make an offer to purchase the supplies and equipment. No City employee shall purchase any supplies or equipment sold by means other than a public auction, nor shall the party conducting the auction purchase any supplies or equipment at the auction. (Ord. 2008-09 § 3. Formerly 2.8.90)

2.8.110 Assessor and Tax Collector
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the State of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector hereby are transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector to the County of Los Angeles. (Ord. 2008-09 § 4. Formerly 2.8.100)

Chapter 2.9 Establishment of the Fire Department
2.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter governs the establishment of the City of La Habra Fire Department.

2.9.20 Established; Composition; Authority Generally
The Fire Department of the City is hereby created and established. The Fire Department shall consist of regular full-time, part-time and volunteer personnel under the command of the Fire Chief. All members of the Fire Department shall be governed by the departmental rules and regulations including such manuals of operation, drill manuals, by-laws and other rules as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. All departmental rules, regulations, manuals of operation, drill manuals, by-laws and other rules shall be approved by the City Manager, except as otherwise directed by the City Council. In addition, all regular personnel shall abide by all personnel rules and regulations of the City of La Habra Heights that govern employees of the City and all volunteer personnel shall abide by such personnel rules and regulations and other policies of the City as are applicable to those personnel. No person, organization, association or corporation shall provide or conduct fire fighting rescue, and/or paramedic operations within the city limits of the City of La Habra Heights except the La Habra Heights City Fire Department, fire-fighting personnel from other local, state and federal agencies and such other individuals and organizations as are formally authorized by the City Council.

2.9.30 Fire Chief Position Created; Appointment
The unclassified position of Fire Chief of La Habra Heights is hereby created and established. The City Manager shall appoint the Fire Chief on the basis of his or her administrative and executive qualifications and abilities. The Fire Chief may be removed at any time with or without cause from his office by the City Manager. The City Manager shall supervise the Fire Chief and the Fire Chief shall be responsible to the City Manager. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1)

2.9.40 Powers and Duties of the Fire Chief
The Fire Chief shall be the operational head of the Fire Department and shall be responsible, under the direction of the City Manager, for the administration of all the affairs of the department within his or her jurisdiction. The Fire Chief shall direct all members of the department, both regular employees and volunteers, in the lawful exercise of their functions and shall have full authority to detail any fire department employee to such public safety service as he or she may direct. The Fire Chief shall have control of the engine houses and of the apparatus and equipment of the department. The Fire Chief shall cause to be put into effect rules and regulations to govern the operation of the Fire Department and shall establish such fire prevention rules, subject to the Uniform Fire Code, as are necessary. The Fire Chief shall also have charge of all fire, rescue and paramedic services.

2.9.50 Compensation of Volunteer Firefighters
There shall be paid to the volunteer firefighters such compensation for time and services provided as is established by resolution of the City Council.

Article 3
Taxes and Licenses
Section Contents

Chapter 3.1    Introduction to Article 3

3.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 3.2    Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance

3.2.10    Short Title

3.2.20    Rate

3.2.30    Operative Date

3.2.40    Purpose

3.2.50    Contract with State

3.2.60    Sales Tax

3.2.70    Place of Sale

3.2.80    Use Tax

3.2.90    Adoption of Provisions of State Law

3.2.100    Limitations on Adoption of State Law

3.2.110    Permit Not Required

3.2.120    Exclusions and Exemptions

3.2.130    Amendments

3.2.140    Enjoining Collection Forbidden

3.2.150    Severability

Chapter 3.3    Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax

3.3.10    Short Title

3.3.20    Imposition of Tax

3.3.30    Payment

3.3.40    Exemption; Security

3.3.50    Exemption; Governmental Agencies

3.3.60    Exemption; Miscellaneous Proceedings

3.3.70    Exemption; Securities and Exchange Commission

3.3.80    Partnerships

3.3.90    Administration by County Recorder

3.3.100    Claims for Refund

Chapter 3.4    Fire Tax

3.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

3.4.20    Imposition of Fire Tax

3.4.30    Maximum Tax Amounts

3.4.40    Exemptions

3.4.50    Administrative Determinations; Appeal Procedures

3.4.60    Special Fund; Use of Tax Proceeds; Accountability Measures

3.4.70    Annual Determination of Tax Amounts: Inflation Adjustments

3.4.80    Collection with Property Taxes

Chapter 3.5    Home Occupation Business Licenses

3.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

3.5.20    Definition of Home Occupation

3.5.30    Fee

3.5.40    Requirements for Issuance of a Home Occupation Business License

3.5.50    Revocation

Chapter 3.6    Regulation of Certain Businesses

3.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

3.6.20    Adoption of License Ordinance

3.6.30    Amendment

3.6.40    Contractors

3.6.50    Vehicles

3.6.60    Resource Extraction Businesses

Chapter 3.7    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

3.7.20    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

Chapter 3.8    Air Quality Improvement Fund

3.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

3.8.20    Definitions

3.8.30    Establishment of Fund

3.8.40    Audits

Chapter 3.1 Introduction to Article 3
3.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to outline procedures with respect to the taxes, licenses, and fees of the City of La Habra Heights and in the regulation of certain types of businesses.

Chapter 3.2 Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance
3.2.10 Short Title
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.

3.2.20 Rate
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be one (1%) percent.

3.2.30 Operative Date
This Chapter became operative on December 4, 1978.

3.2.40 Purpose
The City Council hereby declares that this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter.

3.2.50 Contract with State
The City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax Chapter.

3.2.60 Sales Tax
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 3.2.20 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date.

3.2.70 Place of Sale
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

3.2.80 Use Tax
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 3.2.20 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

3.2.90 Adoption of Provisions of State Law
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.

3.2.100 Limitations on Adoption of State Law
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, whenever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefore. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such taxes, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

3.2.110 Permit Not Required
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this Chapter.

3.2.120 Exclusions and Exemptions
The following exclusions and/or exemptions are applicable.

A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter.

C.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

F.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

3.2.130 Amendments
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter.

3.2.140 Enjoining Collection Forbidden
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

3.2.150 Severability
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

Chapter 3.3 Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax
3.3.10 Short Title
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 12000&file=11901-11903" target="_top">11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

3.3.20 Imposition of Tax
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City of La Habra Heights shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred ($100.00) dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half ($0.275) cents for each five hundred ($500.00) dollars or fractional part thereof.

3.3.30 Payment
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.3.20 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.

3.3.40 Exemption; Security
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

3.3.50 Exemption; Governmental Agencies
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, and when it is acquiring title, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other part liable therefore.

3.3.60 Exemption; Miscellaneous Proceedings
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment.

A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections (A) to (D), inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

3.3.70 Exemption; Securities and Exchange Commission
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.

B.    Such order specifies the property, which is ordered to be conveyed; and

C.    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

3.3.80 Partnerships
A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if

1.    Such partnership (or any other partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

3.3.90 Administration by County Recorder
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.

3.3.100 Claims for Refund
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 06000&file=5096-5107" target="_top">5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

Chapter 3.4 Fire Tax
3.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the establishment and implementation of a Fire Tax for the City of La Habra Heights.

3.4.20 Imposition of Fire Tax
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a special tax to fund fire prevention and protection services and life safety services is hereby imposed on every parcel of land in the City of La Habra Heights. The tax shall be imposed in each fiscal year in amounts deemed necessary by the City to furnish or cause to be furnished adequate fire prevention, fire protection, and life safety services, including paramedic services and emergency medical response services, in the City, but in no event shall the tax exceed the maximum amounts permitted by this Chapter. The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be a tax upon each parcel of property, and the tax shall not be measured by the value of the property.

3.4.30 Maximum Tax Amounts
The maximum amount of the tax imposed on each parcel pursuant to this Chapter shall be determined as follows:

A.    Acreage Charge: Sixty-two dollars and twenty cents ($62.20) on each parcel, other than a parcel maintained and irrigated for golf course use, for each acre or part thereof up to and including the tenth acre; plus thirty-two dollars and ten cents ($32.10) for each acre or part thereof in excess of ten acres, up to and including the twentieth acre; plus sixteen dollars and two cents ($16.02) for each acre or part thereof in excess of twenty acres. For each parcel maintained and irrigated for golf course use the charge shall be twelve dollars and eighty-seven cents ($12.87) for each acre or part thereof.

B.    Residential Structure Charge: In addition to the acreage charge described above, for each parcel improved with one (1) or more residential structures, if the total habitable area is up to and including seven thousand square feet (7,000 square feet), a charge of three-hundred seventy-five dollars and sixty-one cents ($375.61) is hereby imposed; if the total habitable area is more than seven thousand square feet (7,000 sq ft.), a charge of six hundred six dollars and fifteen cents ($606.15) is hereby imposed.

C.    Commercial and Institutional Structure Charge: In addition to the acreage and residential structure charges described above, fifteen cents ($0.15) per square foot of enclosed habitable area for parcels improved with one (1) or more commercial structures; and one-thousand three hundred thirty-eight dollars and nineteen cents ($1,338.19) is hereby imposed on each parcel improved with one (1) or more institutional structures.

D.    Fuel Storage Facility Charge: In addition to the acreage, residential structure and commercial and institutional structure charges described above, two-thousand six-hundred seventy-six dollars and forty-one cents ($2,676.41) is hereby imposed on each parcel improved with a fuel storage facility, pump station, natural gas underground storage facility or compressor station.

3.4.40 Exemptions
A.    The following parcels shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter:

1.    Parcels owned by Federal or State governmental agencies;

2.    Parcels owned by local governmental agencies;

3.    Parcels exempt from taxation by the City pursuant to the laws or constitutions of the United States and the State of California.

B.    Any person claiming an exemption from the tax imposed by this Chapter shall file a verified statement of exemption on a form prescribed by the City Manager prior to June 30th of the first fiscal year for which the exemption is sought.

3.4.50 Administrative Determinations; Appeal Procedures
A.    The records of the Los Angeles County Assessor as of March 1st of each year shall determine the use and improvement of each parcel for the calculation of the tax applicable to that parcel in the following fiscal year. As used in this Chapter, "parcel" shall mean each contiguous unit of improved or unimproved real property held in separate ownership, including but not limited to, any single-family residence, or any other unit of real property subject to the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code Section 66410 et seq.

B.    The City Manager shall administer this Chapter. Appeals of any determination of the City Manager shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk not later than July 1st of the fiscal year for which the tax is imposed. The City Council shall consider the appeal and issue a decision to the appellant in writing.

3.4.60 Special Fund; Use of Tax Proceeds; Accountability Measures
A.    The proceeds of the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be placed in a special fund to be used to provide or cause to be provided fire protection, fire prevention, and life safety services, including, but not limited to, paramedic services and emergency medical response services. The costs of providing fire protection, fire prevention, and life safety services shall include, but not be limited to, salaries and benefits of personnel providing these services, costs associated with the acquisition, maintenance, or construction of equipment, facilities and supplies used for the provision of such services, administrative costs of the fire protection, fire prevention and life safety services program, and the cost of any other expenditure necessary or useful to the provision of these services. Proceeds shall be used for no purposes other than this purpose.

B.    The City Manager shall annually prepare the report required by Section 50075.3 of the California Government Code with respect to the proceeds of the tax.

3.4.70 Annual Determination of Tax Amounts; Inflation Adjustments
The annual Special Fire Tax adjustments for inflation shall be determined through the following procedures:

A.    The City Council shall annually act by resolution to determine the amount of revenue necessary to provide adequate fire protection and prevention services to the City and to establish tax amounts sufficient to generate that revenue. However, the City Council may not impose tax amounts in excess of those provided by Section 3.4.30 of this chapter, adjusted for inflation as provided in subsection B of this section, without the approval of two-thirds (2/3) of the voters of the City voting on the question.

B.    The maximum tax amounts specified by Section 3.4.30 of this chapter shall be increased by the lesser of (i) three (3%) percent or (ii) the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, or any successor to that index, increases in the twelve (12) months prior to March of the year in which the adjustment is made. The City Manager shall annually recalculate the maximum tax amounts pursuant to this subsection B and shall give notice of that determination in the manner required by law for notice of ordinances of the City.

3.4.80 Collection with Property Taxes
The special tax imposed by this chapter shall be due in the same manner, on the same dates, and subject to the same penalties and interest as established by law for other charges and taxes fixed and collected by the County of Los Angeles on behalf of the City of La Habra Heights. The special tax imposed by this chapter, together with all penalties and interest thereon, shall constitute a lien upon the parcel upon which it is levied until it has been paid, and shall constitute a personal obligation of the owners of the parcel on the date the tax is due.

Chapter 3.5 Home Occupation Business License
3.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish requirements for home occupation business licenses.

3.5.20 Definition of Home Occupation
Home occupation shall mean any non-horticultural activity regularly carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a secondary use at the resident’s dwelling. Home occupation includes any such activity regardless of whether the primary operations of the home occupation occur at the resident’s dwelling or elsewhere.

3.5.30 Fee
Every person engaged in a home occupation within the City limits shall obtain and pay a license fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The City shall not issue a business license until the home occupation is reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director. After initial issuance, home occupation business licenses shall be renewed annually and shall require an annual renewal fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

3.5.40 Requirements for Issuance of a Home Occupation Permit
Home occupations permitted by the provisions of the Zoning regulations (Article 7) cannot be conducted without first obtaining a Home Occupation business license that complies with the following regulations:

A.    There shall be only limited stock-in-trade associated with the home occupation, provided that keeping of such stock does not conflict with the other provisions of this Code, and provided such stock does not hinder the parking of vehicles in a garage.

B.    A home occupation shall be conducted in a dwelling and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling.

C.    There shall be no external alteration of a dwelling in which a home occupation is conducted, and the existence of a home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site, except for a nameplate in accord with the provisions of Article 7.

D.    No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed in the conduct of a home occupation.

E.    No motor or mechanical equipment shall be permitted other than normally incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling.

F.    A home occupation shall not create any radio or television interference or create noise audible beyond the boundaries of the site.

G.    No smoke, odor, liquid or solid waste shall be emitted.

H.    No vehicles or trailers, including pick-up trucks and vans, or construction or other equipment, except those normally incidental to residential use, shall be kept on the site.

I.    A home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount in the district.

3.5.50 Revocation
Any Home Occupation permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council upon its finding, after a public hearing that the permittee has failed, neglected or refused to perform, comply with and abide by any of the conditions and provisions of this Chapter.

Chapter 3.6 Regulation of Certain Businesses
3.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures governing the regulation of certain businesses in the City of La Habra Heights.

3.6.20 Adoption of License Ordinance
Title 7, Business Licenses, of the Los Angeles County Code as amended and in effect on June 30, 2006, is hereby adopted by reference as the License Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights. A certified copy of Title 7 of the Los Angeles County Code has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of La Habra Heights, and shall be at all times maintained by the Clerk for use and examination by the public.

3.6.30 Amendments
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.6.20, Title 7 is hereby amended by deleting Chapter 7.24, Charitable Solicitations. The License Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights shall include the supplemental matters set forth in the remaining sections of this Chapter.

3.6.40 Contractors
The following requirements are applicable to contractors that conduct business in the City of La Habra Heights.

A.    Definition. Contractor means any person except a licensed architect or a registered civil engineer acting solely in his professional capacity who in any capacity other than as the employee of another with wages or salary as his sole compensation undertakes to or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submit a bid to or does himself or by or through others does construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development, improvement or any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or work in connection therewith. Contractor shall include subcontractor or specialty contractor but shall not include an owner-builder or anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into or consuming them in the performance of the work of the contractor or owner-builder.

B.    License Required. Every contractor as defined in Section 7.29.010 engaged in the contracting business within the city limits of the City of La Habra Heights shall first obtain and pay for a contractor’s license as required by the Municipal Code of the City of La Habra Heights.

C.    Fee. The license fee required to be paid to perform, carry on, conduct or engage in any contracting activity shall be established by resolution of the City Council and every general and engineering contractor and owner-builder shall:

1.    Require all subcontractors for the performance of any work on each project in the City under his control or direction, whether the subcontract is written or oral, to have a business license as herein provided for the year or years in which the subcontractor’s work is to be done at the time such subcontract is made and before permitting such subcontractor to begin or perform services on any such project of said general or engineering contractor or owner-builder. The failure of such general or engineering contractor or owner-builder to comply with the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall render such general or engineering contractor or owner-builder liable to the City for an additional license fee equal to the amount of such subcontractor’s unpaid license fee plus any penalties for delinquencies accruing thereon pursuant to Title 7 of the Los Angeles County Code.

2.    Furnish the City with a list of all subcontractors to do work on any project of such general or engineering contractor in the City upon forms furnished by the City.

D.    Posting. Each contractor and subcontractor shall post on the site of work or construction a copy of their current business license.

3.6.50 Vehicles
Every person required to have a business license under this ordinance and who regularly uses a vehicle or vehicles in the conduct of their work or business shall obtain from the City a sticker that shall be placed on such vehicle or vehicles identifying the vehicle as belonging to a person with a current business license. Such stickers shall be obtained from the City of La Habra Heights for a fee established by resolution of the City Council.

3.6.60 Resource Extraction Businesses
This Section applies to those entities engaged in resource extraction in the City of La Habra Heights. The following applies to the determination and application of fees.

A.    Terms Specific to this Section. The following terms and definitions are specific to this section:

1.    "Resource extraction business" means a business that operates one or more oil or gas wells located in all or in part within the City of La Habra Heights.

2.    "Oil or gas well" includes any structure or means of extracting oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.

3.    "Oil" includes any liquid or semisolid containing hydrocarbons; "gas" includes any gaseous substance containing hydrocarbons.

4.    A "barrel of oil" shall consist of forty-two U.S. gallons of crude petroleum or hydrocarbon substances corrected for temperature variations in accordance with methods generally accepted in the petroleum industry. "Petroleum or hydrocarbon substances" means crude oil remaining after the removal of water or other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the well site preparatory to shipment.

5.    A "cubic foot of gas" shall consist of one cubic foot of shipped gas corrected for temperature variations in accordance with methods generally accepted in the natural gas industry. "Shipped gas" means gas remaining after the removal of water vapor or other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the well site preparatory to shipment.

B.    Tax.

1.    Every person engaged in a resource extraction business shall obtain a business license and pay an annual business license tax composed of (a) an annual wellhead tax for each well owned or operated by that person including idle wells, (b) a per barrel tax for each barrel of oil produced by that person, (c) a volume tax for each thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas produced by that person, excluding gas that is flared or otherwise wasted on site, and (d) a removal volume tax for each thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas extracted from a storage facility by that person.

2.    The rates for these taxes shall be as follows:

a.    Wellhead Tax. Effective January 1, 2014, the tax per well, whether active or idle, shall be five hundred ($500.00) dollars. This tax shall be increased each January 1, beginning January 1, 2015, by the lesser of (i) three (3) percent or (ii) the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area (as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor) or any successor to that index, increases in the twelve (12) months prior to September of the year prior to the adjustment. For example, the tax effective January 1, 2016, shall be increased from the tax effective January 1, 2015, by the lesser of (i) three (3) percent or (ii) the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index increases between September 2014 and September 2015.

b.    Per Barrel Tax. Effective April 1, 2013, the tax per barrel of oil produced shall be sixty ($0.60) cents. Each January 1 thereafter, the tax per barrel shall be re-calculated based on the California Crude Oil First Purchase Price (the "Oil Index") as published by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (or any successor to that index) using the following formula: the tax per barrel shall be sixty ($0.60) cents multiplied by the ratio obtained by dividing (i) the average of the monthly Oil Index for each of the months in the twelve (12) month period ending with the September prior to the adjustment by (ii) one hundred seven (107). For reference, one hundred seven (107) was the twelve (12) month oil index average for the period including May 2011 through April 2012.

c.    Volume Tax. Effective April 1, 2013, the tax per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas shall be ten ($0.10) cents. Each January 1 thereafter, the tax per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas produced shall be recalculated based on the Wellhead Prices per 1,000 Cubic Feet of United States Natural Gas (the "Natural Gas Index") as published by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (or any successor to that index) using the following formula: the tax per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet shall be ten ($0.10) cents multiplied by the ratio obtained by dividing (i) the average of the monthly Natural Gas Index for each of the months in the twelve (12) month period ending with the September prior to the adjustment by (ii) 3.35. For reference, 3.35 was the twelve (12) month Natural Gas Index average for the period including May 2011 through April 2012.

d.    Removal Volume Tax. Each calendar year, the tax rate per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas re-extracted from a storage facility shall be three-fifths of the rate of the volume tax for that year. For example, from April 1, 2013, through December 31, 2013, the rate shall be six ($0.06) cents per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of gas.

3.    Where this section requires calculation of an annual rate adjustment, the City Manager shall give notice of the results of such calculation in the manner required by law for notice of ordinances of the City.

4.    Each tax that is paid quarterly shall be calculated based on the rate in effect during the months of activity measured. For example, the per barrel tax due on January 30, 2014, based on production occurring from October 1, 2013, through December 31, 2013, shall be calculated based on the rate effective from October 1, 2013, through December 31, 2013.

5.    Each tax that is paid annually shall be calculated based on the rate in effect at the time the tax is due.

6.    Each reference to a "fee" or to "fees" in subsections A through I of this section shall be read to refer to the taxes imposed by this subsection B. Each reference to a "cubic foot fee" in this section shall be read to refer to the volume tax and removal volume tax imposed by this subsection B.

C.    Annual and Quarterly Fee Payments. The wellhead fee shall be due and payable annually under the La Habra Heights Municipal Code. The per-barrel and per cubic foot fees shall be due and payable as follows:

1.    Per barrel and per cubic foot fees shall be paid to the City no later than 30 days after March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year with respect to production during the three months prior to those dates. Returns submitted less than three months from the effective date of the ordinance that adopts this section, however, need only be made with respect to production after the effective date of that ordinance.

2.    Each person required to have a license under this Part shall keep full, true, and accurate records as to the amounts of oil and gas produced and shipped or sold. Those records shall be maintained for at least three (3) years and shall be made available, together with any shipping documents or sales invoices, for inspection by the City at any reasonable time.

3.    Each person required to have a license under this Part shall file with the City, along with each quarterly payment of per barrel and per cubic foot fees, a written return setting forth the number of wells in operation during any part of that quarter and the number of barrels of oil or cubic feet of gas produced by each well during the quarter for which the return is filed. Each such person shall pay the per barrel and per cubic foot fees calculated by applying the current rates to the production reported on the return. Each return shall be signed under penalty of perjury by one with authority to legally bind the business. No return shall be conclusive against the City as to the information set forth therein, nor shall the filing of a return preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action any additional fee that is determined to be due and payable.

D.    Failure to Remit. Any person who fails to remit any fee due under this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent per month or fraction thereof of the amount of the fee due, exclusive of penalties, in addition to the amount of the fee. If the City determines that nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the fee shall be added thereto in addition to the other penalties stated in this section. In addition to other penalties imposed, any person who fails to remit any fee due under this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the fee due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the fee required to be paid.

E.    Determination of Fee by City. If any person fails or refuses to make, within the time provided in this Part, any report and remittance of the fee or any portion thereof required by this Part, the City shall proceed in any reasonable manner to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the fee due. As soon as the City procures such facts and information as are available and determines an estimate of fee due, the City shall assess against the person the fee, interest and penalties provided for by this Part. The City Clerk shall give notice of the assessment by personal service to the person or the person’s representative, or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage pre-paid, addressed to the person’s last known address. Within ten days after the service or mailing of such notice, the person may make written application to the City Clerk for a hearing. If application by the person for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the fee, interest and penalties, if any, assessed shall become immediately due and payable. If such application is timely made, the City Clerk shall give not less than five days’ written notice to the person, in the manner prescribed in this section for the notice of the amount assessed, of the time and place fixed for a hearing. At such hearing, the person may appear and offer evidence why such specified fee, interest and penalties should not be assessed. After such hearing, the City Manager shall determine the fee to be remitted and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such fee, interest and penalties so due. The amount due shall thereupon be immediately due and payable.

F.    Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager at or following a hearing with respect to the amount of fee, interest, and penalties due, may file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen days after the serving or mailing of notice of the City’s determination. The City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing such appeal, and shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the person at the person’s last known address. The findings of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and notice thereof shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 7.29.240 for service of notice of assessment. Any amount found to be due, together with interest at the rate prescribed in Section 7.29.230 from the date such fee accrued and any penalty imposed, shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

G.    Additional Powers and Duties of the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the fees herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Manager. The City Manager may enter into administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this Part so that collection of any tax imposed hereby may be made in conformance with the collection procedures of a particular resource extraction business so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Part. A copy of each such agreement shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Manager.

H.    Application of Part. In the manner and upon the terms and conditions set forth in this Part, it shall be lawful for any person to drill a well for and to produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances and to conduct any other lawful operations, including the installation and maintenance of any derrick, drilling and producing equipment and appurtenance structures or machinery proposed or intended to be used for or in connection with the drilling for or production of oil and gas on any land within the City which is zoned to permit such operations, and on any other land where such operations may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City; provided, that all of such operations shall conform with the provisions of this Part.

I.    Administration and Enforcement of Part. It shall be the duty of the City Manager, or his/her designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this Part.

J.    Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, commence to construct or maintain or use within the City any derrick or other structure, equipment or machinery proposed or intended to be used or used for or in connection with the drilling for or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances without first obtaining a written permit therefore, to be issued by the Fire Chief in accordance with the terms of this Part. The re-drilling of an existing well shall be subject to the permit requirements of this section.

K.    Not Required for Servicing. No permit shall be required for well servicing.

L.    Permit Coverage. The following permit coverage requirements are applicable.

1.    Fire Permit Coverage: Each Fire Permit evidencing the inspection of any well shall require payment of fees sufficient to cover the costs of bi-annual inspection of all structures, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for the temporary field storage, separating, gauging, handling and shipping of oil, gas and other substances produced from or injected into any well; the inspection of all temporary structures, steel derrick or portable mast, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for such operation.

2.    Drilling Permit Coverage: Each permit authorizing the drilling of any well shall also authorize the installation and use of all temporary structures, steel derrick or portable mast, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for such operation, except as otherwise noted in the permit or as otherwise provided by this Code.

3.    Operation and Maintenance Permit Coverage: Each permit authorizing the operation and maintenance of any oil well shall also authorize the installation and use of all structures, tanks, equipment and facilities necessary or convenient for the temporary field storage, separating, gauging, handling and shipping of oil, gas and other substances produced from or injected into any well customarily used in connection with such operation, except as otherwise noted in the permit or as otherwise provided by this Code.

M.    Resource Extraction Business Regulations. Any person desiring any permit required by this Part shall file a written application therefore with the Fire Chief on forms furnished for that purpose which shall contain and be accompanied by the name or number and location of the proposed or existing well as such well may be identified and described in notices filed with the division of oil and gas. Each well shall be identified on a site map or parcel map depicting the location of the well and all other structures on the property. Under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights the drilling or re-drilling of a well requires a conditional use permit. Application for the conditional use permit shall be filed with the department of planning and development within five days of filing for a drilling permit.

N.    Bond to Accompany Application. Except as provided elsewhere in this Part, every application for a permit required by this Part, for which a bond is not on file, shall be accompanied by a faithful performance bond in a form approved by the City Attorney in the sum of fifty thousand dollars for each well. Such bond shall be conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all of the provisions of this Part. The bond shall secure the City against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it by reason of the failure of the permittee to comply fully with the provisions of this Part. The bond shall include a provision that the City be given written notice not less than sixty days prior to the cancellation or reduction in the coverage of the bond.

O.    Blanket Bond. In lieu for filing the bond as required by this Chapter for each well, a blanket bond in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars to cover all operations under this Part of a single permittee may be filed. Riders to such blanket bond may be filed with the City identifying each well to be covered by such blanket bond.

P.    Bond to Be Kept in Full Force and Effect. Each bond filed pursuant to this Chapter shall be kept and maintained in full force and effect until terminated or superseded as provided in this Part.

Q.    Termination of Liability Under Bond. The applicant, as principal, and the surety under any bond filed pursuant to this Chapter may have such bond terminated and canceled if and when the applicant or the assignee of any permit granted pursuant to the Part shall furnish a new bond therefore. Any bond or rider thereto shall be terminated and canceled upon the final and permanent cessation or abandonment of all operations in connection with any wells for which such bond or rider thereto was given, in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Part.

R.    Permit Issuance. The application for an oil well permit submitted pursuant to this Chapter shall be approved and the permit granted by the Fire Chief within five working days after the granting of the conditional use permit and after receipt of such application which conforms with the provisions and requirements of this Part. No permit shall be issued which would conflict with any provision of the zoning ordinance or any other provision of this Code.

S.    Drilling Permit. A fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall accompany each application for a permit to cover the drilling of a new well and the re-drilling of an existing well to recomplete it at a different level or zone than the existing well hole.

T.    Permit Valid for One Fiscal Year. Each oil well permit shall be valid only for the fiscal year for which issued.

U.    Permit Renewal Required Each Year. Each permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be renewed at the beginning of the fiscal year following the year in which it was granted or renewed, unless such well has been abandoned prior thereto. At least 15 days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the owner of any existing well not abandoned shall make application for a permit covering the operation and maintenance thereof.

V.    Change of Ownership, Transfer of Permit. In the event of any change of ownership of any oil or gas well after a permit has been granted to cover the drilling thereof or to cover the operation and maintenance of an existing well, the permit, and all the rights and obligation pertaining thereto may be assigned and transferred to such new owners, as provided in this Chapter.

W.    Notice to Fire Chief, New Bond Required. The permittee shall notify the Fire Chief in writing of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange of any well within thirty days after such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange, and the new owner thereof shall succeed to all the rights and obligations of the permittee under the permit applicable to such well upon the filing by the new owner of a faithful performance bond, as provided in this Part, to cover future operation and maintenance of such well. The notice shall contain the following:

1.    The name and address of the person to whom such well is sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or exchanged.

2.    The name and location of the well.

3.    The date of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, or the date when possession was relinquished by the former permittee.

X.    Revocation - Grounds Generally. Any permit issued pursuant to this Part may be revoked by the City Council upon its finding, after a public hearing as provided in this Chapter, that the permittee has failed, neglected or refused to perform, comply with and abide by any of the conditions and provisions of this Part.

Y.    Notice of Intention; Remedy of Noncompliance Required. Proceedings before the City Council for the revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this Section may be instituted by the Fire Chief, who shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises covered by the permit, readable from the ground level, a notice entitled "Notice of intention to revoke permit," and who shall cause a copy thereof to be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee, or his designated agent, at his last known address and a copy to be filed with the City Council. Such notice shall set forth the date of the posting, in accordance with this section, and the reasons and grounds upon which such revocation will be based and shall require the permittee within fifteen days after the date of posting specified therein to cure and remedy any default, noncompliance with, or violation of any condition of the permit or of this Part or to show cause before the City Council why such permit should not be revoked.

Z.    Extension of Time for Compliance. Upon application therefore by a permittee under this Part, the City Council may, at its discretion, extend the time for curing and remedying any claimed default, noncompliance or violation by the permittee, but no such extension of time shall be for a longer period than a total of sixty days from the service upon the permittee of notice of intention to revoke the permit pursuant to this Chapter.

AA.    Request for Hearing; Failure to Request. At any time prior to the expiration of the fifteen days allowed for remedying any noncompliance with the permit or with this Part, or any extension thereof, the permittee may file with the City Council a written appeal, as provided in this Chapter, from the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Fire Chief as set forth in the notice given pursuant to this Chapter and request a hearing thereon by the City Council. Failure to file a demand for such hearing within the allowed period of time, or any extension thereof, shall be deemed to be an admission on the part of the permittee that valid grounds exist for the revocation of the permit, unless the permittee shall have commenced within that time a diligent and bona fide effort to cure and remedy any default, noncompliance or violation for which such notice was issued.

BB.    Hearing Allowed. If a hearing before the City Council is timely requested pursuant to this Chapter the permit shall not be modified or revoked unless and until so ordered by the Council after the completion of such hearing. (Ord. 2013-02 § 1)

Chapter 3.7 Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
3.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the establishment and implementation of a Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund for the City of La Habra Heights.

3.7.20 Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
A.    To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, and to avail itself of the benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund."

B.    All moneys received by the City from the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the City shall be paid into said fund.

C.    All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to, the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code.

Chapter 3.8 Air Quality Improvement Fund
3.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures governing the Air Quality Improvement Fund.

3.8.20 Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

A.    Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Program shall mean any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution emitted from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470.

B.    Fee Administrator shall mean the City Manager of the City of La Habra Heights.

3.8.30 Establishment of Fund
The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account with a financial institution authorized to accept deposits of City funds. This account shall be known as the Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. All interest earned by the account shall be credited to this account. All funds received by City pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44244, along with any other funds designated by the City Council, shall be deposited in this account and shall be used for the sole purpose of financing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. The Fee Administrator shall be responsible for depositing funds in the Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.

3.8.40 Audits
The City hereby consents to audits, at least once every two (2) years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fees provided by Health and Safety Code Section 44243, provided that such audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. Audit costs shall be funded as provided in Health and Safety Code Section 44244.1.

Article 4
Safety and Environmental Quality
Section Contents

Chapter 4.1    Introduction to Article 4

4.1.10    Purpose of this Article

4.1.20    Contracting with Los Angeles County

Chapter 4.2    Health Code

4.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.2.20    Adoption of Health Code of Los Angeles County

Chapter 4.3    Solid Waste (Integrated Waste Management Ordinance)

4.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.3.15    Definitions

4.3.20    Requirements and Regulations Governing Solid Waste

4.3.30    Permits and Licenses

4.3.40    Source Separated Recyclable Materials

4.3.50    Residential Containers, Placement

4.3.60    Placement of Bins, Boxes and Containers at Nonresidential Uses

4.3.70    Accumulation of Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials

4.3.80    Prohibited Activities

4.3.90    Scavenging Prohibited

4.3.100    Construction and Demolition Recycling

4.3.110    Violations/Penalties

4.3.111    Enforcement Procedures

4.3.112    Collection of Delinquent Charges

Chapter 4.4    Fire Code

4.4.10    Adopt California Fire Code

4.4.20    Chapter 1—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.30    Chapter 2—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.40    Chapter 3—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.50    Chapter 4—Adoption

4.4.60    Chapter 5—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.70    Chapter 9—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.80    Chapter 11—Adoption

4.4.90    Chapter 49—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.100    Chapter 56—Amendments

4.4.110    Chapter 80—Adoption and Amendments

4.4.120    Appendices—Adoption and Amendments

Chapter 4.5    Public Nuisances

4.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.5.20    Public Nuisances

4.5.30    Prevention and Abatement

4.5.40    Summary Abatement of Nuisances that Pose an Immediate Threat to Public Health and Safety

4.5.50    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.6    Security Alarm Ordinance

4.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.6.20    Identification of Alarm Owner

4.6.30    Operation of Direct-Dial Telephone Devices

4.6.40    Audible Alarm Requirements

4.6.50    False Alarms

4.6.60    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.7    Restrictions Applicable to Minors

4.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.7.20    Curfew for Minors

4.7.30    Daytime Restrictions for Minors

4.7.40    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.8    Graffiti Control

4.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.8.20    Graffiti Deemed a Nuisance

4.8.30    Possession of Graffiti Implements

4.8.40    Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator

4.8.50    Property Owner’s Responsibility

4.8.60    Punishment/Public Nuisance

4.8.70    Rewards for Information

4.8.80    Penalties and Civil Liability of Parents

Chapter 4.9    Solicitation

4.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.9.20    Solicitations Permit Required

4.9.30    Exemptions

4.9.40    Application for Permit

4.9.50    Issuance of Permit

4.9.60    Term of Permits

4.9.70    Identification Card

4.9.80    Revocation of Permits

4.9.90    Appeals from Action of City Manager

4.9.100    Manner of Solicitation and Prohibitions

4.9.110    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.10    Animal Control

4.10.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.10.20    License and Permit Requirements

4.10.30    Exhibition of License

4.10.40    Animal Noise

4.10.50    Environmental Controls/Housekeeping

4.10.60    Vector Control

4.10.70    Wild Animals as Pets Prohibited

4.10.80    Apiaries

4.10.90    Animals Causing Injury or Property Damage

4.10.100    Unrestrained Animals

4.10.110    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.11    Noise Control

4.11.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.11.20    Exterior Noise Standards

4.11.30    Stationary Non-Emergency Signaling Devices

4.11.40    Refuse Collection Vehicles

4.11.50    Residential Air Conditioning Equipment

4.11.60    Street Sales

4.11.70    Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing

4.11.80    Vibration

4.11.90    Residential Noise

4.11.100    Unnecessary Noise

4.11.110    Harmful Noise

4.11.120    Construction Noise

4.11.130    Resource Production

4.11.140    Audio Equipment

4.11.150    Band or Orchestral Rehearsals

4.11.160    Engines, Motors and Mechanical Devices

4.11.170    Motor Vehicles

4.11.180    Loading and Unloading

4.11.190    Amplified Signaling Devices

4.11.200    Mechanical Equipment/Accessory Noise

4.11.210    Noisy Hawking and Advertising Prohibited

4.11.220    Loud, Unnecessary and Unusual Noise

4.11.230    Exempt Noise

4.11.240    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.12    Light and Glare Control

4.12.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.12.20    Limit Light Trespass

4.12.30    Standard Outdoor Lighting

4.12.40    Recreational Lighting

4.12.50    Driveway and Parking Area Lighting

4.12.60    Lighting Levels Standards

4.12.70    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.13    Local Air Pollution Control

4.13.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.13.20    Odors

4.13.30    Visibility

4.13.40    Fugitive Dust

4.13.50    Paints and Architectural Coatings

4.13.60    Fugitive Dust from Off-Road Use and Weed Abatement

4.13.70    Vehicle Emissions Controls

4.13.80    Stationary Sources

4.13.90    Stationary Emissions from Oil Production Facilities

4.13.100    Construction Activities

4.13.110    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.14    Public Properties and Facilities

4.14.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.14.20    Public Properties and Facilities

4.14.30    Public Restrooms

4.14.40    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.15    Pest Control

4.15.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.15.20    Pest Control

4.15.30    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.16    Surface Water, Ground Water, Water Quality, Sanitation and Stormwater Runoff

4.16.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.16.20    Impairment of Natural Drainage Course

4.16.30    Flowing of Water, Mud and Other Materials onto Streets and Highways

4.16.40    Pools Breeding Insects

4.16.50    Adoption of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code

4.16.60    Amendments and Additions to Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code

4.16.65    Sewer Service Fees

4.16.70    Local Regulations Governing Illicit Discharges

4.16.80    Septic Systems

4.16.90    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)

4.16.100    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.17    Civic Center Area Underground Utility District

4.17.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.17.20    Definitions

4.17.30    Establishment of District and Boundaries

4.17.40    Overhead Utilities Prohibited

4.17.50    Responsibility of Utilities

4.17.60    Responsibility of Property Owners

4.17.70    Responsibility of City

4.17.80    Exceptions

4.17.90    Implementation Timeline and Suspension of Requirements

Chapter 4.18    Disaster Control

4.18.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.18.20    Disaster Council Membership

4.18.30    Disaster Council Powers and Duties

4.18.40    Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services

4.18.50    Powers and Duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services

4.18.60    Emergency Organization

4.18.70    Emergency Plan

4.18.80    Expenditures

4.18.90    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.19    Unsafe Structures

4.19.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.19.20    Unsafe Structures

4.19.30    Violations/Penalties

Chapter 4.20    Recovery of Costs Related to Abatement of Nuisances

4.20.10    Purpose of this Chapter

4.20.20    Procedure for Recovery of Costs

4.20.30    Other Remedies Available

Chapter 4.21    Recovery of Costs Related to Emergency Response

4.21.10    Findings

4.21.20    Purpose

4.21.30    Definitions

4.21.40    Response Cost Recovery

4.21.50    Security and Safety Plans

4.21.60    Calculation of Emergency or Extraordinary Response Costs

4.21.70    Costs Not Recoverable

4.21.80    Collection of Charges

4.21.90    Appeal

4.21.100    Hearing

4.21.110    Hearing Officer’s Decision

Chapter 4.1 Introduction to Article 4
4.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations governing public health and safety and environmental quality. This Article is referred to as the Safety and Environmental Quality Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights.

4.1.20 Contracting with Los Angeles County
The City Council may enter into a contract with the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors for the performance of certain public health, safety, and environmental health functions. These services shall be provided as deemed necessary and appropriate for the maintenance and enforcement of public health, safety and environmental health.

Chapter 4.2 Health Code
4.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter establishes the City of La Habra Heights Public Health Code.

4.2.20 Adoption of Health Code of Los Angeles County
The City of La Habra Heights hereby adopts the Health Code of the County of Los Angeles, Title 11, Division 1, of the Los Angeles County Code as amended and in effect on June 29, 2006, as the Public Health Code of the City of La Habra Heights to regulate matters concerning public health within the City.

Chapter 4.3 Solid Waste (Integrated Waste Management Ordinance)
4.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter is the La Habra Heights Integrated Waste Management Ordinance. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for the collection, transportation, disposal and recycling of solid waste generated within the City. This Chapter is enacted in accordance with and to ensure that the City is able to meet its obligations under the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.15 Definitions
"Animal waste" includes feces, manure, urine, or any natural biological excrement from livestock. Animal waste is included within solid waste as defined in this section.

"Composting" or "compost" includes a controlled biological decomposition of organic materials yielding a safe and nuisance-free product.

"Franchisee" means a person franchised by the City to regularly collect solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials from a property owner’s or occupant’s premises.

"Green waste" means food scraps, yard trimmings, and other organic matter capable of being composted. Food scraps include discarded organic materials that will decompose or putrefy, including kitchen and table food waste, and animal or vegetable scraps resulting from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food. Yard trimmings may include grass, weeds, prunings, dead plants, brush, and dead trees. Green waste does not include animal waste as defined in this section.

"Recyclable materials" means residential or commercial source separated by-products of some potential economic value, set aside, handled, packaged, or offered for collection in a manner different from regular solid waste. Recyclable materials shall include, but not be limited to: cardboard, paper, plastic, scrap metal, and beverage containers. Recyclable materials may also include materials designated as such in the rules and regulations established by the franchisee.

"Recycling collection facility" means a business or operation lawfully established for collection of recyclable materials.

"Solid waste" includes the definition of that term contained in California Public Resources Code, Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2, Section 40191, and regulations promulgated thereunder that require waste producers within the City to set out for collection.

"Source separated" means the segregation of materials, by the waste producer, at the site of production and designated for separate collection for some form of recycling, composting, recovery or reuse. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.20 Requirements and Regulations Governing Solid Waste
All owners and occupants of real property in the City are liable for the solid waste, animal waste, green waste and recyclable materials collection charges established by the haulers and contractors operating under the authority of the City Council for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, animal waste, green waste and recyclable materials. The following requirements govern the disposal and removal of such waste:

A.    Discarding of Solid Waste, Green Waste and Recyclable Materials. No person shall illegally dispose of any solid waste, animal waste, green waste or recyclable materials on private or public property or upon any street, public right-of-way or open space. This section does not prohibit the placement of solid waste, animal waste, green waste or recyclable materials in approved containers or receptacles for collection or composting in accordance with this Chapter.

B.    Residential Waste Collection. The City Council shall authorize, permit, regulate and control the regularly scheduled collection, removal and disposal of all solid waste, animal waste, green waste and recyclable materials generated at all residential premises. Each owner or occupant shall utilize the services of the City-approved contractor(s) for the regularly scheduled collection of solid waste, animal waste, green waste and recyclable materials from the owner’s or occupant’s premises at least once per week. The owner or occupant shall be responsible for the payment of fees for such services as established by the contractor, including any user fees established by the City Council.

C.    Unauthorized Hauling Prohibited. Except as otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person other than the franchisee or the City to gather, collect, or remove any garbage or rubbish from any premises within the City. Except as otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person not having a valid permit from the City of La Habra Heights to remove, or cause to be removed, any garbage or rubbish from any premises, or from any street, private access road, alley or other place in the City, or to transport the same in, upon or across any street, private road, alley or place in the City. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit an owner or resident, or gardeners, tree trimmers or other persons engaged in a similar trade, from collecting and disposing of green waste generated on a property on three (3) or fewer occasions per year per property. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.30 Permits and Licenses
Every contractor and hauler shall obtain and maintain at all times during its operations a business license issued by the City and all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. In addition, every contractor and waste hauler shall be required to obtain a waste hauler permit from the City of La Habra Heights. The requirements and content of such permits are provided in Article 8. The following exceptions are applicable to this section:

A.    The requirements of this section shall not prevent an owner or resident from composting green waste, or from selling, donating or disposing of recyclable materials at a recycling collection facility.

B.    No owner or occupant shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than an approved contractor, to haul or transport solid waste or discarded recyclable materials to a disposal or processing facility, except as permitted by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.40 Source Separated Recyclable Materials
The City may require any recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing recyclable materials for resale to provide the City with information pertaining to such collection including, without limitation, the amount and value of recyclable materials collected from within the City’s territorial limits, to the extent permitted by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act.

A.    Collection of Source Separated Recyclable Materials. No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other solid waste enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing source separated recyclable materials in the stream of commerce and which buys such materials for resale or marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200) from buying recyclable materials for a monetary or other valuable consideration; nor shall any provision of this Chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer or solid waste enterprise which buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing in the stream of commerce.

B.    Contractors’ Exclusions. No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor from obtaining a permit from the City for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation or from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction. In addition, no provision of this Chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor from causing such salvageable items or construction or demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated if such collection, removal and disposal activity is performed only by the licensed contractor having the contract for the construction or demolition work that generated such salvageable items or construction or demolition waste, or by regularly employed personnel carried on the licensed contractor’s payroll records as an employee and if the contractor complies with any applicable requirements of Article 3. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.50 Residential Containers, Placement
A.    Time. No owner or occupant who receives street-side collection service shall place or permit to be placed any solid waste, recyclable materials, or green waste container at the place of collection at the residential premises before twelve p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection or leave any such container at the place of collection after ten p.m. on the day of collection, or more than two (2) hours after actual collection, whichever is later. If the place of collection is also used for the regular storage of solid waste, then it must be screened from view from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way, as required by the provisions of Article 7.

B.    Location. Each owner or occupant shall comply with all rules and regulations of the franchisee for placement of containers and with the provisions of Article 7 governing placement of containers. Any failure to comply with such rules that prevents or inhibits collection of the contents of any container will result in a notice of noncollection. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.60 Placement of Bins, Boxes and Containers at Nonresidential Uses
Except during times of collection, bins, boxes and containers at nonresidential premises shall be maintained and sited in accordance with the provisions of Article 7. The contractor or hauler shall plan with the customer the placement of the bins, boxes, and containers to minimize traffic, aesthetic and other problems associated with their placement and to ensure compliance with the provisions of Article 7. The design of any new, substantially remodeled, or expanded building or other facility shall provide for proper storage, handling, and accessibility that will accommodate the solid waste and recyclable materials screening and loading anticipated and which will allow for efficient and safe collection while ensuring compliance with the provisions of Article 7. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.70 Accumulation of Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials
Every owner or occupant shall keep the solid waste collection bins and storage areas in a clean and sanitary condition and shall not cause or permit any solid waste to accumulate for a period in excess of one (1) calendar week. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit any person from keeping building materials in, on or about any place or premises during the period of active construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure thereon under a current valid building permit, nor the keeping of wood neatly piled upon such place or premises for household use, nor the composting of yard trimmings, all of which must be kept in compliance with all other applicable laws. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.80 Prohibited Activities
The following activities are prohibited:

A.    No person shall burn or bury any solid waste, animal waste, hazardous waste or recyclable materials within the City at any time.

B.    No person shall transfer solid waste or recyclable materials from one (1) collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer assists or improves the method of operation or is necessary due to mechanical failure of or accidental damage to a collection vehicle.

C.    No person shall deposit any hazardous waste in any bin, box, or container utilized for the collection of solid waste, animal waste, green waste or recyclable materials. Violation of this subsection may result in a notice of noncollection.

D.    No person shall deposit solid waste, animal waste, or green waste in a bin, box or container utilized for the collection of recyclable materials. Violation of this subsection may result in a notice of noncollection.

E.    No person shall deposit solid waste, animal waste, or recyclable materials in a bin, box or container utilized for the collection of green waste. Violation of this subsection may result in a notice of noncollection.

F.    The keeping upon any premises of solid waste, including animal waste, which is offensive, obnoxious, or unsanitary is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated in any manner provided by this Code or any other law for the abatement of nuisances.

G.    Waste collection activities, including the compression of trash, may not be allowed to pollute or otherwise adversely impact the ground, water, or air.

H.    The accumulation of solid waste, animal waste, recyclable materials, or green waste in a manner that in the opinion of the City Manager, City’s Fire Chief or Code Enforcement Officer constitutes an unsafe or hazardous condition or otherwise violates any of the applicable laws governing the storage of such materials is expressly prohibited.

I.    No person shall dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment (including by abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever) any solid or liquid waste upon any premises within the City, or to cause, suffer or permit any solid or liquid waste to come to be located upon any premises in the City, except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.90 Scavenging Prohibited
No person shall tamper with, modify, or otherwise scavenge solid waste or recyclable materials that have been placed in any solid waste or recyclable materials bin, box, or container. No person other than a City-approved contractor shall collect the recyclable materials from residential premises within the City. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.100 Construction and Demolition Recycling
This Chapter governs the recycling of construction and demolition waste. Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued by the City.

A.    All Permitted Construction, Demolition or Renovation Projects. Prior to beginning any construction or demolition activities, the applicant shall submit a recycling plan to the Community Development Director and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Article. Failure to comply with any terms of this section shall subject the project applicant to the full range of enforcement mechanisms as set forth in Article 8.

B.    Submission of a Recycling Plan. Applicants for building or demolition permits shall complete and submit a recycling plan on a form approved by the City as part of the application packet for the building or demolition permit. In preparing the recycling plan, applicants shall consider the recycling of demolition debris, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make such materials available for salvage prior to disposal at a landfill. The completed recycling plan shall indicate all of the following:

1.    The estimated volume or weight of project construction and demolition debris, by material type, to be generated;

2.    The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;

3.    The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect and receive that material; and

4.    The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition materials that will be disposed of at a landfill.

C.    Review of Recycling Plan. No building or demolition permit shall be issued unless and until the Community Development Director has approved the recycling plan. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety as determined by the City Manager. If the Community Development Director determines that the recycling plan is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least fifty (50) percent of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, the Community Development Director shall either return the recycling plan to the applicant marked "Denied," or marked "Further Information Required."

D.    Compliance with Recycling Plan. Prior to the completion of any construction and demolition project, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Director documentation indicating that the diversion requirement has been met. The applicant shall be required to divert at least fifty (50) percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by the project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the Community Development Director for the project. This documentation shall include the following:

1.    Receipts from the vendor and facility that collected and received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material;

2.    A copy of the previously approved recycling plan for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled; and

3.    Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with the approved recycling plan for the project.

E.    Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition debris diverted or landfilled is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed.

F.    Determination of Compliance and Release of Building Permit. The Community Development Director shall review the recycling plan submitted under subsection B of this section and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

1.    If the Community Development Director determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, the Community Development Director shall release the building permit to the applicant.

2.    If the Community Development Director determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement. In making this determination, the Community Development Director shall consider the availability of markets for the construction and demolition debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction and demolition debris. If the Community Development Director determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply, the Community Development Director may release the building permit to the applicant.

3.    If the Community Development Director determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection B of this section within the required time period, then the Community Development Director shall notify the applicant. The building permit shall not be released until the applicant has complied with this section.

G.    Exemption from Recycling Plan. If an applicant for a project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time they submit the recycling plan required in this section. The applicant shall indicate on the recycling plan the maximum rate of diversion believed feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

1.    The Community Development Director shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant the Community Development Director shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

2.    If the Community Development Director determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, the Community Development Director shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the recycling plan submitted by the applicant. The Community Development Director shall return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant marked "Approved for Exemption."

3.    If the Community Development Director determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the Community Development Director shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall resubmit a recycling plan in full compliance with this section. If the applicant fails to resubmit the recycling plan, or if the resubmitted recycling plan does not comply with this section, the Community Development Director shall deny the recycling plan.

4.    The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager any decision made by the Community Development Director. The decision made by the City Manager shall be final. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.110 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the provisions of Article 8, and is subject to civil penalties described in Section 8.7.40(C). (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.111 Enforcement Procedures
A.    Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the City Manager and City Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter as well as those of California Penal Code Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7 and 375; California Government Code Section 68055 et seq.; and California Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112.

B.    The City Manager and Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to declare a violation of this Chapter a public nuisance subject to abatement under one (1) or more of the procedures described in Chapter 8.8.

C.    Immediate Threat to Public Health and Safety; Summary Abatement Authorized.

1.    If any owner or occupant receives two (2) consecutive notices of noncollection, the accumulation of waste on the premises will constitute a public nuisance posing an immediate threat to public health and safety, and will therefore be subject to summary abatement pursuant to Section 4.5.40. The two (2) notices of noncollection shall satisfy the requirement in Section 4.5.40 that the City Manager set forth in writing the facts and circumstances establishing the need for immediate abatement.

2.    The City Manager may also declare any accumulation of waste to be an immediate threat to public health and safety subject to summary abatement, pursuant to Section 4.5.40.

D.    For any abatement of a nuisance declared under this Chapter, the owner shall be liable for any and all fines, penalties, fees, and costs of abatement, including attorney’s fees, pursuant to the provisions of Article 8. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

4.3.112 Collection of Delinquent Charges
A.    Report of Delinquent Charges. All charges for waste collection shall be paid on time. If any amount is past due for more than sixty (60) consecutive days, the franchisee shall submit a written complaint to the Finance Manager. The Finance Manager shall notify the property owner or resident of the delinquency and advise the owner or resident that if the delinquency is not cured within thirty (30) days, the delinquency will be brought before the City Council in a public hearing to take place at a date and time specified in the notice but not sooner than forty-five (45) days after the date of the notice. The said written notice shall be mailed to each person to whom such premises is assessed in the most recent property ownership records provided to the City by the County Assessor on the date the notice is mailed. In addition a notice will be sent to the property address.

B.    Report and Hearing. The Finance Manager shall cause a report of delinquencies to be prepared and presented at a hearing before the City Council. The Council shall consider the report, as well as any objections or protests thereto. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council may confirm the report as prepared, reject it entirely, or amend it as necessary and then confirm the amended report.

C.    Recordation of Lien for Delinquent Charges. Upon confirmation of the report of delinquent charges by the City Council, a lien on the premises to which the service was rendered will be recorded with the Recorder of the County of Los Angeles.

D.    Collection of Delinquent Charges by Special Assessment. Upon the confirmation of the report pursuant to subsection A of this section by the City Council, the delinquent charges contained therein which remain unpaid by the owner shall constitute a special assessment against the premises to which service was rendered and shall be collected at such time as established by the County Assessor for inclusion in the next property tax assessment.

The Finance Manager shall turn over to the County Assessor for inclusion in the next property tax assessment the total sum of unpaid delinquent charges consisting of the delinquent solid waste collection service charges and administrative charges which the City Council designates as special assessments, as a special assessment against the premises to which said service was rendered.

Thereafter, said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures of sale as provided for delinquent ordinary municipal taxes. The assessment shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the premises and paramount to all other liens except for those of State, County and municipal taxes, with which it shall be upon parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest and charges due and payable thereon are paid. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to said special assessments. (Ord. 2013-03 § 1)

Chapter 4.4 Fire Code
Prior legislation: Ords. 2008-01, 2009-02, 2010-06, 2012-01 and 2013-06.

4.4.10 Adopt California Fire Code
Except as hereinafter provided in this Chapter, Title 24, Part 9, 2016 California Fire Code, which constitutes an amended version of the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth and shall constitute and may be cited as the Fire Code of the City of La Habra Heights. (Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.20 Chapter 1—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

A. 102.13 References in Documents and Continuing Legal Effect. References to prior versions of the California Fire Code, the Los Angeles County Code, or the La Habra Heights Municipal Code that are amended or renumbered in this Municipal Code, that are cited on notices issued by the City or other documents of ongoing or continuing legal effect, including specifically resolutions adopting or imposing fees or charges, until converted, are deemed to be references to the new counterpart 2016 Fire Code, Los Angeles County Code, or amended Municipal Code sections for the purposes of notice and enforcement. The provisions adopted herein shall not in any manner affect deposits, established fees or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated by number, code section or otherwise, but such references shall be deemed to apply to the corresponding provisions set forth in the code sections adopted or amended hereby.

B. 102.13 Designated as Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. The City Council has designated every parcel within the boundaries of the City as being located in a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone as defined in Section 51175 et seq. of the Government Code.

C. 104.12 Restrictions. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to limit the powers of the Fire Code Official to impose more restrictive fire and public safety requirements as otherwise authorized by law. In addition, the Fire Code Official is empowered to mandate a curtailment of certain activities during periods where the risk of fire, including wildfire, is higher than normal.

D. 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of either a misdemeanor, infraction or both as prescribed in Section 109.4.2 and 109.4.3. Penalties shall be as prescribed in local ordinance. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

E. 109.4.1.1 Criminal Violations. Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Code, which is punishable as a felony, will be prosecuted as such pursuant to the California Penal Code. Any person or entity that otherwise violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction. Any person who engages in any of the activities prohibited by the California Fire Code as adopted by the city is liable for the expense of fighting any resulting fire, or for the expense incurred during a hazardous materials incident. Any such expense shall be a charge against that person and this charge shall constitute a debt and will be collectible by the public agency incurring the expense.

F. 109.4.2 Infraction. Except as provided in Section 109.4.3, persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction.

G. 109.4.3 Misdemeanor. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative, or who violate the following sections of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:

H. 109.4.1.1 Criminal Violations. Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Code, which is punishable as a felony, will be prosecuted as such pursuant to the California Penal Code. Any person or entity that otherwise violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction. Any person who engages in any of the activities prohibited by the California Fire Code as adopted by the city is liable for the expense of fighting any resulting fire, or for the expense incurred during a hazardous materials incident. Any such expense shall be a charge against that person and this charge shall constitute a debt and will be collectible by the public agency incurring the expense.

I. 109.5 Citations. The City Manager and his/her designee and the Fire Chief and his/her designee shall have the authority and duty to enforce the provisions of the Fire Code pursuant to the California Penal Code. The Fire Chief and his/her designees may make arrests for felony or misdemeanor violations of the Fire Code. The City Manager and/or the Fire Chief (including their designees) may issue citations for infractions or misdemeanor violations of the Fire Code or other related provisions of the Municipal Code.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.30 Chapter 2—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 2, Definitions, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment:

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.40 Chapter 3—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 3, General Requirements, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

A. 305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires are not allowed when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

B. SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES, FIRE PITS, FIRE RINGS, AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES

C. 307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R shall comply with this section.

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

D. 307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202.

E. 310.2 Prohibited areas. Smoking shall be prohibited where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard, and in spaces where flammable or combustible materials are stored or handled, or within an area set aside for public use. Public use areas may include, but are not limited to, civic facilities, parks, open space areas, and trails. Such activities may also be prohibited by signage or other means and in vehicles using public and private roads during those periods identified by the Fire Chief as being high fire hazard periods.

F. 320 Live Vegetation Control Measures. The control of live vegetation shall comply with Section 320.1 through 320.4

G. 320.1 Removal of Flammable Vegetation. All flammable vegetation shall be removed from gutters, roof areas, and eaves.

H. 320.2 Tree Limbs. Tree limbs shall be trimmed for a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from any chimney or stovepipe. Any dead limbs or vegetation hanging over roofs shall be removed.

I. 320.3 Wooden or Combustible Fences. All flammable materials shall be removed within ten (10) feet of any wooden or combustible fence.

J. 320.4 Emergency Vehicle Access. No property owner may allow any portion of any vegetation on their property to interfere with street and emergency vehicle access, regardless of whether the access is along a street, along a private residential access road. Vegetation shall be trimmed back a minimum distance of three (3) feet from the edge of pavement. Vegetation shall also be trimmed to a minimum height of thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches above the street pavement. The Fire Department may provide written notice to the property owner requiring vegetation to be trimmed for a specified additional distance where the Fire Department determines that the vegetation would otherwise interfere with street or emergency vehicle access. If the property owner fails to maintain the clearance requirements the City may abate the nuisance without further notice at the property owners’ expense. This Subsection shall not apply to cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents, or similar plants used as ground covers; provided, that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

K. 321 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities, or additions greater than 500 ft2 shall establish and maintain a Fuel Modification zone around the structures and facilities. Fuel Modification shall comply with Sections 321.1 through 321.4.

L. 321.1 Fuel Modification Zones. Specific zones of a property are subject to fuel modification requirements with regard to the planting of vegetation. These fuel modification requirements are designed to lessen the potential for wildfire. Fire fuel modification zones will be installed and maintained around all structures pursuant to the following fuel modification zone requirements and as shown in Exhibit 4-1:

Zone A extends to a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any structure. This zone is the fuel modification "wet zone" requiring fire resistant vegetation and irrigation systems. Land within this zone must be free of debris, dead wood, branches touching the ground, and other dry or dead vegetation.

Zone B extends from Zone A to a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any structure, regardless of where such structure is located plus any area within twelve (12) feet of the edge of the pavement on any public road or private residential access road. This zone requires either fire resistant and irrigated landscaping or other plant materials (including native species) thinned by a minimum of fifty (50) percent. Land within this zone must be free of debris, dead wood, branches touching the ground, and other dry or dead vegetation.

Zone C extends from Zone B to a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any structure, regardless of where such structure is located. This zone requires either fire resistant and irrigated landscaping or other plant materials (including native species) thinned by a minimum of thirty (30) percent. Land within this zone must be free of debris, dead wood, branches touching the ground, and other dry or dead vegetation.



Exhibit 4-1 Fuel Modification Zones

L. 321.2 Plant Pallet. Only those plants that have fire resistive properties and listed in the La Habra Heights Fuel Modification Guideline may be used unless approved by the Fire Chief.

M. 321.3 Plant Spacing. Plant spacing is critical in the reduction of wild fires. Plant spacing shall comply with the specifications specified in the La Habra Heights Fuel Modification Guideline.

N. 321.4 Nonconforming Landscaping. Nonconforming landscaping related to fuel modification zones must be replaced in order to conform to current regulations.

O. 322 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces.

Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

P. 323 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist:

1. Difficult terrain.

2. Danger of erosion.

3. Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species.

4. Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees.

5. Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical.

Q. 324 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire.

Exceptions:

Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition.

R. 324.1 Equipment and devices generating heat, sparks or open flames. During any time of the year within the Wildland Risk Areas, no person shall use or operate any stationary equipment, welding equipment, cutting torches, tar pots, or grinding devices from which a spark, fire, or flame may originate, which is located on or near any forest-covered land, brush-covered land, or grass-covered land, without doing the following:

First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If a 30 foot clearing cannot be achieved then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting.

Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation.

Stop work when winds are 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediately in case of a fire.

S. 324.2 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 324 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.

T. 325 Unsafe Structures. The ownership or maintenance of any structure that has characteristics that constitute a fire hazard is prohibited.

U. 326 Weed Abatement. Weed abatement shall comply with Sections 326.1 through 326.3.

V. Section 326.1 Property Owner Responsibilities. Every person who owns or is in possession of any property within the City of La Habra Heights shall, at their own expense, maintain their property free from any growth of weeds that constitutes a fire hazard.

W. Section 326.2 Habitat Authority. The City shall also monitor the diligence of Puente Hills Landfill Native Habitat Preservation Authority (or that of any successor agency) with regard to brush clearance and fire prevention activities on their properties within and adjacent to the City.

X. 326.3 Abatement Procedures. In order to reduce fire hazards and nuisances associated with weeds, refuse, rubbish and dirt upon or in front of private property, the City Council may conduct proceedings pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the California Government Code (Section 39560 et seq.). Such proceedings may include requiring abatement of fire hazards throughout the City, entering upon property and performing abatement where the private property owner does not abate, and placing a lien on the property to recover costs. Without notice, the Fire Chief may also summarily abate weeds and hazardous growth on private property that in any way hinders emergency access, and charge the property owner for the costs of the abatement.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.50 Chapter 4—Adoption
A.    California Fire Code Chapter 4—Emergency Planning and Preparedness. Adopt only the sections listed below:

1.    401;

2.    401.3.4;

3.    401.9;

4.    402;

5.    403.2;

6.    404.5 through 404.6.6;

7.    407. (Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.60 Chapter 5—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 5, Fire Service Features, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

A. 507.3 Fire Flow. Fire flow shall be a minimum of 1000 GPM for structures 1-3,600 ft2 and 1,500 GPM for structures greater than 3,600 ft2. The Fire Department shall review all construction applications and verify that sufficient fire flow exist before a building permit is issued.

Exceptions:

1. The City Council may waive the fire flow requirements when the City Council upon recommendation of the Fire Department finds that there are sufficient alternate sources of water available to adequately protect existing and proposed structures. In waiving the fire flow requirement, the City Council may attach such conditions to the waiver as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

2. Either of the following is exempt from the requirements of this Subsection:

a. Additions to existing residential structures not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet in area in any twelve (12) month period.

b. Alterations or repairs to existing residential structures in any twelve (12) month period not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the value of existing structures, accessory buildings to existing dwellings, and agricultural areas.

3. The City Council may establish further exceptions to the fire flow requirements when acting on the recommendation of the Fire Chief that such exceptions will be adequate to protect health and safety without requiring excessive public or private expenditures.

B. 507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 400 feet (122 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.

Exception: Additions less than 1,000 ft2.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.70 Chapter 9—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

A. 903.2.8. Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be installed in all of the following buildings, or portions of buildings, unless it is established to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief that the installation of such interior fire sprinkler system would impose an undue burden and the absence of an interior fire sprinkler system would not significantly increase the fire risk or hazard:

1. Any new residence, detached habitable structure, detached garage exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet, or commercial structure regardless of the construction materials.

2. Existing and new portions of an existing building when more than twenty-five (25) percent of the existing roof structure is replaced by the addition of a second story, more than seventy-five (75) percent of the existing roof structure is replaced, or floor area is increased by more than seventy-five (75) percent.

3. Any residential addition(s), including attached or detached garages, attics, second stories, or other living areas, exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area in any twelve (12) month period.

4. Any structure in which more than fifty (50) percent of the existing drywall is removed or disturbed.

5. That portion of any structure having more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of ceiling area removed or disturbed.

6. Any attic area greater than fifty (50) square feet in floor area with a roof pitch greater than six (6) feet in twelve (12) linear feet.

B. 903.3.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and required by the Fire Code Official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3.

TABLE 903.3.5.3

Hydraulically Calculated Systems

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.80 Chapter 11—Adoption
A.    California Fire Code Chapter 11—Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. Adopt only those sections and subsections listed below:

1.    1103.7;

2.    1103.7.3;

3.    1103.7.3.1;

4.    1103.7.8 through 1103.7.8.2;

5.    1103.7.9 through 1103.7.9.10;

6.    1103.8 through 1103.8.5.3;

7.    1107;

8.    1113;

9.    1114;

10.    1115;

11.    1116. (Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.90 Chapter 49—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 49, Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

A. 4906.3 Vegetation.

(5) City of La Habra Heights Vegetation Management Guidelines.

B. 4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in hazardous fire areas shall comply with the following:

1. Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official concurrent with the submittal for approval of any tentative map.

2. Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.

1.1 The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification for perpetuity.

3. The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of the City of La Habra Heights Vegetation Modification Guideline.

4. The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official.

5. All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.100 Chapter 56—Amendments
A.    California Fire Code Chapter 56—Explosives and Fireworks. California Fire Code Chapter 56 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following amendments:

A. Section 5601 Explosives. No person shall store or keep for sale within the City any gunpowder, giant powder or blasting powder in quantities greater than five (5) pounds. Caps of the type used for detonating explosives shall not be brought into or stored within the City without prior written approval of the Fire Department. This Subsection does not apply to loaded cartridges, shells or powder in shells.

B. Section 5602 Fireworks. The possession, sale, discharge, firing or use of any fireworks is prohibited.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.110 Chapter 80—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Chapter 80, Referenced Standards, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows:

A. 4.1.3 Stock of Spare Sprinklers

4.1.3.1. A supply of at least two sprinklers for each type shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced.

4.1.3.2 The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property.

4.1.3.3 The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed 100°F (38°C).

4.1.3.4 A special sprinkler wrench shall be provided and kept in the cabinet to be used in the removal and installation of sprinklers. One sprinkler wrench shall be provided for each type of sprinkler installed.

B. 7.1.2 The system piping shall not have a separate control valve unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

(Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

4.4.120 Appendices—Adoption and Amendments
California Fire Code Appendices are adopted in their entirety with the following amendments:

Appendix A is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix B is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment:

A. B101.1 Scope. The procedure for determining fire-flow requirements for non R-3 buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be in accordance with this appendix. This appendix does not apply to structures other than buildings. Fire flow for R-3 shall be in accordance with Section 507.3.

Appendix BB is adopted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix C is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment:

A. C101.1 Scope. In addition to the requirements of Section 507.5.1 of the California Fire Code, Fire hydrants shall be provided in accordance with this appendix for the protection of non R-3 buildings, or portions of buildings, hereafter constructed or moved into the jurisdiction. Hydrants spacing for R-3 occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 507.5.41.

Appendix CC is adopted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix D is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix E is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix F is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix G is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix H is adopted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix I is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix J is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix K is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix L is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix M is deleted in its entirety without amendments.

Appendix N is deleted in its entirety without amendments. (Ord. 2016-06 § 2)

Chapter 4.5 Public Nuisances
4.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to identify those activities and conditions that shall be considered a public nuisance in the City of La Habra Heights. The summary abatement of any public nuisance shall be undertaken at the expense of the person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance.

4.5.20 Public Nuisances
The following are considered to be public nuisances:

A.    Un-maintained Landscaping. Excessive overgrowth of vegetation, dead, decayed or diseased trees, growth of weeds or deposit of garden waste that are likely to harbor rats or vermin, constitute a fire or health hazard, or may be dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare;

B.    Dead or Diseased Landscaping. Overgrown, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees or other vegetation, other than compost, that constitutes a fire hazard, is likely to create a hazard to motor vehicles, bicycles, or pedestrians or otherwise interfere with the safe use of any street or road or is likely to impede drainage within or over a parkway, drainage course, or watercourse;

C.    Vegetation Extending into Travel Lanes. Any trees, shrubbery or other vegetation within three (3) feet horizontally of any roadway edge of pavement or not providing a minimum of twelve (12) feet of vertical clearance above roadway surface or extending into or above any street or right-of-way in such manner as to interfere with free passage along, or safe and unobstructed line of sight within, such roadway;

D.    Impairment of View of Street Signs. Allowing or permitting vegetation to be located so as to prevent or impede a clear view of public signs;

E.    Traffic View Impairment by Landscaping. Allowing or permitting vegetation to be located near a driveway or street intersection, or edge of pavement so as to prevent a clear view of approaching vehicles on a street;

F.    Defective Structures. Any defective or deteriorated building that constitutes a potential fire hazard or may result in structural failure or creates an unhealthful condition for surrounding residents;

G.    Unsafe Buildings and Properties. Maintaining a property or structure in a manner that is in violation of the Los Angeles County Building Code or the Fire Code;

H.    Building Maintenance. Maintaining any unpainted building or structure, or those having dry rot, warping, or termite infestations or any building or structure on which the condition of the paint or stucco has become so deteriorated as to permit termite infestation or maintaining buildings or structures with broken windows or doors so as to constitute a hazardous condition and invite trespassers and malicious mischief;

I.    Child Safety. Maintaining or failing to maintain property so as to allow conditions that are dangerous and accessible to children including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment or machinery, hazardous, stagnant or improperly fenced pools, spas, ponds, septic systems or excavations;

J.    Road Hazards. Logs, rocks, sand, dirt or other materials that are likely to create a hazard to motor vehicles, bicycles, or pedestrians or otherwise interfere with the safe use of any street or road or that is likely to impede drainage within or across a parkway, drainage course, or watercourse;

K.    Abandoned Buildings. Any abandoned or vacated building or structure, including garden sheds, stables and pens, left in a condition of disrepair that is easily accessible to the public including those that may become a fire or safety hazard;

L.    Improper Storage. The outside storage of rubbish or junk, including but not limited to: refuse, garbage, food waste other than compost, trash, scrap metal, scrap lumber, concrete, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, litter, piles of dirt, discarded building materials, yard waste, abandoned, broken, discarded, inoperable or unused furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, refrigerators, freezers or other fixtures, appliances, or equipment;

M.    Improperly Discarded Debris. Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, appliances, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or equipment;

N.    Accumulation of Waste Products. The keeping or dumping of dead animals, any animal remains, or other waste organic products (waste vegetable matter, ashes, swill or any refuse matter) in any building, premises, public land or water course (all refuse matter must be collected and kept in tightly covered or closed metal cans or vessels);

O.    Vehicle Repair. The repair or dismantling of any automobile, boat or other engine-powered vehicle or conveyance in public view;

P.    Construction Equipment and Machinery. Keeping on real property construction equipment or machinery of any type in violation of the Home Occupancy Ordinance or when such equipment is parked or stored on the owner’s property and is visible from a public easement or an adjoining property, except during construction activities. This does not apply while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active Building Permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property;

Q.    Other Machinery. Keeping, operating or maintaining any machinery on real property which by reason of dust, exhaust or fumes creates a health or safety hazard;

R.    Erosion and Flooding. The failure to maintain property, the topography or configuration of which, whether in its natural state or as a result of grading operations or other earth movement activities, causes or will cause erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff that will result in debris deposit on public roadways or which may otherwise be injurious to public health or safety;

S.    Unsafe Animal Keeping. Keeping or maintaining on property any live or dead animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbances, danger or menace to the health or safety of the community;

T.    Animal Waste. Keeping or maintaining accumulations of animal manure or other animal matter of any kind or character from which smells or odors emanate or which provide or are likely to provide a breeding place for vermin, insects or rodents of any kind or allowing such waste to be conveyed in water runoff from the site;

U.    Temporary Roofing/Groundcover. Maintaining plastic or other temporary protective materials on roofs or the ground (for erosion control) for more than six (6) months;

V.    Parking of Vehicles. Failing to keep all vehicle parking on an improved surface (refer to Article 7);

W.    Abandoned Vehicles. Parking inoperable or unregistered vehicles in the City for more than thirty (30) days. Vehicles parked for longer periods of time shall be considered abandoned;

X.    Parking of Large Vehicles. Failing to park large vehicles, including but not limited to, motor homes and boats, on an approved parking surface and screened from view;

Y.    Commercial Vehicle Parking. Parking and/or storing commercial vehicles in all areas except for agricultural and other equipment that is permitted pursuant to Article 7;

Z.    Charging of Admission to Parties. Allowing parties which require or accept payment for admission;

AA.    Illegal Dumping. The dumping of any solid waste, hazardous material or bulky item, including but not limited to any waste as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117, demolition and construction wastes, any discarded furniture, home or industrial appliance or abandoned vehicle or a part of an abandoned vehicle;

BB.    Keeping of Animals. The keeping of animals in setback areas of a property or within 35 feet of an adjacent residence or pool or patio area;

CC.    Resource Production Operations. Failure to ensure that all facilities, pipelines, abandoned pipelines, equipment, structures, wells, idle wells, abandoned wells and all associated resource production operations are maintained and conducted in conformance to all applicable current City, County, State and Federal regulations;

DD.    Unlawful Assembly. Blocking ingress or egress to any public or private building or facility or obstructing any public or private street or right-of-way;

EE.    Violations of this Article. Any other condition or conduct that violates the provisions of this Article or constitutes a public nuisance as defined under California statutory or case law or is contrary to the public peace, health, and safety or otherwise prevents the enjoyment or reasonable use of property;

FF.    Other Nuisances. In addition to these enumerated public nuisances, the City Council shall have the power to declare what conditions, acts or omissions constitute a nuisance.

4.5.30 Prevention and Abatement
Every person who owns or is in possession of any property within the City of La Habra Heights shall, at their own expense, maintain their property, including any parkway areas between their property line and edge of pavement, and any improvements or activities within those properties so that they are free from any public nuisance. All property found to be in any condition that is described in this Chapter shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8. The procedures for abatement shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law.

4.5.40 Summary Abatement of Nuisances that Pose an Immediate Threat to Public Health and Safety
If, upon the determination of the City Manager, a particular public nuisance as described in this Chapter or any other applicable Chapter poses an immediate threat to public health and safety, the City Manager may dispense with the applicable notice and hearing requirements and order the immediate abatement of the activity or activities and/or condition or conditions causing the public nuisance consistent with the provisions set forth in Article 8. Prior to ordering immediate abatement pursuant to this Section, the City Manager must set forth in writing the facts and circumstances establishing why the subject property constitutes a public nuisance and why immediate abatement is essential.

4.5.50 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code, unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction.

Chapter 4.6 Security Alarm Ordinance
4.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the use of security alarms, including those in vehicles, in the City of La Habra Heights. The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and cited as the City of La Habra Heights Security Alarm Ordinance.

4.6.20 Identification of Alarm Owner
For every audible alarm system, the alarm owner shall be required to post the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified in the event the alarm is activated. The posting must be placed in a visible location near the property’s entryway. An audible alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its being activated.

4.6.30 Operation of Direct-dial Telephone Devices
No person shall use any alarm system that is equipped with a direct-dial device that, when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any public law enforcement or safety agency.

4.6.40 Audible Alarm Requirements
This Section governs the installation and use of audible alarm systems in the City of La Habra Heights. For purposes of this Section, "audible alarm" means any alarm system which generates a sound which is designed to be heard outside the building or vehicle where the system is installed. Audible alarms, and their installation and use, must conform to the following requirements.

A.    No audible alarm shall be installed, maintained, or used that emits or can emit an alarm sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren.

B.    All audible alarms shall be designed and/or equipped to automatically turn off not more than five (5) minutes after being activated.

C.    No subscriber, seller or lessor of alarm systems shall install, equip or utilize an audible alarm that is an automatically self-resetting alarm system.

D.    All new alarms shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply or other provision such that that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electric service will not activate the alarm system.

4.6.50 False Alarms
The following requirements are applicable to false alarms including those in vehicles.

A.    Activation of False Alarm. A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This Section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system.

B.    The City may impose a fee on any alarm owner whose alarm system generates more than two (2) false alarm calls in any twelve (12) month period.

C.    An alarm owner shall not operate an alarm system that generates more than five (5) false alarm calls in any twelve (12) month period.

D.    Exemptions. The provisions of this Section are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to emergency motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 2012-02 § 1)

4.6.60 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code, unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction.

Chapter 4.7 Restrictions Applicable to Minors
4.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for minors to ensure that curfews are adhered to and that regulations governing truancy are enforced.

4.7.20 Curfew for Minors
The following curfew regulations are applicable to minors.

A.    Prohibited Act. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be present in a "public place," as defined in Subsection B of this Section between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any given day and sunrise of the immediately following day unless the minor satisfies one of the exemptions specified in Subsection C of this Section.

B.    Restricted Areas. Minors are prohibited from visiting any public place during those hours when the curfew is in force. For purposes of this Chapter, a "public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, any public street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground or public building, any common area of any school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop, or any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place.

C.    Exemptions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply when a minor satisfies any of the following:

1.    The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of the minor.

2.    The minor is on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of the minor.

3.    The minor is traveling to, or directly home from, a place or places that is connected with or required by a business, trade, profession or occupation in which such minor is lawfully engaged.

4.    The minor is involved in an "emergency situation," which means for this purpose, any unforeseen set of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

5.    The minor is within 50 feet of the front door of his or her residence.

6.    The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a school, religious or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, religious or civic organization or other similar entity or organization that assumes responsibility for the minor.

7.    The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a political fundraiser, rally or other political activity, or is otherwise exercising his or her First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, provided that any such political event or other First Amendment-type activity is supervised by adults and/or sponsored by a political organization.

8.    The minor is present at, or traveling to or directly home from, a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of the minor’s school.

9.    The minor has entered into a valid marriage, is on active duty with the armed forces of the United States or is legally emancipated.

4.7.30 Daytime Restrictions for Minors
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be "absent from school and found in a public place," unless the minor has one of the valid excuses specified in Subsection B of this Section.

A.    Restrictions Defined. For purposes of this Chapter, a minor is "absent from school and found in a public place" if said minor is found idling, wandering, strolling, playing, or aimlessly driving or riding about in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. of the same day on days when the minor’s school is in session.

B.    Valid Excuses. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply when a minor meets one of the following exceptions:

1.    The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation, as determined by the court, for the minor’s absence from school.

2.    The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor.

3.    The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by said minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor.

4.    The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment.

5.    The minor has permission to leave the school campus and said minor has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, Off-Campus Permit.

6.    The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of said minor’s school.

7.    The presence of the minor in a place that is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged.

4.7.40 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8. Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to violate the restrictions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

Chapter 4.8 Graffiti Control
4.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for the control and abatement of graffiti. This Section of the Municipal Code shall be referred to as the City of La Habra Heights Graffiti Control Ordinance.

4.8.20 Graffiti Deemed a Nuisance
The City Council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein contained. Furthermore, the City Council finds that it is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property to keep such property clear and free of graffiti at all times. The existence of any surface of a structure on any property within the City of La Habra Heights where such surface has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times in a twelve (12) month period is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the City according to the provisions and procedures adopted by the City.

4.8.30 Possession of Graffiti Implements
The following governs the possession of implements that may be used in defacing property and structures with graffiti.

A.    It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to these specific locations upon public property, or upon private property, without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of this Subsection shall not apply to the possession of felt-tip markers by minors attending, or traveling to or from school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at said school that formally requires the possession of felt-tip markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this Section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a felt-tip marker.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, or other public owned or operated building or within one hundred (100) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain or similar types of infrastructure.

C.    It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish or cause to permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian.

4.8.40 Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator
Any person applying graffiti must remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or the private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the law enforcement agency, the Community Development Director or any additional department head as authorized by the City Manager. In addition, the following provisions governing the removal of graffiti shall also apply:

A.    Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment for removal. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti or pay for its removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter.

B.    The parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor who applies graffiti shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment of the removal.

C.    The public law enforcement agency, the Community Development Director or any additional department head, as authorized by the City Manager, may convert such payment into equivalent forms of community service hours. Such payments or equivalent forms of community service hours shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed.

4.8.50 Property Owner’s Responsibility
The property owner or the person(s) responsible for maintaining the property must adhere to the following requirements:

A.    It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control of property, to permit said property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of five (5) days after service of notice by first-class mail, personal service, or posting of notice on the property.

B.    The requirements of Subsection A of this Section will not apply if the responsible party demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti.

C.    The requirements of Subsection A will not apply if the responsible party demonstrated that they have an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service of notice by first-class mail personal service, or posting of notice on the property.

4.8.60 Punishment/Public Nuisance
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

4.8.70 Rewards for Information
The City of La Habra Heights may offer rewards for information leading to the identification and apprehension of any person who willfully applies graffiti or otherwise defaces, damages or destroys any public or privately owned property.

4.8.80 Penalties and Civil Liability of Parents
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to violate the restrictions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.9 Solicitation
4.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for the control of solicitation in the public rights-of-way or upon public property within the City of La Habra Heights.

4.9.20 Solicitations Permit Required
No person shall engage in solicitation, as that term is defined in Article 12, within the City without having obtained a permit from the City Manager authorizing such solicitation; but when a permit has been issued to any person the agents and solicitors for such person shall not be required to obtain individual permits.

4.9.30 Exemptions
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the organization on whose behalf such solicitation is made.

4.9.40 Application for Permit
The requirements for application for a Solicitation Permit are as follows:

A.    An application for permit to solicit shall be made to the City Manager upon forms prescribed by the City Manager and signed under oath. The application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the City Manager at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the time at which the permit to conduct a solicitation shall become effective; provided, however, that the City Manager may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application within this required period prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The City Manager shall either grant or deny the required permit to conduct a solicitation within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the application is made. In the event the City Manager fails to act upon a permit within the time prescribed herein, the permit shall be deemed granted.

B.    The application herein required shall contain at least the following information: address, telephone and other contact information for the applicant; the purpose for which the solicitation is to be made; the total amount of any funds to be raised thereby, if any; and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts there from; an outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations, including dates and times for the commencement, conduct and termination of the solicitation; a statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department, officer or employee thereof; the names of other cities in which the person registering has solicited; and an explanation of the reasons, if the applicant is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is not available.

C.    If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the City Manager in writing thereof within twenty-four (24) hours after such change.

4.9.50 Issuance of Permit
The City Manager shall issue a permit for solicitation unless any of the following have been demonstrated:

A.    That the applicant has failed to provide the required information;

B.    That any statement made in the application is untrue; or

C.    That the proposed time, place and manner of solicitation is inconsistent with any provision of this Code or poses a threat to the public’s health or safety.

In the event the City Manager denies a permit to any applicant, the City Manager, within five (5) business days thereof, shall send by registered mail or give the applicant in person written notice of the denial, stating the reasons for such denial.

4.9.60 Term of Permits
All permits issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) calendar days unless renewed, revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Upon good cause shown, the City Manager may issue a permit that may be valid for more than thirty (30) calendar days, but in no event shall a permit be valid for more than six (6) months. Any permit issued under this Chapter shall not be transferable or assignable.

4.9.70 Identification Card
All persons to whom permits have been issued hereunder shall furnish an identification card to their agents and solicitors which card is required to be in the possession of each agent and solicitor and presented when soliciting. Identification cards shall include the permit number, the name and address of the permittee, a statement describing the permittee’s purpose and activity, the signature of the permittee’s chief executive officer (if applicable), the name and signature of the solicitor to whom the card is issued, the specific period of time during which the solicitation is authorized, and shall have printed prominently thereon in red: ‘This identification card is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the City of La Habra Heights or any of its officers or employees.’

No person shall solicit unless he or she exhibits an identification card of a form approved by the City Manager and, before commencing the solicitation, the solicitor shall read it to the person solicited or present it to the person solicited, allowing sufficient time for perusal.

4.9.80 Revocation of Permits
Whenever it shall be shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this Chapter has violated any of the provisions hereof or has violated any other law in connection with the solicitation, the City Manager shall immediately suspend the permit, and within two (2) business days thereof, shall either send by registered mail or give the permit holder in person written notice of suspension, stating the reasons for the suspension.

4.9.90 Appeals from Action of City Manager
If an applicant or permit holder is aggrieved by any action to deny, suspend or revoke a permit by the City Manager, such applicant or permit holder may appeal to the City Council by filing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the City Manager’s decision with the City Clerk a written statement addressed to the City Council requesting an appeal and setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action by the City Manager. The City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal and notify the applicant or permit holder. The City Council may affirm, reverse or reverse with conditions the decision of the City Manager. The action of the City Council shall be final.

4.9.100 Manner of Solicitation and Prohibitions
A.    No person shall solicit without a permit and identification card;

B.    No person shall solicit within the City after the permit issued by the City has expired;

C.    No person shall solicit at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium where there is a sign indicating "No Solicitations," "Do Not Disturb," or any other indication that the occupants do not wish to be solicited or in any other way have their privacy disturbed;

D.    No person shall touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person of any member of the public, without first receiving express permission therefore from such member of the public;

E.    No person shall persistently and importunately solicit any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to be solicited;

F.    No person shall intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk or other place or in any place open to the public generally;

G.    No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any member of the public who declines to be solicited;

H.    No person shall misrepresent his or her physical or mental health while soliciting;

I.    No person shall alter an identification card issued or approved by the City without the express approval of the City Manager;

J.    No person shall solicit funds in the City for any purpose other than purpose(s) specified in the application upon which the permit was issued;

K.    No person shall, while standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, solicit, or attempt to solicit, employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways or driveways; and

L.    No person shall, while the occupant of a moving vehicle, solicit, or attempt to solicit, business or contributions of money or other property, from a person that is within the public right-of-way.

4.9.110 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.10 Animal Control
4.10.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish animal control procedures in the City of La Habra Heights. Except as hereinafter provided, Division 1 of Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on June 29, 2006, is hereby adopted by reference as the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights. In addition to Division 1 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, the requirements enumerated in this Chapter shall also apply. Development standards pertaining to the keeping of animals are contained in Article 7 of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code.

4.10.20 License and Permit Requirements
Every person owning or having custody or control of any dog over the age of four months in the City of La Habra Heights shall obtain a license for each dog(s) and shall pay the fees for such licenses as set forth in Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code. All large animal keeping uses must be established and maintained in accordance with the terms of a Large Animal Keeping Permit from the City of La Habra Heights.

4.10.30 Exhibition of License
All dogs (domesticated pets and guard dogs) found within the City of La Habra Heights, regardless of where the owner may reside, must have a dog license. The license tag must be securely affixed to the dog’s collar.

4.10.40 Animal Noise
The continued nuisance noise by domestic pets and/or livestock is prohibited.

4.10.50 Environmental Controls/Housekeeping
Animal keeping uses and activities are not permitted to create a nuisance for neighboring properties. Such nuisances include, but are not limited to, noise, light and glare, odors, or fugitive dust. Animal keeping uses and facilities must be maintained in a safe and clean condition at all times and kept free of debris, trash, odors, and accumulated animal waste. Animal keeping uses and activities shall not be permitted to unduly interfere with the free and unencumbered enjoyment and use of adjoining or nearby residential lots nor result in environmental pollution including, but not limited to, the pollution of surface water or the creation of odors or fugitive dust.

4.10.60 Vector Control
All animal-keeping facilities must be kept free of vectors and in compliance with all applicable vector control standards. Periodic pest control inspections of animal keeping facilities shall be permitted pursuant to Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code.

4.10.70 Wild Animals as Pets Prohibited
Only domestic and non-dangerous wild animals may be kept or maintained within the City.

4.10.80 Apiaries
All apiaries and the ancillary improvements must be installed and maintained pursuant to the Los Angeles County Code Title 10, Division 3, Chapter 10.76. The owner of any hive located in the City or of any new hive to be established in the City shall register the hive or hives with the Los Angeles County Apiary Inspector and thereafter shall annually re-register pursuant to applicable regulations. Hives shall be placed as close to the center of the parcel on which they are located as practical. Africanized bees are not permitted and must be destroyed if found.

4.10.90 Animals Causing Injury or Property Damage
The keeping of animals that may cause injury or property damage, or any dangerous animal, is prohibited.

4.10.100 Unrestrained Animals
All animals must be restrained when off the property on which it is kept.

4.10.110 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.11 Noise Control
4.11.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Section is to establish noise control regulations in the City of La Habra Heights.

4.11.20 Exterior Noise Standards
No noise levels shall exceed the noise levels specified in Article 7 of this Municipal Code.

4.11.30 Stationary Non-Emergency Signaling Devices
The following requirements are applicable to stationary non-emergency signaling devices.

A.    The sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than five (5) consecutive seconds in any hourly period is prohibited.

B.    Sound sources covered by this provision and not exempted under Section 4.11.230 may be exempted by a variance issued by the Community Development Director.

4.11.40 Refuse Collection Vehicles
The following regulations govern noise generated during refuse collection activities.

A.    Operating or permitting the operation of the compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse and which creates, during the compacting cycle, a sound level in excess of eighty-six (86) dBA when measured at fifty (50) feet from any point of the vehicle is prohibited.

B.    Operating or permitting the operation of the compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a residential area or within five-hundred (500) feet thereof is prohibited.

C.    Collecting refuse with collection vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a residential area or within five-hundred (500) feet thereof, is prohibited.

D.    In the case of conflict between this Chapter and any other ordinance regulating refuse collection, provisions of any specific ordinance regulating refuse collection shall control.

4.11.50 Residential Air Conditioning Equipment
Operating or permitting the operation of any air conditioning or refrigeration equipment in such a manner as to exceed any of the following sound levels is prohibited.

A.    60 dBA at any point on property line if the unit was installed prior to January 1, 1980 and 55 dBA at any property line if the unit was installed after that date.

B.    55 dBA at the center of a neighboring patio if unit was installed prior to January 1, 1980 and 50 dBA at the center of a neighboring patio if the unit was installed after that date.

C.    55 dBA outside of the neighboring living area window located nearest the equipment if the unit was installed prior to January 1, 1980 and 50 dBA if the unit was installed after that date.

D.    The unit may not be placed in any yard setback area.

4.11.60 Street Sales
Offering for sale, selling anything, or advertising by shouting or outcry within any residential zone is prohibited. Vehicles that employ external speakers or other audible sound devices to advertise their presence are prohibited within any residential zone in the City.

4.11.70 Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing
Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a real-property boundary or within 500 feet of a residential zone is prohibited.

4.11.80 Vibration
Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates vibration that is above the vibration perception threshold of any individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property, or at one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way, is prohibited. For the purposes of this Chapter, the perception threshold shall be a motion velocity of 0.01 in/sec over the range of 1 to 100 Hertz.

4.11.90 Residential Noise
No person shall make or permit the generation of noise that interferes with the reasonable peace and comfort of the residents or any guests located on adjacent properties.

4.11.100 Unnecessary Noise
No person shall make or permit any unnecessary noises, sounds or vibrations that are physically annoying to reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.

4.11.110 Harmful Noise
No person shall make or permit the generation of noise that is so harsh, prolonged, or unusual that it creates unnecessary or unreasonable discomfort to any persons.

4.11.120 Construction Noise
The operation of construction equipment or conducting construction-related activities (including demolition, grading, site preparation, etc.) is prohibited weekdays and Saturdays between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time on Sundays or holidays unless such is specifically exempted from this restriction in writing by the City Manager in response to exigent circumstances.

4.11.130 Resource Production
Normal servicing, remedial or maintenance work performed within an existing well site is restricted to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays. The installation and construction of new wells and facilities must conform to the requirements of Article 7.

4.11.140 Audio Equipment
The use of any audio equipment at a sound volume sufficiently loud to disturb the peace and quiet of persons with ordinary and normal sensitivity is prohibited.

4.11.150 Band or Orchestral Rehearsals
Musical concerts, practices or rehearsals between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. are prohibited outdoors in all areas of the City and indoors if such activities are audible in areas exterior to the building in which such activities occur.

4.11.160 Engines, Motors and Mechanical Devices
The sustained operation or use of any mechanical device, including but not limited to air conditioning units and pool pumps, is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the device complies with sound level limitations provided in this Article.

4.11.170 Motor Vehicles
The operation of a motor vehicles and motorcycles in such a manner so as to cause unnecessary noise, whether stationary or moving, is prohibited.

4.11.180 Loading and Unloading
The loading, unloading, opening, closing, or handling of goods, containers, building materials, or other objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

4.11.190 Amplified Signaling Devices
The use of any amplified signaling device including, but not limited to bells, chimes, sirens, or whistles is prohibited for other than emergency use.

4.11.200 Mechanical Equipment/Accessory Noise
The operation of any internal combustion engine or other equipment without a proper muffler or other factory installed noise attenuation equipment is prohibited.

4.11.210 Noisy Hawking and Advertising Prohibited
The generation of any loud or raucous noise by using any loudspeaker, blowing any bugle, horn or trumpet, or by beating any drum, or ringing any bell, or in any other manner, for the purpose of advertising or selling goods or services upon any highway or sidewalk, or in any doorway or entrance to any building opening onto any such highway or sidewalk, is prohibited.

4.11.220 Loud, Unnecessary and Unusual Noise
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make any loud, unnecessary and unusual noise that disturbs or causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity. The standard that may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this Section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    The level of noise.

B.    Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.

C.    Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.

D.    The level and intensity of any background noise.

E.    The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.

F.    The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.

G.    The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.

H.    The time of the day or night the noise occurs.

I.    The duration of the noise.

J.    Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

K.    Whether the noise is produced by a non-residential activity (resource production, recreation, etc.).

4.11.230 Exempt Noise
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.

A.    The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or sound emissions related to the performance of emergency work.

B.    The collection of residential refuse between the weekday hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and the collection of commercial refuse on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

C.    Emergency work performed within an existing well site.

D.    Special outdoor public events conducted pursuant to a written approval issued by the City Manager or which constitute a regular or usual function sponsored by the City.

4.11.240 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.12 Light and Glare Control
4.12.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing nuisance light and glare in the City of La Habra Heights. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1)

4.12.20 Limit Light Trespass
All outdoor light fixtures shall limit light trespass and glare through the use of shielding and directional lighting. All exterior lights shall be designed, located, installed and directed to prevent objectionable light glare across property lines. Landscaping shall be required in areas where plantings can reduce visible glare. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.30)

4.12.30 Standard Outdoor Lighting
Outdoor light fixtures shall use a narrow cone of light to confine the light to the area of interest and to minimize light trespass and glare. Such lighting must be equipped with automatic shut-off timers or otherwise shut off when not in use. In addition, the lighting of these features and other monuments shall conform to the light levels indicated in Article 7 of this Municipal Code. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.40)

4.12.40 Recreational Lighting
Light fixtures used for outdoor recreational facilities shall be fully shielded to prevent light trespass beyond the immediate area in which the activity is conducted. Such lighting must be equipped with automatic shut-off timers or otherwise shut off when not in use. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.50)

4.12.50 Driveway and Parking Area Lighting
Lighting fixtures located along driveways and parking areas shall be fitted with glare shields or be cut-off type fixtures. Such lighting must be equipped with automatic shut-off timers or otherwise shut off when not in use. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.60)

4.12.60 Lighting Levels Standards
Light trespass shall be minimized by designs that result in no more than 0.25 foot candles measured at a point located five (5) feet inside the adjacent property and five (5) feet above the ground. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.70)

4.12.70 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8. (Ord. 2015-01 § 1. Formerly 4.12.80)

Chapter 4.13 Local Air Pollution Control
4.13.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations relating to land use, maintenance and development that prevent excessive, unnecessary and avoidable impacts on air quality.

4.13.20 Odors
No land use or activity will be permitted to generate an obnoxious odor that is perceived at a neighboring property line.

4.13.30 Visibility
No land use or activity will be permitted to generate visible emissions.

4.13.40 Fugitive Dust
No activity, including construction, will be permitted to generate significant quantities of fugitive dust as defined by the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

4.13.50 Paints, Sandblasting and Architectural Coatings
The City shall require the use of low-polluting construction and sandblasting materials and architectural coatings.

4.13.60 Fugitive Dust from Off-Road Use and Weed Abatement
As a means to control fugitive dust from off-road vehicles, the use of recreational off-road vehicles on unpaved surfaces is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to agricultural activities or property maintenance. All weed abatement activities must conform to the requirements of the SCAQMD.

4.13.70 Vehicle Emissions Controls
All vehicles operating within the City are required to maintain emissions control equipment pursuant to the applicable requirements.

4.13.80 Stationary Sources
All stationary emissions sources shall be required to obtain any required operating permits.

4.13.90 Stationary Emissions from Oil Production Facilities
Oil producing equipment must employ Best Available Control Technology (BACT) and be required to obtain all requisite permits from the South Coast Air Quality Management District.

4.13.100 Construction Activities
All construction activities must conform to all applicable South Coast Air Quality Management District regulations.

4.13.110 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.14 Public Properties and Facilities
4.14.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide regulation of behavior in all public facilities within the City of La Habra Heights.

4.14.20 Public Properties and Facilities
The following regulations are applicable at public facilities in the City of La Habra Heights.

A.    The hours of operation of City controlled public facilities shall be determined by resolution of the City Council.

B.    Dogs and other domestic animals are allowed in The park if kept restrained. Patrons with animals must clean up after their animals.

C.    Motorized vehicles or radio-controlled devices are not allowed in the park. (An exception is motorized wheelchairs and sit-down type carts for disabled individuals.)

D.    All trash and debris must be placed in the appropriate containers.

E.    A person shall not camp or sleep overnight in The park or any public land in the City without obtaining City approval. The City Manager may issue an overnight camping permit to any group so long as the group has agreed to the conditions contained in the permit. Upon the granting of such permit, the members of such group, including the adult supervisors, may camp at the time, location and under the conditions specified in the permit.

F.    It is unlawful for any person to discard rubbish or other materials on public land or within a public right-of-way.

G.    No person shall roller skate, roller blade or ride upon a skateboard, scooter or other similar wheeled device on public walkways, within the park gymnasium or in public parking areas within the City.

1.    Bicycles. All sections of this code and the State Vehicle Code pertaining to the use and maintenance of bicycles shall be enforced at public properties and facilities in the City of La Habra Heights.

2.    Bicycles are permitted on public walkways, within the park and in public parking areas within the City.

3.    No person shall ride or operate a bicycle:

a.    In a negligent, unsafe or reckless manner or in any way that endangers the life, limb or property of any person;

b.    At a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having due regard for weather, visibility, other trail or road users and the surface and width of the trail or road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property, or in excess of posted bicycle speed limits;

c.    In any open space area, including but not limited to, open space hillsides, creeks, creekbeds or drainage areas.

H.    No person shall operate a motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, or other recreational vehicle on any trail within the park. (Ord. 2016-04 § 2; Ord. 2009-07 § 1; Ord. 2009-06U § 1)

4.14.30 Public Restrooms
This Section governs the use of public restrooms in the City. For purposes of this Section, a "public restroom" is defined as any structure or facility situated on public or private property equipped with toilets, urinals or washbowls, or other similar facilities, erected and maintained for use by members of the general public for personal hygiene and comfort.

A.    Use of Restrooms By Opposite Sex Prohibited. Entering a restroom marked for use by the opposite sex is prohibited.

B.    Sign requirements. All public restrooms maintained for the exclusive use of either males or females shall be marked in a manner so as to give appropriate notice to members of the public that the facility is for the exclusive use of males or females. The markings or signs may be written in the English language or may be of other customary design giving reasonable notice of the exclusive use of that facility.

C.    Exceptions. This Chapter shall not apply to those restrooms within the City that are designed, erected and maintained so as to accommodate only one person at a time and are equipped with an appropriate locking device. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to minors under the age of seven years when accompanied by a responsible adult charged with the care of such minor, any person employed to perform janitorial or maintenance duties in public restrooms, or any public officer while in the performance of his or her official duties. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to physically or mentally handicapped persons or to those assisting such persons.

4.14.40 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions set forth in Article 8. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person or entity that violates Section 4.14.20(G) and (H) of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of an infraction that shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions set forth in Article 8. (Ord. 2009-07 § 2; Ord. 2009-06U § 2)

Chapter 4.15 Pest Control
4.15.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing the control of pests and vectors.

4.15.20 Pest Control
The following pest and vector control requirements apply to all properties in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    No person shall operate or maintain any premise so as to permit the breeding or harboring of insect vectors or other vectors. No person shall permit on his or her premises, the accumulation of any material that could lead to the breeding of undesirable insects and other vectors.

B.    All animal or fowl manure, excrement, and all other fly breeding materials, shall be removed from all premises as often as is necessary to prevent the breeding or harboring of flies.

C.    No person shall permit the exposed carcass or body of any dead animal or fowl to remain on their premises for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. All carcasses must be promptly secured until the carcass is properly disposed of. No carcass shall be left exposed to predators.

4.15.30 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.16 Surface Water, Ground Water, Water Quality and Sanitation and Storm Water Runoff
4.16.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing surface water, ground water and water quality in the City. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any landowner or person leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in the City to undertake the activities prohibited by this Chapter.

4.16.20 Impairment of Natural Drainage Course
It is unlawful for any person or entity to deposit any refuse, rubbish, stones, or any other materials that may impede, retard or change the normal direction or velocity of the flow of, or deteriorate the quality of the surface water and ground water in the channel or bed or bank of any river, stream, wash, natural drainage course or arroyo in the City of La Habra Heights.

4.16.30 Flowing of Water, Mud and Other Materials onto Streets and Highways
It is unlawful for any person or entity to deposit any material other than storm water runoff, including but not limited to mud, rotary mud, sand, water, oil or other hazardous materials, onto or upon any public or private street, highway, drainage ditch, storm drain or flood control channel.

4.16.40 Pools Breeding Insects
It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person or entity to maintain or operate, or cause to be maintained or operated, a pool or other water feature in such a manner which allows it to become a breeding place for mosquitoes or other insects. For purposes of this Section, the term pool means any public or private above-grade, at-grade or below-grade basin, chamber, tank or structure used or intended to be used for wading, swimming, diving, bathing or any form of water recreation, therapy or sport or for water gardens or fish ponds.

4.16.50 Adoption of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code
The following Divisions of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code have been adopted by reference:

A.    Except as hereinafter provided, Title 20, Utilities, Division 2, Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on June 29, 2006, is adopted by reference as the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights.

B.    Except as hereinafter provided, Title 20, Utilities, Division 5, Flood Control District Property and Facilities, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on June 29, 2006, is adopted by reference as the Flood Control Channel Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights.

4.16.60 Amendments and Additions to Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code
The Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance (Title 20, Division 2) is amended as follows:

A.    Section 20.28.050 is amended to provide that the City Engineer may recommend that the City Council approve an agreement to reimburse a subdivider, school district, an improvement district formed under special assessment procedures, or person for the cost of constructing sanitary sewers for public use where such sewers can or will be used by areas outside of the proposed development; and to establish a reimbursement district and collection rates as described in the agreement under the provisions of this Chapter.

B.    Section 20.32.130 is amended by adding the following: "The City Council may waive said fee, except in reimbursement projects, for any existing residential property when said connection is made within six (6) months of the construction by the City of the line to which the residences will be connected if the City Council finds that said waiver will encourage connection to the City project and if the City project is being constructed in the vicinity of a Federal project for which no connection charges were required."

C.    Section 20.32.150 is amended to specify that in the event the City Engineer determines that the property described in the application for a permit is included within a sewer reimbursement district that has been formed by the City Council in accordance with Section 20.28.050, the charge for connecting to the public sewers shall be as set forth in the agreement.

D.    Section 20.32.280 is amended by adding the following: "All monies collected under this Section for sewer maintenance are to be submitted directly to the County Sewer Maintenance District for inclusion in the Maintenance District’s Funds."

E.    Section 20.32.290 is hereby deleted.

F.    Section 20.32.300 is amended to state that all money received under Section 20.32.200 shall be deposited with the County Treasurer and credited to the Special Sewer Maintenance Fund.

G.    Section 20.32.690 is amended by adding the following: "In the event the damaged public sewer is not in a Sewer Maintenance District, the violator shall reimburse the City within thirty (30) days after the City shall render an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited in the City Treasury."

H.    Section 20.32.325 is amended to read as follows: The City Council shall, by resolution, establish a sewer connection fee to be charged and collected by the City for each connection to any public sewer or trunk sewer in the City, whenever all or any portion of such public sewer or trunk sewer, including man-holes, wyes, laterals or other related facilities and appurtenances, is, was, or is to be paid for by the City, and reimbursement of which expenditure is not or has not been otherwise provided for by bond issue, private contract, special assessment district or otherwise. Such resolution shall authorize and direct the City Engineer to charge and collect such sewer connection fee at the time a Sewer Connection Permit is issued, and such sewer connection fee shall be in addition to all permit, connection inspection, and other fees and charges which are otherwise required to be paid.

4.16.65 Sewer Service Fees
Pursuant to Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and further pursuant to Section 11 of Article XI of the State Constitution, sewer service fees can be established in connection with water, sanitation, storm drainage or sewerage system.

A.    Sewer User Fees. Any person who discharges wastewater into the wastewater collection system serving seventeen (17) homes in the subdivision within the Reserve Specific Plan area of the City shall pay a user fee in accordance with the schedule of charges as may be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The charges provided therein shall remain in effect until amended by ordinance or resolution of this City Council.

Unless and until this section is amended to remove this restriction, this section is applicable only to the sewer line which serves seventeen (17) parcels in the subdivision within the Reserve Specific Plan area.

B.    Sewer User Fees As a Debt. The sewer user fee shall be a civil debt owing the City from the person subject to the fee.

1.    If an invoice for the sewer user fee established by this Chapter is unpaid sixty (60) days after mailing to the property owner, a penalty of ten (10) percent shall be charged, and an additional one and one-half (1.5) percent per month shall be charged until the charges and penalties are paid in full; further, the user is responsible for all amounts incurred by the City to disconnect and to restore sewer service. If the City Council authorizes collection of sewer fees on the property tax roll as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 5473 or other authority, this subsection B shall be inapplicable to fees so collected.

2.    If court action is taken to enforce nonpayment of charges, the user shall pay all reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City.

C.    Collection Procedure for Delinquent Accounts—Creation of Lien. Any sewer service fees that remain unpaid after the delinquent dates as set forth in subsection B of this section may be collected thereafter by the City as provided in this section or in any other manner authorized by law.

1.    The City Council shall cause a report of delinquent utility fees to be prepared periodically. The City Council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto.

2.    The City Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.

3.    At the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The City Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which the report shall be confirmed by resolution.

4.    The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees plus administrative costs. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the City Clerk, or auditor appointed by the City Council. The lien created attaches upon recordation of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation in the office of the County Recorder. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as other property taxes and penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment.

D.    Collection Via Property Tax Roll. The City Council hereby elects to have delinquent sewer user fees confirmed pursuant to the collection procedure of subsection C of this section collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, the City’s general taxes pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 5471 et seq. The election made by the adoption of this section shall remain in effect until repealed by further ordinance of this City Council.

E.    Sewerage Revenue Control. All moneys received from the collection of the sewer user fees established in this Chapter shall be controlled, and used only as permitted, by Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

F.    Connection Fees. Any person connecting premises to the wastewater collection system of the City shall first pay a connection fee in accordance with the schedule of charges as may be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. No person who has previously paid for construction of a portion of the City’s wastewater collection system with respect to premises located within a special sewer assessment district or reimbursement district shall pay the fee required by this section. (Ord. 2016-03 § 2)

4.16.70 Local Regulations Governing Illicit Discharges
The following local regulations govern illicit discharges that could affect the quality of surface waters and storm water runoff.

A.    Discharges and Connections. No person shall cause or permit or allow to be caused or permitted, any discharge, from such person’s property, of non-storm water runoff to enter the storm drain system, unless such discharge is authorized by an NPDES Permit or fully complies with a City approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. No person shall construct or use an illicit connection that operates intentionally or unintentionally.

B.    Illicit Disposal. No person shall spill, dump, dispose place or otherwise allow any material, other than storm water runoff into any storm drain system. Disposal in the City shall comply with Best Management Practices (BMPs) adopted by the City that apply to such activities.

C.    Construction Projects. All residential and nonresidential construction activities shall be in conformance with the BMPs procedures adopted by the City that apply to such construction activities. A Building or Grading Permit for residential or nonresidential construction activity will not be issued prior to issuance of a required NPDES Permit. If an NPDES Permit is required for such construction activity, the NPDES Permit shall be maintained at the site of said activity and shall be shown upon request to the City’s employees or agents.

D.    Resource Production Sites. All persons engaged in resource production activity in the City, if any, shall acquire an NPDES Permit prior to discharging any non-storm water runoff into the storm drain system. The NPDES Permit shall be retained on site and shall be available for review by City officers or inspectors or those persons authorized to inspect on behalf of the City, at the request of any such person. All resource production activities shall comply with Best Management Practices (BMPs).

E.    Septic Waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where discharge to City streets or storm drain system may occur.

F.    Illicit Discharges and Connections. No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue any illicit connection or any illicit discharge to the municipal separate storm water system. This prohibition applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that connection was established prior to, or after, the effective date of the ordinance that adopted this Chapter.

G.    Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the City, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water within the City. This paragraph shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers, bags or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste pick up and disposal.

H.    Disposal of Landscape Debris. No person shall intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into the municipal separate storm water system.

I.    Use of Water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the washing down of paved areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.

J.    Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to storm water shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance-related pollutants are contained and not discharged to the municipal separate storm water system.

K.    Removal and Disposal of Debris from Parking Lots. Non-residential vehicle parking lots with more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces that are located in areas potentially exposed to storm water shall be swept to prevent accumulation of debris or other equally effective measures shall be utilized to remove accumulation of debris.

L.    Food Wastes. Food wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the municipal separate storm water system.

M.    Animal Wastes. Animal waste, including but not limited to, waste accumulation in stables, dressage rings, other equestrian facilities, poultry pens, private kennels, and other facilities must be regularly impounded and cleaned and the waste disposed of in a manner that does not lead to contamination of the soil and/or surface or groundwater. Such wastes may not be discharged into any municipal waste system where such systems are provided. The storage and removal of animal waste must adhere to the requirements of a Large Animal Keeping Permit.

N.    Septic Tank Permits. All uses requiring septic tanks for the disposal and treatment of effluent must maintain a Septic Permit pursuant to Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code.

O.    Septic Tank Inspections. No future residential development shall be approved until soil and drainage conditions have been analyzed to assure that septic tank and cesspool liquid waste disposal systems can function adequately to protect the water table unless the development covers the cost of connection to a sewer system. If there are areas of the City in which organic waste disposal systems are failing, special assessment districts shall be formed to finance small area sewage treatment facilities or connections to regional sewer systems.

P.    Maintenance of Water Courses. Property owners are required to keep the courses of blue line streams, or other surface water bodies including intermittent streams, running clear and unimpeded through their properties.

4.16.80 Septic Systems
The following requirements apply to the installation and maintenance of septic systems.

A.    Soils Testing Required. Soils will be tested following Los Angeles County procedures to assure their receptivity and appropriateness for leaching liquid waste prior to installation of any new system.

B.    Approval Required. A private sewage disposal system may be installed provided that prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for any new structure, or prior to a change in use of an existing structure, where the sewage disposal system is to be utilized, written approval must be obtained from the City as provided in this Chapter.

C.    Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to alter, expand, or otherwise modify an existing sewage disposal system without first submitting plans of the proposed work and obtaining a permit.

D.    Maintenance and Repair. In case of failure, malfunction or breakdown of a private sewage disposal system, if not corrected within the time designated by the City, the City may order or cause the necessary corrections to be made. The property owner will be responsible for the costs of correction. The City may also order vacation of the premises pursuant to applicable provisions of this Chapter.

E.    Abandoned Septic Systems. Every private sewage disposal system that has been abandoned or has been discontinued from further use or to which no waste discharge pipe from a plumbing fixture is connected shall be treated in accordance with the applicable standards.

F.    Septic Systems Verification. When homes and other properties equipped with septic systems are offered for sale, verification as to the functionality of the septic systems must be provided following procedures maintained by the Community Development Department.

G.    Onsite Wastewater Treatment System. Except as herein provided, County of Los Angeles Ordinance No. 2018-0037, knows as the Local Agency Management Program (LAMP), as contained in Title 8 (Consumers Protection, Business and Wage regulations) and Title 11 (Health and Safety) of the Los Angeles County Code is here by incorporated by reference and shall regulate conventional and non-conventional onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS) within the City of La Habra Heights, including review, siting, design, permitting, operation and maintenance requirements for OWTS, and providing for collections of fees associated with the monitoring and enforcement of OWTS. (Ord. 2019-01 § 2)

4.16.90 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Best Management Practices (BMP) for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials that have potential adverse impacts on water quality shall be used in areas exposed to storm water.

A.    Requirements for Industrial or Commercial and Construction Activities. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general storm water permit addressing such discharges, granted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Board shall comply with all requirements of such permit. Each discharger identified in a NPDES Permit shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City Manager prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the City.

B.    Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan ("SUSMP") Requirements for New Development and Redevelopment Projects. New development and redevelopment specified in this Chapter shall require a storm water mitigation plan that complies with the most recent SUSMP and any local storm water mitigation requirements.

C.    Incorporation of SUSMP into Project Plans. An applicant for a new development or a redevelopment project subject to the requirements of this Chapter shall incorporate a storm water mitigation plan into the development plan that includes those Best Management Practices (BMPs) necessary to control storm water pollution from construction activities and facility operations. Structural or treatment control BMPs set forth in project plans shall meet the design standards set forth in the SUSMP. If a project applicant has included or is required to include structural or treatment control BMPs in project plans, the applicant shall provide verification of maintenance provisions. The verification shall include the applicant’s signed statement, as part of the project application, accepting responsibility for all structural and treatment control BMP maintenance until such time, if any, that the property is transferred.

D.    Issuance of Discretionary Permits. No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project identified in Subsection B. of this Section until the Community Development Director confirms that either (i) the project plans comply with the applicable SUSMP requirements, or (ii) compliance with the applicable SUSMP requirements is impracticable for one (1) or more of the reasons set forth in Subsection F of this Section regarding issuance of waivers. Where a project results in an increase of less than fifty (50) percent of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development did not require a SUSMP at the time the last discretionary approval was granted by the City, the design standards set forth in the SUSMP will apply only to the addition, and not to the entire development.

E.    Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy. As a condition of issuing a certificate of occupancy for a new development or redevelopment project identified in Subsection B. of this Section, the Community Development Director shall require facility operators and/or owners to implement all BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the SUSMP and other applicable regulatory requirements.

F.    Granting of Waiver. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant a waiver from the requirements of the SUSMP for a development or redevelopment project if it can be shown to be impractical. An impracticability waiver may be granted only when all structural or treatment control BMPs have been considered and rejected as unfeasible. Recognized situations of impracticability are limited to the following, unless approved by the Regional Board:

1.    Extreme limitations of space for treatment on a redevelopment project;

2.    Unfavorable or unstable soil conditions at a site to attempt infiltration; or

3.    Risk of ground water contamination because a known unconfined aquifer lies beneath the land surface or an existing or potential underground source of drinking water is less than ten (10) feet from the soil surface.

G.    Transfer of Properties Subject to Requirement for Maintenance of Structural and Treatment Control BMPs. The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either: (i) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP or, (ii) to replace an existing structural or treatment control BMP with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the City and the SUSMP. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conducts maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection. Residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a homeowner’s association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project’s Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&R’s). Printed educational materials will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what storm water management facilities are present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property. If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted.

H.    Application of CEQA. Provisions of this Section shall be complimentary to, and shall not replace, any applicable requirements for storm water mitigation required under the California Environmental Quality Act.

I.    Non-Storm Water Discharges. The following non-storm water discharges into the municipal separate storm water system (MS4) are prohibited unless in compliance with a NPDES Permit or pursuant to a discharge exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional Board’s Executive Officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board:

1.    Wastewater discharge from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations;

2.    To the maximum extent practicable, discharges from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is undertaken;

3.    Discharges of untreated runoff from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials;

4.    Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas provided, however, that non-industrial and noncommercial activities which incidentally generate urban runoff, such as the hosing of sidewalks, and the noncommercial hand-washing of cars, shall be excluded from the prohibitions of this Chapter;

5.    To the maximum extent practicable, discharges from washing impervious surfaces which result in discharge of untreated runoff, unless specifically required by the State’s, the City’s, or Los Angeles County’s health and safety codes, or permitted under a NPDES Permit;

6.    Discharges of animal waste from corrals, pens, stables, or other animal keeping areas;

7.    Discharges of any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide that has been or is hereafter banned by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation; and

8.    The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a direct or indirect discharge.

J.    Discharges in Violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit, either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge.

K.    Designated Discharges, Conditionally Exempted Discharges, or Designated Discharges. Discharges from those activities specifically identified in, or pursuant to the City’s NPDES Permit as Exempted Discharges, Conditionally Exempted Discharges, or Designated Discharges shall not violate this Chapter, provided that any applicable BMPs developed pursuant to the Municipal NPDES Permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified sources.

L.    Planning and Land Development Program Requirements for New Development and Redevelopment Projects.

1.    Solely for purposes of this subsection (L), the terms set forth below shall have the following meanings:

"Area susceptible to runoff" means any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation.

"Authorized Enforcement Officer" means the City Manager or his or her designee.

"Best management practices (BMPs)" means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from storm water or non-storm water discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of storm water or non-storm water discharges to receiving waters.

"Construction" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, excavation, or any other activities that result in soil disturbance. Construction includes structure teardown and demolition. It does not include routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility; emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety (including fire prevention); clearing and grubbing of vegetation for landscape maintenance and fire prevention which is not associated with a larger construction project; interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction debris to storm water; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.

"Construction General Permit" means the NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities, Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ (NPDES Permit No. CAS000002), adopted September 2, 2009, and any successor permit to that permit.

"Development" means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private residential project or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility; or emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety (including fire prevention).

"Directly adjacent" means situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area.

"Director" means the City Manager or his or her designee.

"Discharge" means when used without qualification the "discharge of a pollutant."

"Discharge of a pollutant" means any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source or any addition or any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by human activity; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.

"Discharging directly" means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject project, development, subdivision, or facility and not commingled with the flows from adjacent lands.

"Discretionary project" is defined in the same manner as CEQA Guidelines Section 15357 (Cal. Code Regs., Title 14, Section 15357) as amended, and means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the City decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the City merely has to determine whether a project conforms with applicable statutes, regulations, or ordinances.

"Disturbed area" means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation unless solely for the purpose of landscape maintenance or fire prevention.

"Environmentally sensitive area" means an area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (Pub. Resources Code Section 30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are areas designated as significant ecological areas by Los Angeles County; an area designated as a significant natural area by the California Department of Fish and Game; provided, that the area has been field verified by that department; and an area identified by the City as environmentally sensitive.

"Hillside" means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope with a grade of twenty-five (25) percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.

"Infiltration" means the downward entry of water into the surface of the soil.

"Inspection" means entry and the conduct of an on-site review of structure and devices on a property, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with applicable legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection include, but are not limited to:

a.    Pre-inspection documentation research;

b.    Request for entry;

c.    Interview of property owner, resident, and/or occupant(s);

d.    Property walk-through;

e.    Visual observation of the condition of property;

f.    Examination and copying of records as required;

g.    Sample collection as required;

h.    Exit discussion (to discuss preliminary evaluation) as appropriate; and

i.    Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance.

"Low impact development (LID)" means building or landscaping features designed to retain or filter storm water runoff.

"Material" means any substance including, but not limited to: garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and fluid or solid containing chemicals.

"Municipal NPDES Permit" or "MS4 NPDES Permit" both mean the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board adopted the Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Discharges within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4, Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001.

"Municipal separate storm sewer system" or "MS4" both mean a conveyance system (consisting of roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, channels, or storm drains):

a.    Owned or operated by a state, city, or other municipality having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts organized under state law such as flood control districts, sewer districts, drainage districts, and similar entities that discharge to waters of the United States;

b.    Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;

c.    Which is not a combined sewer; and

d.    Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works ("POTW") as defined by 40 C.F.R. Section 122.2, as amended.

"Natural drainage systems" means all drainages that have not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored with shotcrete, concrete, or rip-rap) or drainage systems that are tributary to a natural drainage system.

"New development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure; creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. New development does not include land disturbing activities solely involving landscaping or fuel modification.

"Non-storm water discharge" means any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is not composed entirely of storm water.

"NPDES" or "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System" means the national program for issuing, modifying, reissuing, revoking, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits and imposing and enforcing pre-treatment requirements under the Clean Water Act, Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405.

"Pollutant" means those "pollutants" defined in Section 502(6) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6)) or incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.    Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge);

b.    Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic;

c.    Hydrocarbons such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease;

d.    Excessive eroded soils, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the State;

e.    Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities);

f.    Substances that have characteristics such as pH less than six (6) or greater than nine (9), or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.

"Project" means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities excluding landscaping projects.

"Rain event" means a rainfall event that produces more than 0.1 inch of precipitation in twenty-four (24) hours unless specifically stated otherwise.

"Redevelopment" means land disturbing activities that result in the creation, addition, or replacement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface for existing single-family residential structures and accessory structures or the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on a parcel containing an existing nonresidential structure. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to, the expansion of a building footprint, addition or replacement of a structure, replacement of impervious surface area that is not within the regular course of routine maintenance, and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces which meet the area standards above. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of a structure; land disturbing activities solely involving landscaping or fuel modification; or emergency construction activities required for the immediate protection of public health and safety.

"Regional Board" means the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board.

"Routine maintenance" includes, but is not limited to, projects conducted to:

a.    Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility;

b.    Perform necessary restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity, and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities;

c.    Carry out road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders, and performing ditch cleanouts;

d.    Update existing lines and facilities, including the replacement of existing lines with new materials or pipes, to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity;

e.    Repair leaks;

f.    Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural grades; and

g.    Conduct discing, grubbing, and other weed abatement activities for fire prevention.

Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable code, standards, and regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.

"Runoff" means any runoff including storm water and dry weather flow from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.

"Simple LID BMP" means a BMP constructed above ground on a single-family residential home that can be readily inspected by a homeowner or inspector. Simple LID BMPS do not require an operation and maintenance plan under the MS4 NPDES Permit. Examples of such BMPs include, but are not limited to, vegetated swales, rain barrels and above ground cisterns, rain gardens, and pervious pavement.

"Site" means the land or water area where any structure or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the structure or activity.

"Source control BMP" means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution.

"Storm water" means storm water runoff and surface runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(13)).

"Structural BMP" means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and dry weather runoff pollution. Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.

"Treatment" means the application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation, and UV radiation.

"Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption, or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.

2.    The following new development and redevelopment projects are required to comply with the planning and land development program requirements of the Municipal NPDES Permit:

a.    Development projects, including the construction of new single-family residential homes, equal to one (1) acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious area;

b.    Parking lots with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces;

c.    Single-family residential hillside residential development projects or redevelopment projects;

d.    Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet applicable redevelopment thresholds (pursuant to the Municipal NPDES Permit), which include:

i.    Land-disturbing activities which create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on lots developed with single-family dwellings and/or necessary structures; and

ii.    Land-disturbing activities which create, add, or replace five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site excluding lots developed with single-family dwellings and accessory structures.

iii.    Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-development storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.

iv.    Where redevelopment results in an alteration to less than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-development storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, not the entire development.

e.    Roadway construction with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area shall follow either the USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) or the City of Los Angeles Green Streets and Green Alleys Design Guidelines Standards to the maximum extent practicable.

f.    Any new development or redevelopment project located in or directly adjacent to or discharging directly into an environmentally sensitive area, where the development will:

i.    Discharge storm water that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and

ii.    Create two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of impervious surface area.

3.    Incorporation of Planning and Land Development Program Requirements into Project Plans.

a.    New development and redevelopment projects are required to control pollutants and runoff volume from the project site by minimizing the impervious surface area and controlling runoff through infiltration, bioretention, and/or rainfall harvest and use, in accordance with the standards set forth in the Municipal NPDES Permit.

b.    An applicant for a new development or redevelopment project as defined by subsection (L)(1) of this section shall incorporate into the applicant’s project plans a post-construction storm water mitigation plan which includes those best management practices necessary to control storm water pollution from the completed project. Structural or treatment control BMPs (including, as applicable, post-construction treatment control BMPs) set forth in project plans shall meet the design standards set forth in the current Municipal NPDES Permit.

c.    To the extent that the City may lawfully impose conditions, mitigation measures, or other requirements on the development or construction of a single-family home in a hillside area, a single-family hillside home new development or redevelopment project shall implement mitigation measures to:

i.    Conserve natural areas;

ii.    Protect slopes and channels;

iii.    Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;

iv.    Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability;

v.    Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability.

d.    New Development/Redevelopment Project Performance Criteria. Post-construction control BMPs to mitigate storm water pollution are required for all new development and redevelopment projects as defined by subsection (L)(1) of this section unless alternative measures are allowed as provided in the Municipal NPDES Permit. BMPs must be implemented to retain onsite the storm water quality design volume (SWQDv), defined as runoff from either:

i.    0.75 inch, twenty-four (24) hour rain event; or

ii.    The eighty-fifth percentile, twenty-four (24) hour event, as determined from the Los Angeles County eighty-fifth percentile precipitation isohyetal map, whichever is greater.

BMPs shall meet the design specifications and on-site retention potential outlined in the Municipal NPDES Permit.

For projects unable to retain one hundred (100) percent of the SWQDv onsite due to technical infeasibility as defined in the Municipal NPDES Permit, projects must implement alternative compliance measures in accordance with the Municipal NPDES Permit.

Single-family hillside home development projects are exempt from the new development/redevelopment project performance criteria of the Municipal NPDES Permit unless they create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface.

e.    Hydromodification Control Criteria.

i.    All non-exempt new development and redevelopment projects located within natural drainage systems as defined in subsection (L)(1) of this section must implement hydrologic control measures to prevent accelerated downstream erosion and to protect stream habitat in natural drainage systems. Project exempt from hydromodification controls are listed in the Municipal NPDES Permit.

ii.    The following new development and redevelopment projects must include one (1), or a combination of, hydromodification control BMPs, low impact development (LID) strategies, or stream and riparian buffer restoration measures:

1.    Projects on single-family lots that create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area are required to implement LID BMPs. Single-family homes implementing such BMPs will satisfy the hydromodification control requirements of the Municipal NPDES Permit.

2.    Projects on non-single-family lots disturbing an area greater than one (1) acre but less than fifty (50) acres within natural drainage systems must demonstrate one (1) of the following:

A.    The project has been designed to retain onsite, through infiltration, evapotranspiration, and/or harvest and use, the storm water volume from the runoff of the ninety-fifth percentile, twenty-four (24) hour storm, or

B.    The runoff flow rate, volume, velocity, and duration for the post-development condition do not exceed the pre-development condition for the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall event, or

C.    The erosion potential (Ep) in the receiving water channel will approximate one (1), as determined by a hydromodification analysis study and the equation presented in Attachment J of the Municipal NPDES Permit, or other approved equations.

4.    Issuance of Final Approval. As a condition for issuing final approval for new development or redevelopment projects identified in subsection (L)(1) of this section, the authorized enforcement officer shall require property owners or their representative(s) to build all the storm water pollution control best management practices and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the Municipal NPDES Permit other applicable regulatory requirements including the following words:

SHOULD THE ABOVE REPRESENTATION BE INCORRECT, WE UNDERSTAND AND ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COST OF CORRECTING ANY DEFICIENCY IN THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ABOVE CONDITION AS WELL AS PAYMENT OF APPLICABLE ADMINISTRATIVE AND/OR CIVIL REMEDIES. WE UNDERSTAND THAT THE CITY WILL RELY ON THE REPRESENTATIONS CONTAINED IN THIS STATEMENT AS HAVING ACHIEVED OUR OBLIGATION FOR COMPLIANCE WITH STORM WATER REQUIREMENTS AND SIGN THIS CERTIFICATION VOLUNTARILY, WITHOUT PURPOSE OR EVASION AND OF OUR OWN FREE WILL AND WITH FULL KNOWLEDGE OF ITS SIGNIFICANCE.

With the exception of simple LID BMPs (as defined in subsection (L)(1) of this section) on lots developed with single-family residences, project owners shall provide an operation and maintenance plan, monitoring plan where required, and verification of ongoing maintenance provisions for LID practices, treatment control BMPs, and hydromodification control BMPs including but not limited to: final map conditions, legal agreements, covenants, conditions or restrictions, CEQA mitigation requirements, conditional use permits, and/or other legally binding maintenance agreements. These maintenance records must be kept on site for treatment BMPs implemented on single-family residences.

5.    Transfer of Properties Subject to Requirement for Maintenance of Structural and Treatment Control BMPs.

a.    The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either (a) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP; or (b) replace an existing structural or treatment control BMP with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then-current standards of the City and the Municipal NPDES Permit. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection.

b.    If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2)

4.16.100 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.17 Civic Center Area Underground Utility District
4.17.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to serve the public health, safety and welfare by requiring the conversion of overhead utilities to underground locations and to specifically achieve the following objectives:

A.    Reduction of potential hazards to life and property in the event of emergencies or disasters such as earthquakes, fires, floods, hazardous or toxic waste releases, or heavy rains;

B.    Facilitation of the delivery of emergency services from the civic center area to persons and property located throughout the City;

C.    Improvement of the utility of Hacienda Boulevard for such public uses as pedestrian travel, ease of deliveries to adjacent property, and emergency evacuation;

D.    Reduction of visual distractions and impairments for drivers in the civic center area, thereby promoting the safety of pedestrians and vehicle operators; and

E.    Improvement of the aesthetics of the City’s civic center. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.20 Definitions
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases (and any variants thereof) mean:

A.    "District" means the Civic Center Area Underground Utility District established by Section 4.17.30.

B.    "Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within the District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.

C.    "Public utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.30 Establishment of District and Boundaries
The Civic Center Area Underground Utility District is hereby established. The District includes:

A.    The first eight hundred fifty (850) feet of Hacienda Road, forty-five (45) feet on either side of the centerline extending south from the centerpoint of that street’s intersection with West Road.

B.    The first two hundred fifty (250) feet of Hacienda Road, forty-five (45) feet on either side of the centerline extending north from the centerpoint of that street’s intersection with West Road.

C.    The first one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of West Road, forty-five (45) feet on either side of the centerline extending west from the centerpoint of that street’s intersection with Hacienda Road.

D.    Each parcel of real property abutting any section of West Road or Hacienda Road that is set forth in subsections A through C of this Section.

And each parcel of real property abutting that section of Hacienda Road and West Road. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.40 Overhead Utilities Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the District. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.50 Responsibility of Utilities
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within the District, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.60 Responsibility of Property Owners
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within the District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on their property, and to the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission.

B.    In the event that any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this Section within the time provided for in this Chapter, the City Manager shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.70 Responsibility of City
The City will remove, at its expense, all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in sufficient time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove such poles within the time specified by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.80 Exceptions
The following facilities are exempt from the requirements of Section 4.17.40:

A.    Poles, or electroliers, used exclusively for street lighting;

B.    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

C.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand and five hundred (34,500) volts;

D.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

E.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts; and

F.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

4.17.90 Implementation Timeline and Suspension of Requirements
A.    It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this Chapter be implemented in a manner that best coordinates with other construction projects at the City’s civic center site.

B.    The requirements of Sections 4.17.40 through 4.17.70 shall be suspended until such suspension is lifted pursuant to Section 4.17.90(C).

C.    The City Manager shall determine the date or dates upon which the suspension of each requirement of Sections 4.17.40 through 4.17.70 shall be lifted. He or she shall give notice of such dates by posting the determination in the manner in which the City gives notice of ordinances adopted by the City Council and shall mail notice of such determination to each property affected by this Chapter and to each utility affected by this Chapter. Such notice shall be given no later than thirty (30) days prior to the first date set forth in the determination. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2)

Chapter 4.18 Disaster Control
4.18.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected persons.

Definition MOVE TO Article 12 - included here for reference only

As used in this Chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

4.18.20 Disaster Council Membership
The City of La Habra Heights Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

A.    The Mayor, who shall be chairman, and the members of the City Council;

B.    The Director of Emergency Services, the Assistant Director of Emergency Services and the Chiefs of Emergency Services as provided for in the emergency plan set forth in this chapter shall be ex-officio and non-voting members of the Disaster Council.

4.18.30 Disaster Council Powers and Duties
It shall be the duty of the City of La Habra Heights Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairman or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice Chairman.

4.18.40 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
The office of Director of Emergency Services is hereby created. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. There shall also be an office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services and confirmed by the City Council.

4.18.50 Powers and Duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
The powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services are specified as follows:

A.    The Director is hereby empowered to:

1.    Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. The City Council shall take action to ratify such a proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

2.    Request the Governor proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

3.    Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter.

4.    Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the City’s emergency organization, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

5.    Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies.

6.    In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director is hereby empowered:

a.    To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

b.    To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

c.    To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County in which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

d.    To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

e.    To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this Chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

B.    The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

C.    The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency program of the City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

4.18.60 Emergency Organization
All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons charged with duties, incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization for the City of La Habra Heights.

4.18.70 Emergency Plan
The City of La Habra Heights Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of La Habra Heights Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all City resources, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by the City Council.

4.18.80 Expenditures
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of La Habra Heights.

4.18.90 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Further, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, during a declared emergency to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this Chapter; or

B.    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; or

C.    Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State or any other governmental agency.

Chapter 4.19 Unsafe Structures
4.19.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of La Habra Heights through the regulation of unsafe structures.

4.19.20 Unsafe Structures
Pursuant to this Section, the Building Official, Fire Department personnel, or other designated City personnel may access a property when there are adequate facts in evidence to question whether the property and/or structures are safe for human habitation and are in compliance with the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code. In the event such officials determine that a property and/or building is dangerous, substandard or unsafe for human habitation, the following acts are deemed unlawful:

A.    For any person, directly or indirectly, to pay any rent, perform any services or give anything of value whatsoever for the privilege of continuing to reside in, use, or occupy for any purpose of human habitation of any such premises;

B.    For any person to receive any rent, accept any services or receive anything of value whatsoever for the human use, occupation or habitation of any such premises;

C.    For any person, after notice, to continue to reside in, use or occupy such premises, provided, however, that this subsection shall not prevent the owner nor the City from demolishing the premises nor the owner from renovating the same so long as the premises are not used in any way for human habitation during renovation.

4.19.30 Violations/Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

Chapter 4.20 Recovery of Costs Related to Abatement of Nuisances
4.20.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the City’s authority to recover costs associated with the abatement of a nuisance.

4.20.20 Procedure for Recovery of Costs
In addition to the violations and/or penalties specified in this Article, the City is empowered to recover all costs incurred in the abatement of a nuisance. The procedures related to the recovery of costs associated with the abatement of a public nuisance are set forth in Article 8.

4.20.30 Other Remedies Available
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, the City may bring appropriate civil and criminal action in a court of competent jurisdiction or may initiate an administrative proceeding for abatement of any nuisance existing within the City pursuant to any other provision of law. The use of this Chapter by the City to abate a nuisance shall not bar the use of any other procedure authorized by State law. All remedies of the City are cumulative and the use of any remedy shall not bar the use of any other remedy with respect to the same or another property.

Chapter 4.21
Recovery of Costs Related to Emergency Response
4.21.10 Findings
The City Council finds as follows:

A.    The false reporting of an emergency or of a criminal offense unreasonably diverts vital and critical public safety resources.

B.    Owners and/or occupants of certain businesses and properties utilize a disproportionate amount of public safety resources thereby diverting these critical resources from other parts of the City.

C.    Owners and/or occupants of certain businesses and properties require extraordinary public safety services in response to criminal and/or nuisance activities associated with the use and/or occupancy of the premises.

D.    Deterring the making of false claims and the unnecessary or excessive use of public safety resources would free up critical resources for the benefit of the public and the community as a whole.

E.    It is therefore in the public interest for those who misuse police and fire resources by falsely reporting an emergency or a criminal offense or who utilize a disproportionate amount of public safety resources and require extraordinary public safety services or responses to be liable for the costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.20 Purpose
The purposes of this Chapter are to assist the City in defraying the cost of emergency services when the negligent or criminal actions of owners and/or occupants of certain properties or users of City facilities or infrastructure require extraordinary response from law enforcement or fire/EMS, when a person files a false report of nuisance or criminal activity that requires investigation or when nuisance activities cause the City to incur extraordinary response costs; and to deter or prevent future extraordinary safety services responses and the diversion of critically important public safety resources. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.30 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this Chapter:

A.    "Ambulance company" shall mean any medical transport service contracted by the County of Los Angeles to perform services in the City.

B.    "Emergency" means any condition that results in, or could result in, the response of a public official in an authorized emergency vehicle or aircraft.

C.    "Emergency response" means the dispatch of one (1) or more sheriff or one (1) or more fire/EMS personnel to a property within the City for a disturbance or other emergency. A response to a security or fire alarm does not constitute an “emergency response” under this Chapter.

D.    "Extraordinary public safety services" means any of the following:

1.    The response of three (3) or more sheriff’s deputies to a single emergency;

2.    The response of three (3) or more fire/EMS crews to a single emergency;

3.    The second (2nd) emergency response to the same property within a thirty (30) day period;

4.    The third (3rd) emergency response to the same property within a ninety (90) day period.

E.    "False report" means a verbal report to the City or the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Office or other emergency services personnel via 911 dispatch or any other communication, directly or indirectly to a Sheriff’s Deputy, or a report filed in writing, that a felony or misdemeanor has been committed or that an emergency exists, when filed by an individual who knows the information to be false.

F.    "Occupant" means any individual who occupies or controls property at the time of the response.

G.    "Owner" means any individual person who has legal title to the property at the time of the response.

H.    "Parent or guardian" shall mean a parent with legal custody, guardian, conservator, or relative caregiver of the minor. "Relative caregiver" means a relative, as defined in Section 6550(i) of the California Family Code, who assumed primary responsibility for the minor while the child was in the relative’s care and control, and who is not a biological or adoptive parent. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.40 Response Cost Recovery
The costs of emergency responses and responses to false reports shall be assessed to persons causing the emergency or necessitating the response as follows:

A.    Every person who makes a false report shall be liable for all of the City’s actual costs, both direct and indirect, incurred as a result, including the expenses investigating and/or responding to the false report.

B.    Any owner or occupant of a business or property whose criminal or negligent activity results in the provision of extraordinary public safety services to that business or property shall be liable for all of the City’s actual costs, both direct and indirect, incurred as a result. Negligent activity may include such things as oil spills and hazardous operation of a vehicle.

C.    Where initial emergency services have been provided at a business or property and the owner or occupant of such business or property has received written notice from the City subsequent to the provision of initial services informing him that the owner or occupant’s actions or failure to act resulted in the provision of unnecessary or unwarranted emergency services and that repeated calls for service could result in liability, then the owner or occupant of such business or property shall be liable for all of the City’s actual costs, both direct and indirect, incurred in providing extraordinary public safety services at such business or property after the written notice was provided.

D.    Where an owner or occupant of a business or property fails to implement and/or abide by a plan provided by the City under Section 4.21.50, the owner and occupants of the business or property shall be jointly and severally liable for the actual cost of providing extraordinary safety response services incurred from the time the plan is provided, until the owner or occupant implements and abides by the plan.

E.    Any person whose negligence causes an incident resulting in an emergency response necessary to protect the public from a real and imminent threat to health and safety to confine, prevent, or mitigate the release, escape, or burning of hazardous substances shall be liable for all expenses incurred to the extent permissible under California Health and Safety Code Section 13009.6.

F.    An owner or occupant shall not be liable under this section if that person was not the owner or occupant of the property during the time the extraordinary public safety services were rendered.

G.    An owner or occupant who is an individual person and is the victim of a crime shall not be liable for the extraordinary public safety services related to that crime.

H.    Any cost recovery or other remedy provided by this Chapter is civil, not criminal, and is in addition to any other available remedy provided by law, including administrative citations and penalties. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.50 Security and Safety Plans
Whenever the City provides emergency response to a particular business or property, the City may provide the property owner or occupant with written notice specifying the emergency services provided and providing a written plan for improving the security and safety of the property or business. The plan shall include:

A.    Reasonable, specific, tangible methods for improving security or safety and minimizing the need for emergency response services; and

B.    A reasonable deadline for implementation of the plan. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.60 Calculation of Emergency or Extraordinary Response Costs
Calculation of the amount due for an emergency response related to extraordinary response shall include all actual costs incurred by the City in responding to the incident. These shall include all costs for contracted law enforcement services invoiced to the City for the particular incident, as well as fire department fees as established by resolution of the City Council. Any costs related to the cost of equipment on scene, and the cost of repairing or replacing equipment damaged at the scene shall also be calculated into the total cost. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.70 Costs Not Recoverable
Time spent by responding personnel on activities that are not customarily required as a consequence of investigating and mitigating an incident is not eligible for reimbursement. Recoverable costs are restricted to those directly arising because of a response to a particular incident. Thus, salary costs incurred after a subject is booked are not recoverable as expenses of an emergency response. Additionally, the cost of an officer’s time testifying against a defendant arising from a decision to prosecute the defendant is not recoverable. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.80 Collection of Charges
A.    The City Manager shall calculate the charges payable under this section and shall cause a bill to be prepared within thirty (30) days of the qualifying incident. The bill will be sent to the responsible person’s address that is listed with the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office and transmitted through certified mail, return receipt requested. Service of the bill shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of mailing.

B.    If the responsible person is a minor, the parents or guardians of such minor shall be liable for the charges payable under this Chapter.

C.    In the event that the bill is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of its issuance, the City Manager may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid amounts, including further outreach by additional collection letters, referral to a collection agency, and by civil action. Where costs levied under this Chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of being billed, a penalty equaling ten (10) percent of the levied amount will be assessed on the day following the due date. Thereafter, the delinquent amount will incur an interest penalty of one (1) percent of the outstanding balance accrued every thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.90 Appeal
Any responsible person or the parent or guardian of a responsible person, if he/she is a minor, may contest response costs assessed under this Chapter by submitting a written request to the City for an appeal hearing, clearly stating the reasons for the appeal, within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of a bill by the responsible person. An appeal fee will be paid, as set by Council resolution. A hearing before a hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the request for hearing is filed. The responsible person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.100 Hearing
A.    No hearing to contest a bill for response costs issued under this Chapter before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a written request for a hearing has been timely submitted.

B.    The hearing shall not be open to the public.

C.    The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and any relevant evidence concerning the identity of the responsible person and/or incorrectly charged costs.

D.    The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant evidence may be considered, and the hearing officer has the discretion to exclude evidence if he/she finds such evidence to be irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. The hearing officer has the authority to cut off presentation of evidence if he/she reasonably believes that the evidence being presented is irrelevant or needlessly repetitive.

E.    The failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute acceptance of the charges and shall be considered a concession that the emergency or extraordinary response cost was properly issued.

F.    Notwithstanding the above, upon a showing of good cause by the appellant, the hearing officer may excuse the appellant’s failure to appear at the hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the hearing be rescheduled more than one (1) time.

G.    The bill for the emergency or extraordinary response cost and any additional documents submitted by the City Manager shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

H.    Neither the City Manager nor any other representative of the City shall be required to attend the hearing, nor shall the hearing officer require that there be submitted any evidence, other than the bill which references the services provided as well as the amount charged. However, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the City Manager or any city employee or agent.

I.    At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the appellant shall be provided with copies of the bill, reports, and other documents submitted or relied upon by the City Manager. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the City shall be provided with copies of any documents relied upon by the appellant to contest the charges included in the bill for response costs. No other discovery disclosure is required. If the City submits any additional written evidence in support of the bill for response costs to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of the report also shall be served by certified mail on the appellant at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.

J.    The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the City or from the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

4.21.110 Hearing Officer’s Decision
A.    Within twenty (20) days after considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify or revoke the bill for response costs and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

B.    If the decision is to uphold the bill for response costs, the responsible person shall pay the amount due along with the costs of the hearing within thirty (30) days of mailing of the officer’s decision. If the decision is to revoke the bill, the appellant shall be so notified in writing within thirty (30) days of the hearing date.

C.    The hearing officer’s decision shall include notice that an aggrieved party may file a petition for review with the California Superior Court, County of Los Angeles, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.

D.    The hearing officer’s written decision shall be served on the appellant within twenty (20) days from the date of the hearing by mailing to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested, via U.S. Mail. Service of the hearing officer’s decision shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of mailing.

E.    The hearing officer shall not be a City employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon any ruling or outcome issued by the hearing officer. (Ord. 2012-03 § 1)

Article 5
Building, Residential, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Energy and Green Building Code
Section Contents

Chapter 5.1    Introduction to Article 5

5.1.10    Purpose of this Article

5.1.20    Building Division

5.1.30    Powers and Duties of the Building Official

Chapter 5.2    Code Requirements

5.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

5.2.20    Adoption and Application of Codes

5.2.30    Permit and Plan Review Requirements

5.2.40    Use and Occupancy

5.2.50    Inspections

5.2.60    Violations/Penalties

5.2.70    Intent and Purpose

5.2.71    Definitions

5.2.72    Applicability

5.2.73    Solar Energy System Requirements

5.2.74    Duties of Building Department and Building Official

5.2.75    Expedited Permit Review and Inspection Requirements

Chapter 5.3    Code Exemptions

5.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

5.3.20    Work Exempted from Permit

Chapter 5.4    Amendments to the 2016 Building, Residential and Electrical Codes

5.4.10    Amendments to the 2016 California Building Code

5.4.20    Amendments to the 2016 California Residential Code

5.4.30    Amendments to the 2016 California Electrical Code

Chapter 5.1 Introduction to Article 5
5.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish building, residential, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, energy and green building code requirements, procedures and regulations for new construction.

The provisions of this Article and other relevant portions of this Code shall apply to the erection, alteration, installation, repair, movement, improvement, removal, connection or conversion of any building, electrical equipment and/or appliances or any other electrical work, plumbing equipment and/or appliances or any other plumbing work and mechanical equipment and/or appliances or any other mechanical work regulated by this Code. (Ord. 2016-05 § 2(B); Ord. 2013-05 § 2; Ord. 2010-04 § 2)

5.1.20 Building Division
The City of La Habra Heights Community Development Department hereby establishes the Building Division. The Community Development Director shall supervise the Building Official. The Building Official is responsible for adherence of all development to the Building, Residential, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Energy and Green Building Codes established by this Article. (Ord. 2016-05 § 2(C); Ord. 2013-05 § 2; Ord. 2010-04 § 2)

5.1.30 Powers and Duties of the Building Official
This Section establishes powers and duties of the Building Official.

A.    General. The Building Official is authorized to engage in, and oversee all local code enforcement activities, including administration of the Building Division, interpretation of code requirements, making all inspections and enforcing and recommending adoption of rules and supplemental regulations which clarify the application of such provisions. The Building Official shall have all police powers necessary for the administration of such enforcement and other enumerated and otherwise reasonably related activities. Such powers and enforcement activities shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this Code and State law.

B.    Modifications. The Building Official shall approve modifications to this Code in accordance with the policies and procedures approved and implemented by the City Manager.

C.    Authorities. The Building Official is authorized to make and enforce such guidelines and policies for safeguarding life, limb, health or property as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Code.

D.    Deputies. The Building Official may delegate enforcement or inspection powers to other employees or officials as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Building Division.

E.    Inspections; Alternate Methods of Construction. The Building Official shall conduct inspections and shall approve alternate materials and methods to this Code in accordance with the policies and procedures approved and implemented by the City Manager.

F.    Plan Requirements. The Building Official shall enforce plan submittal requirements and conditions in accordance with the policies and procedures approved and implemented by the City.

G.    Cooperation of Other Officials. The Building Official may request the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the City.

H.    Liability. Issues of liability and indemnification of the Building Official and any subordinates are governed by applicable provisions of the Government Code or other State law.

I.    Appeals. The Building Official shall process all applications for appeals of decisions by the Building Official in accordance with the policies and procedures of Article 8.

Chapter 5.2 Code Requirements
5.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards to preserve the public peace, health and safety by regulating the design and construction of buildings and structures, including electrical, mechanical and plumbing components. The design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of equipment and appliances shall conform to all requirements set forth herein. Consistent with this purpose, the provisions of this Code are intended and always have been intended to confer a benefit on the community as a whole and are not intended to establish a duty of care toward any particular person.

5.2.20 Adoption and Application of Codes
A.    All portions of the California Building Standards Code apply in La Habra Heights, except as provided in this Municipal Code. The Building Standards Code includes:

1.    The 2016 California Administrative Code (Part 1);

2.    The California Building Code (Part 2, which is based on the 2015 International Building Code);

3.    2016 California Residential Code (Part 2.5, based on the 2015 International Residential Code) including Appendix H;

4.    2016 California Electrical Code (Part 3, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code);

5.    2016 California Mechanical Code (Part 4, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code);

6.    2016 California Plumbing Code (Part 5, based upon the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code);

7.    2016 California Energy Code (Part 6);

8.    2016 California Historical Building Code (Part 8);

9.    2016 California Existing Building Code (Part 10, based on the 2015 International Existing Building Code);

10.    2016 California Green Building Standards (Part 11, known as the "CALGreen" Code);

11.    2016 California Referenced Standards Code (Part 12);

12.    1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (published by I.C.B.O.);

13.    2015 International Property Maintenance Code (published by ICC).

B.    Copies of Codes Available. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d), one (1) copy of an up-to-date version of said codes will remain on file with the City Clerk.

C.    Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Code, or to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the Building Official may require tests to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the owner or the owner’s agent. Test methods shall be as specified by this Code. If there is no appropriate test method specified in this Code, the Building Official shall determine and specify the test procedure.

D.    Electrical Utility Release. When deemed appropriate by the Building Official, electric utilities may be released. Release of electric utility may be done prior to the building final for testing and inspection purposes. The Building Official shall retain the right to revoke the release of electric utility for just cause, and may have the utility disconnected at the earliest availability of the utility purveyor. Attempting to occupy prior to issuance of a certificate of completed construction, whether temporary or final, may result in disconnection of the utilities. It is unlawful to energize any electrical wiring coming under the provisions of this Code, until such wiring has been inspected and approved. However, permission may be given to furnish temporary electric current for a length of time not exceeding thirty (30) days, or other reasonable period, if the Building Official determines that such electrical wiring may be used safely for such purpose, and that there exists a necessity for such use.

E.    Authority to Disconnect Electric Utility. The Building Official may disconnect or order discontinuance of electric utility when used without a required permit or found to be a hazard. The Building Official shall have the power to disconnect or to order the discontinuance of electric utility service as a means of preventing, restraining, correcting or abating any violation of this Code. The electrical service shall remain disconnected or discontinued until the Building Official authorizes service resumption.

F.    Right of Entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection in connection with the application for a permit or other approval, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which is hazardous, unsafe or dangerous, the Building Official is authorized to enter and inspect. If the premises are occupied, the Building Official shall request entry explaining the reasons therefor, and if such premises are unoccupied, shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the person having control of the premises and request entry. If the person having control of the premises cannot be found or if entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the premises.

If the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that conditions are so hazardous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the Building Official shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such premises. If the premises are occupied, the Building Official shall first present credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection.

No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand, to promptly permit the Building Official to make any inspection provided for by this Code. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

G.    Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is performed contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Building Official may order the work stopped. Any persons so ordered shall immediately stop work until authorized to resume.

H.    Use Violations. Whenever any equipment or appliance is determined to be dangerous the Building Official may make an investigation and order such use discontinued. The use shall immediately be discontinued until authorized to resume. (Ord. 2016-05 § 2(D); Ord. 2013-05 § 2; Ord. 2010-04 § 2; Ord. 2008-02 § 1 (Exh. A))

5.2.30 Permit and Plan Review Requirements
The Building Official shall enforce permit requirements in accordance with the policies and procedures approved and implemented by the City Manager. When required by the Building Official to verify compliance with this Code, additional calculations, geological or engineering reports and other required data must be submitted for plan review.

A.    Permit Fees. All plan review fees and permit fees shall be as adopted by resolution. In the event that any person obtains a permit but no portion of the work covered by the permit has been commenced, and such permit is subsequently cancelled, the permittee may submit a written request for a refund of permit fees.

B.    Refunds. Permit fees may be refunded to the degree such exceeds actual costs of issuance and cancellation, provided the request has been submitted within one year from the date of cancellation or expiration of the permit. No portion of the plan checking fee shall be refunded, unless no review has been performed, in which case ninety (90) percent of the plan checking fee shall be refunded.

5.2.40 Use and Occupancy
No construction shall be used or occupied, and no change in any occupancy classification shall be made until approved by the Building Official. Upon finalizing a building permit, a certificate of completed construction shall be issued by the Building Official.

A.    Use and Occupancy Approvals. Approval of a building, structure, device, or premises, or portion thereof for use shall not be construed as approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code.

B.    Suspension of Approvals. The Building Official may suspend or revoke any previously issued approval or certificate whenever it is determined that the approval or certificate was issued in error. Any such certificate so issued shall be surrendered to the Building Official.

C.    Unpermitted Structures or Devices. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any unpermitted structure or device that requires a permit.

D.    Change in Use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except pursuant to Article 7 of this Code.

E.    Issuance of a Certificate of Completed Construction. When the building, structure, device or premises has passed final inspection, and the required fees have been paid, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of completed construction.

F.    Issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Completed Construction. If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or structure before completed, a temporary certificate of completed construction may be issued.

G.    Continued Use of Unpermitted and/or Noncomplying Conditions. At the discretion of the Building Official, a certificate of continued use of unpermitted and/or noncomplying condition(s) may be issued provided that the property owner establishes that the condition(s) were not created by the current owner, the current owner had no knowledge that the condition(s) were unpermitted and/or noncomplying at the time of purchase and the condition(s) do not pose a hazard to persons or property. Permits may be required as provided in this Code.

5.2.50 Inspections
The Building Official shall conduct inspections in accordance with the policies and procedures approved and implemented by the City Manager. Any building, device or premises that remains in an unfinished state for an unreasonable period of time, or is otherwise deemed a nuisance, may be declared substandard. An "unreasonable period of time" shall be defined as eighteen (18) months for residential construction and thirty-six (36) months for all other construction. Residential construction shall specifically include detached garages and similar accessory structures that serve a residential or agricultural use.

5.2.60 Violations/Penalties
A.    Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Article 8 unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted.

B.    Whenever any work has been commenced without a permit as required by this Municipal Code, a special investigation shall be made prior to the issuance of the permit. The planning fee collected for each permit so investigated shall include the cost of the investigation. The planning fee shall be specified by resolution.

C.    If the Building Official issues an order to a person who fails to comply with the order within fifteen (15) days following the due date for compliance, a noncompliance fee shall be collected. The noncompliance fee shall not be imposed unless the order states that a failure to comply within 15 days after the specified compliance date will result in the fee being imposed.

D.    Existing equipment and/or appliances lawfully installed prior to the effective date of this Code may have their existing use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and location and is not a hazard to life, health, or property.

E.    In addition to the violations and/or penalties specified in this Article, the City is empowered to recover all costs incurred in enforcing any provisions of this Article, to the fullest extent permissible under law. The procedures for recovery of costs shall be the procedures for abatement of a public nuisance prescribed in Article 8.

F.    The City may bring appropriate civil and criminal action or initiate an administrative proceeding for recovery of costs or other abatement of a nuisance pursuant to any other provision of law. The use of this Chapter by the City to abate a nuisance shall not bar the use of any other procedure authorized by State law. All remedies of the City are cumulative and the use of any remedy shall not bar the use of any other remedy with respect to the same or another property.

5.2.70 Intent and Purpose
The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This Chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

5.2.71 Definitions
A.    "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

B.    "Building Department" means the Building and Safety Division for the City of La Habra Heights.

C.    "Building Official" means the Building Official for the City of La Habra Heights.

D.    "City" means the City of La Habra Heights.

E.    "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one (1) or more of the following:

1.    Email.

2.    The Internet.

3.    Facsimile.

F.    "Expedited permitting," and "expedited review," means the process outlined in Section 5.2.75 entitled "Expedited Permit Review and Inspection Requirements."

G.    A "feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit.

H.    "Board of Appeals" means the Board of Appeals for the City of La Habra Heights.

I.    "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following:

1.    A solar energy system that is not larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

2.    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of La Habra Heights and all State of California health and safety standards.

3.    A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

4.    A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of La Habra Heights.

J.    "Solar energy system" means either of the following:

1.    Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2.    Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating.

K.    "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

5.2.72 Applicability
This Chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Chapter are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

5.2.73 Solar Energy System Requirements
A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and the State of California.

B.    Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

5.2.74 Duties of Building Department and Building Official
A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the City’s publicly accessible website.

B.    Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. Website applications may be allowed at such time in the future that the technology is made available by the City.

C.    An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D.    The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

E.    The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

F.    All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

5.2.75 Expedited Permit Review and Inspection Requirements
A.    The Building Department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within thirty (30) days of adoption of this chapter. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the Building Department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three (3) business days. The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.

B.    Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the applicant meets local, State and Federal health and safety requirements.

C.    If a use permit is required, the Building Official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.

D.    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The City shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Sections 714(d)(1)(A) and (B).

E.    The City shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an association as defined in Civil Code Section 4080.

F.    If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

G.    Only one (1) inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

H.    The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two (2) business days of a request.

I.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 2015-02 § 1)

Chapter 5.3 Code Exemptions
5.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to identify building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical works that do not require permits.

5.3.20 Work Exempted from Permit
The Building Official shall maintain a list of certain construction and other works that do not require a permit.

Chapter 5.4 Amendments to the 2016 Building, Residential and Electrical Codes
5.4.10 Amendments to the 2016 California Building Code
The following amendments to the California Building Code shall apply in the City:

A.    Administration. Division II of Chapter 1, entitled "Scope and Administration," is applicable in the City where a conflict occurs between this Chapter and Chapters 5.2 and 5.3, the more restrictive or more specific shall govern.

B.    Revision. Insert "La Habra Heights" into the text as the name of jurisdiction in Section 101.1.

C.    Section 101.4 is deleted in its entirety (including Sections 101.4.1, 101.4.2, 101.4.3, 101.4.4, 101.4.5, 101.4.6 and 101.4.7), and replaced with the following:

101.4. Referenced Codes. The California Codes listed in La Habra Heights Municipal Code Section 5.2.20 (which include, among other things, requirements to comply with the Grading Code and the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)) shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent of each such reference.

D.    Section 105.2 is revised by amending exception 9, and adding 14 as follows:

9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches (457.2 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927.059L) and are installed entirely above ground.

14. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.2.

E.    Section 105.3.2, which addresses application expiration, is revised by adding a sentence as follows:

In no case shall more than one extension be granted for a project when another edition of the state codes has gone into effect or which exceeds the extensions allowed by the City Fee Ordinance.

F.    Section 105.5, which addresses permit expiration, is amended by adding a sentence as follows:

In no case shall an extension be granted which would extend the construction time from start of work to completion beyond the limits described in Section 5.2.50 or which exceeds the extensions allowed by the City Fee Ordinance. Neither shall an extension be granted for a project which has not substantially started construction in the opinion of the building official if another edition of state codes has gone into effect.

G.    Section 107.3 Add a paragraph as follows:

An expedited review and permit issuance process shall be provided for EV Charging Stations and simplified forms for submittal will be made available on City’s website by September 30, 2017.

H.    On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the fees established by the City of La Habra Heights when it adopted Resolution 2011-20 to thereby adopt by reference the amendments to the Building Standards Code made by the County of Los Angeles pursuant to Los Angeles County Ordinance Number 2007-0108.

I.    Board of Appeals. Section 113.3 is amended to provide as follows:

Board of Appeals when used in the Building Standards Codes shall mean the City Council. The Board of Appeals is hereby established for each of the Building Standards Codes. Depending on the subject of the appeal, specialized expertise may be solicited for the purpose of providing input to the Appeals Board.

J.    Wildland Urban Interface. Section 701A.1 of the Building Code is amended to provide as follows:

701A.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems and/or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new buildings located within a Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area as defined in Section 702A. All areas in the City of La Habra Heights are established as falling within the Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area.

K.    Class A Roofing and Skylights Protection Required. Section 1505.1 is amended as follows:

1505.1 General. Roof assemblies shall be divided into the classes defined below. Class A roof assemblies shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition, fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D 2898. The minimum roof coverings installed on buildings shall comply with Table 1505.1 based on the type of construction of the building.

Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with Chapter 24 or Section 2610 and 708A.2.1 shall not be subject to the requirements listed in this Section 1505.1.

L.    Table 1505.1 is revised to provide:

Table 1505.1a
Minimum Roof Covering Classifications
Types of Construction

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a. Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

M.    Section 1505.1.3 is revised to provide:

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is Class A.

N.    Nonclassified Roofing Exception. Section 1505.5 is deleted.

O.    Special Purpose Roofs. Section 1505.7 is deleted.

P.    Pool Barriers Rules Apply To Private Pools.

1. The following definition is added to Section 3109.4.4.1:

"PRIVATE POOL", is any constructed pool, permanent or portable, and over 18 inches deep which is intended for non-commercial use as swimming pool by not more than three owner families and their guests.

2.    The first paragraph of Section 3109.4.4.2 is revised by adding text to provide:

3109.4.4.2 Construction permit; safety features required.

New pools or spas: Commencing January 1, 2007, except as provided in Section 3109.4.4.5, whenever a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool or spa, or any building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing pool or spa, at a private, single-family home, it shall have an enclosure complying with 3109.4.4.3 and, it shall be equipped with at least one of the following seven drowning prevention safety features:

(Ord. 2016-05 § 4; Ord. 2013-05 § 4; Ord. 2010-04 § 4)

5.4.20 Amendments to the 2016 California Residential Code
The following amendments to the California Residential Code shall apply in the City:

A.    Table R301.2(1) is revised to provide:

Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMPe

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIREDh

FLOOD HAZARDSg

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj

Speedd (mph)

Topographic effectsk

Special wind regionl

Wind-borne debris zonem

Weatheringa

Frost line Depthb

Termitec

Zero

110

No

No

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12-24"

Very Heavy

43

No

No

0

60

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.    Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b.    The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The City shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.    The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d.    The City shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2(4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.    The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.    The City shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.    There are no Flood Hazard Zones in La Habra Heights.

h.    In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the City shall fill in this part of the table with "NO."

i.    The City shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the l00-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.htrnl.

j.    The City shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.    In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the City shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the City shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.

l.    In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.

m.    In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.

B.    Class A Roofs. Section R902.1 is amended as follows:

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. At minimum, Class A roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Class A roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

Exceptions:

1. Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

2. Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

C.    Class A Roofs. Section R902.1.3 is amended as follows:

R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is Class A.

D.    Wood Roofs Require Class A Treatment. The first paragraph of Section R902.2 is amended to provide:

R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A roofs.

(Ord. 2016-05 § 4; Ord. 2013-05 § 4; Ord. 2010-04 § 4)

5.4.30 Amendments to the 2016 California Electrical Code
The following amendments to the California Electrical Code shall apply in the City:

A.    The following second and third paragraphs are added to Article 310.106(B) to provide as follows:

In general, for all installations, if wiring is to be size 6 or smaller, the wiring must be copper. Consideration for use of aluminum wire can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured.

Aluminum conductors of size 6 or smaller may be used for branch circuits only if approved after continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torquing of connections at their termination point.

(Ord. 2016-05 § 4; Ord. 2013-05 § 4; Ord. 2010-04 § 4)

Article 6
Streets, Rights-of-Way, and Encroachments
Contents of Article

Chapter 6.1    Introduction to Article 6

6.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 6.2    Traffic (Traffic Ordinance)

6.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

6.2.20    Traffic Regulations

Chapter 6.3    Roadway Protection

6.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

6.3.20    Unauthorized Work

6.3.30    Transporting Materials

6.3.40    Roadway Protection

6.3.50    Debris Removal and Damage to Roads

Chapter 6.4    Roadway Encroachment

6.4.10    Purpose of This Chapter

6.4.20    Encroachment Permit Required

6.4.30    Encroachment Permit Requirements

6.4.40    Improvements Not Requiring an Encroachment Permit

6.4.50    Revocation

6.4.60    Restoration

6.4.70    Emergency Excavations

6.4.80    Moratorium Streets

6.4.90    Coordination of Excavation

Chapter 6.5    On-Street Parking

6.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

6.5.20    On-Street Parking Prohibition

6.5.30    Citations and Towing

Chapter 6.6    Reserved

Chapter 6.7    Enforcement

6.7.10    Violations and Penalties

6.7.20    Procedure for Recovery of Costs

6.7.30    Other Remedies Available

Chapter 6.1 Introduction to Article 6
6.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish general traffic regulations and other regulations to govern roadway protection, roadway encroachment, maintenance and parking control.

Chapter 6.2 Traffic (Traffic Ordinance)
6.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter serves as the City of La Habra Heights Traffic Ordinance.

6.2.20 Traffic Regulations
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 15, Vehicles and Traffic, Division 1, Traffic Code and Division 2, Miscellaneous Regulations, of the Los Angeles County Code as amended and in effect on June 29, 2006, is hereby adopted by reference as the City of La Habra Heights Traffic Ordinance. The following amendments have been made to Title 15:

A.    Vehicles Transporting Hazardous Materials. A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance (as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations) must adhere to all applicable County, State, and Federal regulations. Further, Harbor Boulevard is the only designated route for the transport of hazardous materials through the City.

B.    Vehicles in Excess of Three (3) Tons Prohibited on City Streets. No person shall drive or operate any vehicle in excess of three (3) tons unladen vehicle weight on any street within the City. This Subsection does not apply to vehicles exempt by County or State statutes and regulations, or to the following:

1.    Emergency vehicles, as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code.

2.    Any vehicle operated or used in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of any public utility or any street.

3.    Any vehicle operated in accordance with Sections 1031 through 1036 of the California Public Utilities Code.

4.    Any passenger vehicle operated, engaged and used for the sole and exclusive purpose of picking up or discharging passengers at any location upon any street.

5.    Any vehicle entering or leaving the City by direct route when necessary for occasional pickup or delivery of merchandise to or from any location within the City.

6.    Any vehicle entering or leaving the City by direct route when delivering materials to be used in any project for which an encroachment permit or a building permit has been obtained.

7.    Any vehicle the use of which is expressly authorized in connection with any use permitted pursuant to Article 7 of this Code, so long as the vehicle is operated in accordance with all Conditional Use Permits or other land use approvals, all conditions thereof, and all other applicable laws and regulations.

8.    Any vehicle entering or leaving the City by direct route to and from a street address at which the vehicle is regularly and lawfully parked.

C.    Traffic Speed Limits. Speed limits for City streets shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less unless otherwise determined in accordance with the provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

D.    Citation and Penalties. The violations covered by this Chapter shall be considered an infraction with a fine amount of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars. (Ord. 2007-01 § 1)

Chapter 6.3 Roadway Protection
6.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The Chapter establishes rules and regulations that are designed to protect the integrity of the public and private roadways in the City.

6.3.20 Unauthorized Work
No person may alter or otherwise damage a public roadway, or the parkway extending six (6) feet beyond edge of pavement, without first obtaining an Encroachment Permit.

6.3.30 Transporting Materials
All transport related to grading, demolition or construction that requires a building or grading permit also requires and must be conducted in conformance with a Haul Route Permit. Additionally, the following requirements are applicable to all transport of materials in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    Deposition of Materials. No person shall transport material of any kind over, along, or across a public road in a manner that would result in the materials being transported to fall or otherwise be deposited upon the road or right-of-way.

B.    Cleaning of Transport Vehicles. All vehicles used to haul or transport earth or other bulk material along the public roads shall be cleaned before leaving the loading place.

C.    Solid Waste Transport. Any vehicle hauling solid waste shall be constructed and designed so that no material is deposited upon the roads. During the compression of the loaded refuse, no water or other material shall escape the vehicle.

D.    Restoration. In case material is accidentally deposited upon any public or private road, such material shall be immediately cleaned from the road and removed by the person responsible for the transport. If spilled material is not so removed, City crews may perform such work and charge the responsible person for the cost of such services.

6.3.40 Roadway Protection
This Section specifies those activities that are expressly prohibited or restricted to protect the roads.

A.    Deposit of Petroleum Products. It is unlawful for any person or entity to permit the deposit or flow of any oil or liquid of petroleum content onto a public or private road in the City.

B.    Deposit of Water. It is unlawful for any person or entity to allow the deposition of any irrigation, pool, waste or other water onto a public or private road.

C.    Utilities Installation. Public utilities that alter a road or its subsurface must restore the roadway to all current roadway construction and repair standards to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director pursuant to the terms of an Encroachment Permit.

D.    Illegal Dumping. It is unlawful for any person to deposit rubbish or other materials on private or public property without the property owner’s consent. This prohibition includes the deposit of soil, rocks, vegetation or other materials whether intentional or unintentional.

E.    Exemption. This Section shall not apply to any alteration or deposit allowed by permit for building or improvement purposes.

6.3.50 Debris Removal and Damage to Roads
The following provisions govern the enforcement of regulations prohibiting placement of materials (including materials that are deposited unintentionally) on roads and the mitigation thereof.

A.    Removal of Debris. The Community Development Director or his designee has the right to remove the materials and to submit a statement of the cost of such removal to the responsible party and that party shall pay the itemized cost to the City.

B.    Action to Recover Cost. The City may bring an action against the responsible party to recover the cost of such removal by the Community Development Director or his designee and for collection of costs of enforcement.

C.    Injunction. The City may bring an action to enjoin any continued such placing, tracking or other depositing by such a person, his or her employer, employee or agent, and for collection of costs of enforcement.

Chapter 6.4 Roadway Encroachment
6.4.10 Purpose of This Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for encroachments into public places by establishing requirements for encroachment permits ("permit"). For purposes of this Chapter, an encroachment is defined as any activity conducted or any obstruction located within a public right-of-way or within six (6) feet from the edge of any public pavement. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.20 Encroachment Permit Required
No person shall excavate, construct, reconstruct, or undertake repair of any kind in any road or other public right-of-way or within six (6) feet of any public roadway pavement, without first obtaining an encroachment permit. Those activities requiring an encroachment permit may include, but are not limited to, grading, modification or construction of walls and fences, curbs, walks, gutters, driveways, pavement, sanitary sewers, storm drains, culverts, pipelines, utility improvements, vegetation, gates, lights or bollards, landscape improvements, landscape maintenance, and installing traffic control devices. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.30 Encroachment Permit Requirements
The following provisions govern encroachment permits:

A.    No permit shall be issued unless a written application (on a form provided by the Community Development Director) for the issuance of a permit, accompanied by any required fee, and plans signed by a licensed engineer if required by the Community Development Director, is submitted to the Community Development Department ("Department") not less than forty-eight (48) hours before the work is proposed to commence. Any person who begins any work that requires an encroachment permit without first obtaining the permit shall immediately stop all work and apply for such permit.

B.    The Community Development Director is authorized to issue permits to encroach; provided, that the permit is terminable on not more than ninety (90) days’ notice. The decision of the Community Development Director may be appealed to the City Manager not later than fifteen (15) days following the date of the Community Development Director’s decision.

C.    The Community Development Director for good and sufficient reasons may grant an extension of time for the permit.

D.    The Community Development Director may impose such conditions, including reasonable bonds or insurance, and require such changes in the application as deemed necessary for the protection of the roadway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, the safety of persons using the public place or the reasonable and customary use and enjoyment of neighboring properties.

E.    The Community Development Director shall establish such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the proper construction, use, and maintenance of encroachments. Any work or use done under such permit shall conform to such standards and specifications. In the absence of specific standards and specifications, recognized standards of construction or approved practices shall govern the work or use.

F.    The permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage proximately caused by work done by the permittee under permit or proximately caused by failure of the permittee to perform all obligations of such permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the City, its officers, or employees, the permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claim insofar as permitted by law.

G.    Permits shall be issued only to the person, firm, or corporation making the application ("permittee") and may not be assigned to another person by the permittee. If any permittee assigns his permit to another, the permit shall be void.

H.    The permittee, in the conduct of the work, use, or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a permit, shall provide, erect, and maintain traffic control devices such lights, barriers, warning signs, patrols, and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the public. Any omission on the part of the Community Development Director to specify in the permit what lights, barriers, or other protective measures or devices are required shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all requirements of law and otherwise adequately protecting the safety of those using the roads or otherwise affected by the work. If, at any time, the Community Development Director finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, the City may provide, erect, maintain, relocate, or remove such safeguards as are deemed necessary or may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, all at the expense of the permittee.

I.    In accordance with State law, any person excavating in the public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of the underground service alert ("USA") regarding notification of excavation and marking of subsurface facilities. Such person shall provide USA with the assigned number for the permit to excavate or other information as may be necessary to properly identify the proposed excavation.

J.    A copy of the permit shall be available for review at the site of the excavation/encroachment for the duration of the excavation and shall be shown, upon request, to any police officer or any employee of the City.

K.    Opening, Backfilling and Paving Trenches.

1.    No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts that is more than four hundred (400) feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, except when the prior written consent of the Community Development Director has been obtained.

2.    Open excavation shall be covered with nonskid surface steel plates ramped to the elevation of the contiguous street, pavement, or otherwise protected in accordance with guidelines prescribed by the Department.

3.    All excavations shall comply with the standards and requirements established by the Community Development Director for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. The standards and requirements may impose different requirements for different excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors, such as:

a.    The location, type and extent of excavation performed;

b.    The condition of the surface being excavated;

c.    The period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated;

d.    The average daily traffic volume and truck volume. Permanent pavement restoration shall be completed no later than two (2) weeks after the trench is backfilled; provided however, that the Community Development Director may grant an extension depending on the complexity of the work and testing which is demonstrated to be necessary to get the utility in service.

4.    Construction debris and surplus excavated material shall be removed within one (1) working day from the time such material is placed upon the street; provided, that exceptions to this requirement may be approved by the Community Development Director. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the permittee shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director.

5.    Whenever any caving in the sidewalls of any excavation occur, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away. In no case shall any void under a pavement be filled by any side or lateral tamping.

L.    Whenever any facility is abandoned in the public right-of-way, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall file in the office of the Community Development Director within thirty (30) calendar days after such abandonment documents (plan or map) prepared and signed by a licensed engineer showing in detail the location of the facilities so abandoned. Each map, set of maps, or plans filed shall show in detail the location of each such facility or facilities abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map, set of maps, or plans. The maps or plans shall be a scaled drawing submitted in digital format, or on Mylar.

M.    Each visible facility installed in the public right-of-way shall be clearly identified with the owner of the facility.

N.    Whenever an encroachment agreement is required or permitted for any excavations, encroachments, and/or obstructions, the City Manager is authorized to execute such encroachment agreement on behalf of the City and in a form approved by the City Attorney. Encroachment agreements shall be recorded with the County Recorder and shall run with the land. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.40 Improvements Not Requiring an Encroachment Permit
The following excavations, encroachments and obstructions within a public place do not require a permit from the Community Development Director prior to construction:

A.    Parkway lawn, ground cover or shrubs within the parkway area to the edge of pavement in conformance with the fire code.

B.    Irrigation systems that do not cause ponding or transport of significant volumes of water onto road surfaces.

C.    The property owner that installed such encroachment shall be responsible for its maintenance in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Director and in conformance with all applicable requirements of the City Municipal Code. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.50 Revocation
The City Council of the City of La Habra Heights reserves the right and option to revoke an encroachment permit or order the removal of any permitted encroachment at its sole discretion. However, before any encroachment permit is revoked on less than the notice period specified in the encroachment permit, the permittee will be notified of such intention and provided with an opportunity for a hearing. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.60 Restoration
A.    In every case and at all times the work of removing from the streets all obstructions, surplus materials, debris, graffiti and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be the responsibility of the permittee and shall be performed in a manner deemed satisfactory to the Director. Excavation sites shall be cleaned at the completion of each workday. In addition, the permittee shall remove all excavated material from the site of the excavation no later than the end of each workday.

B.    In the event that subsurface material or pavement over or immediately adjacent to any excavation should become depressed, broken, or fail in any way at any time after the excavation has been completed, the Community Development Director shall exercise his best judgment to determine the person(s) responsible, if any, for the failure in the subsurface or surface of the public right-of-way and shall designate such person as the responsible party. The Community Development Director shall notify said person(s) of the condition, its location, and the required remedy, and such person(s) shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition to the satisfaction of the Director within five (5) working days of the notification. The Community Development Director may extend the time for the responsible party to repair or restore the affected public right-of-way.

C.    Immediately upon completion of any work that was authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the permittee shall promptly fill, compact, resurface, repair or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director or his designee. If the permittee fails or refuses to comply with this requirement, the City may do so or cause the same to be performed and the permittee shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City. If at any time it becomes necessary to again repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the City may do so or cause the same to be performed and the permittee shall be responsible for all costs incurred for such additional repairs. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.70 Emergency Excavations
A.    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or duct in or under any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises; provided, that the person making the excavation shall notify the Community Development Director within one (1) day after the offices of the City are first opened subsequent to the excavation. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this Chapter.

B.    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of interrupted service provided by a municipal or utility excavator when such necessity arises during days or times when the Department is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to be excavated in the public right-of-way pursuant to this section, such person shall apply for an emergency permit within twenty-four (24) hours after notification by the City or when the Department’s offices are first opened. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement for the basis of the emergency permit which includes a description of the excavation already performed and any work remaining to be performed. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.80 Moratorium Streets
The Community Development Department will not issue any permit to excavate in any street that has been reconstructed or resurfaced by the Department or any other owner or person in the preceding five (5) year period. Companies shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating newly paved streets during the five (5) year moratorium period. Exceptions to the five (5) year moratorium are as follows:

A.    Emergency which endangers life or property or public health;

B.    Interruption of essential utility service;

C.    Work that is mandated by City, State, or Federal legislation;

D.    Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing service exists.

All permits which are issued under subsections A through D of this section shall be in accordance with the details and specifications used and established by the Community Development Director. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

6.4.90 Coordination of Excavation
A.    Advance Planning.

1.    On or before October 1 of each year, each utility company that requests a permit under this Chapter shall prepare and submit to the Department a plan in a format specified by the Department that shows all major work anticipated to be done in the public right-of-way in the next two (2) years ("two (2) year plan"). Any utility company that does not prepare a two (2) year plan shall submit a statement that no such major work is anticipated and shall immediately report any major work to the Department as soon as it becomes reasonably foreseeable.

2.    Unless State law provides otherwise, the Department may disclose information contained in a two (2) year plan to any company only on a need-to-know basis in order to facilitate coordination among excavators and to avoid unnecessary excavation in City streets. To the maximum extent permissible under Federal, State, and local laws applicable to public records, the City shall not otherwise disclose to the public any information contained in a two (2) year plan submitted by a utility company except to the extent necessary to coordinate with other permit applicants or projects, or the extent the information is proprietary, trade secret or is otherwise protected from disclosure; provided, however, the City shall have no duty to decline to disclose any information that utility company has not identified on its face as proprietary, trade secret or otherwise protected from disclosure. The Department shall notify the utility company of any request for inspection of public records that calls for disclosure of any two (2) year plan on which any information has been identified as proprietary, trade secret or protected from disclosure. The Department shall consult with the City Attorney regarding any such request and shall inform company either that the Department will refuse to disclose the protected information or, if there is no proper basis for such refusal, that the Department intends to disclose the requested information unless ordered otherwise by a court. The City shall be under no obligation to initiate or defend any litigation relating to this provision.

B.    City’s Pavement Management Plan ("PMP").

1.    The Department will prepare a two (2) year PMP showing all proposed resurfacing and reconstruction in the public right-of-way. The PMP will correspond to the City’s approved fiscal year budget. The PMP may be revised from time to time after receipt of the two (2) year plans from utility companies. In order to facilitate coordination and minimize the cost of excavation, the Department will make its PMP available for public review upon request.

2.    Except when waived by the Community Development Director, at least one hundred eighty (180) calendar days prior to undertaking the resurfacing and reconstruction of any street, the Department shall send a notice of the proposed repaving and reconstruction to each utility company.

C.    Coordination. The Department will review the two (2) year plans and identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of excavations. The Department will notify affected owners and utility company of such conflicts and opportunities to the extent necessary to maximize coordination of excavation. Each permit applicant shall coordinate, to the extent practicable, with each potentially affected owner and utility company to minimize disruption in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2)

Chapter 6.5 On-Street Parking
6.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish prohibitions related to on-street vehicle parking. For purposes of this Chapter, on-street parking is defined as the parking of any vehicle within three (3) feet from the edge of pavement. The development of any permanent parking area is subject to the additional restrictions found in Article 7.

6.5.20 On-Street Parking Prohibition
In addition to those restrictions imposed by state law, the following on-street parking limitations apply in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    Overnight on-street parking is prohibited on all roads in the City of La Habra Heights. Temporary on-street parking is permitted when and where it does not interfere with or obstruct the safe use of the street or adjacent properties

B.    On-street parking is never allowed if such causes a significant increase in hazards for users of the road by narrowing useable pavement width to a degree causing impeded passage or access or by obstructing sight distance.

C.    Parking is prohibited on Hacienda Road and Harbor Boulevard within the City.

D.    No person shall park, leave standing, or store upon any roadway or other place open for vehicular travel within the City limits of the City of La Habra Heights, any vehicle, as defined in Vehicle Code Section 670, for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours.

In the event a vehicle is found to be in violation of subsection D of this section, the vehicle may be removed as provided in California Vehicle Code Section 22651(K), or any successor provision thereto. (Ord. 2017-01 § 2)

6.5.30 Citations and Towing
The procedures for the citation of illegally parked vehicles, the towing of vehicles, and the retrieval of vehicles are governed by the applicable state statutes.

Chapter 6.6 Reserved
Chapter 6.7 Enforcement
6.7.10 Violations and Penalties
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8 of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction.

6.7.20 Procedure for Recovery of Costs
In addition to the violations and/or penalties specified in this Article, the City is empowered to recover all costs incurred in enforcing any provisions of this Article or repair of damages consequential to violation of this Article to the fullest extent permissible under state law. The procedures for recovery of costs are set forth in Article 8.

6.7.30 Other Remedies Available
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, the City may initiate appropriate civil and criminal action or an administrative proceeding for recovery of costs or other abatement of a nuisance existing within the City pursuant to any other provision of law. All remedies of the City are cumulative and the use of any remedy shall not bar the use of any other remedy with respect to the same or another property.

Article 7
Development Code and Zoning Ordinance
Section Contents

Chapter 7.1    Introduction to Article 7

7.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 7.2    Application of Development Code and Zoning Ordinance

7.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.2.20    Application of Development Code and Zoning Ordinance

Chapter 7.3    Zone Districts

7.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.3.20    R-A Zone (Residential-Agricultural Zone)

7.3.30    OS-C Zone (Open Space-Conservation Zone)

7.3.40    OS-R Zone (Open Space-Recreation Zone)

7.3.50    OS-RP Zone (Open Space-Resource Production Zone)

7.3.60    PF Zone (Public Facilities Zone)

7.3.70    SPO Zone (Specific Plan Overlay Zone) & IO Zone (Institutional Overlay Zone)

7.3.80    Land Use Restrictions Summary

Chapter 7.4    Cannabis Regulations

7.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.4.20    Definitions

7.4.30    Commercial Cannabis Uses

7.4.40    Penalty for Violation

Chapter 7.5    Nonconforming Structures, Land Uses and Lots

7.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.5.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.5.30    Modifications to Existing Legal Nonconforming Structures

7.5.40    Modifications to Existing Legal Nonconforming Uses

7.5.50    Nonconforming Lots

7.5.60    Review of Existing Nonconformities as Part of Development Review Process

Chapter 7.6    Noise and Lighting Standards

7.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.6.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.6.30    Performance Standards for Noise Control and Light and Glare

7.6.40    Development Standards for Noise Control

7.6.50    Development Standards for Light and Glare Control

Chapter 7.7    Congestion and Traffic Demand Management Standards

7.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.7.20    Definitions

7.7.30    Impact Analysis for Projects Requiring an EIR

7.7.40    Applicability of Requirements

7.7.50    Development Standards

7.7.60    Monitoring

7.7.80    Enforcement

Chapter 7.8    Wireless Telecommunication Facilities

7.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.8.20    Exempt Telecommunication Facilities

7.8.30    Application and Permitting Process

7.8.40    Findings of Approval

7.8.50    Locational Standards

7.8.60    Design and Screening Criteria

7.8.70    Site Development Standards

7.8.80    Sustainability

7.8.90    Operational Standards

7.8.100    Standard Conditions of Approval

7.8.110    Operation and Maintenance Standards

7.8.120    Duration, Revocation and Discontinuance

7.8.130    Federal Preemption

Chapter 7.9    Sign Standards

7.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.9.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.9.30    Development Standards for Signs

7.9.40    IO Zone Standards for Signs

7.9.50    Allowed Signs

7.9.60    Prohibited Signs

Chapter 7.10    Animal Keeping Development Standards

7.10.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.10.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.10.30    Performance Standards for Animal Keeping

7.10.40    Development Standards for Animal Keeping

7.10.50    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Animal Keeping Standards

Chapter 7.11    Setback and Yard Use Standards

7.11.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.11.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.11.30    Performance Standards for Yards

7.11.40    Development Standards for Yards

7.11.50    Uses and Development Permitted and Prohibited in Yards

7.11.60    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Yards and Setbacks

Chapter 7.12    Landscaping Standards

7.12.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.12.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.12.30    Performance Standards for Landscaping

7.12.40    Development Standards for Landscaping

7.12.50    Tree Preservation

7.12.60    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Landscaping

Chapter 7.12.5    Water Efficient Landscaping

7.12.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.12.5.20    Definitions

7.12.5.30    Applicability of Water Efficient Landscape Requirements

7.12.5.40    Landscape Design and Plant Requirements

7.12.5.50    Irrigation Requirements

7.12.5.60    Soil and Grading Requirements

7.12.5.70    Implementation

7.12.5.80    Compliance and Enforcement

7.12.5.90    Irrigation Audit and Maintenance

7.12.5.100    Recycled Water

7.12.5.110    Stormwater Management

7.12.5.120    Water Waste Prevention

7.12.5.130    Public Education

Chapter 7.13    Parking and Access Standards

7.13.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.13.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.13.30    Performance Standards for Parking and Access

7.13.40    Development Standards for Parking and Access

7.13.50    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Parking

Chapter 7.14    Lot Development Standards

7.14.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.14.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.14.30    Performance Standards for Lot Development

7.14.40    Development Standards for Lot Development

7.14.50    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Lot Development

Chapter 7.15    Reserved

Chapter 7.16    Reserved

Chapter 7.17    Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape Standards

7.17.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.17.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.17.30    Performance Standards for Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape

7.17.40    Development Standards for Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape

7.17.50    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape

Chapter 7.18    Building Design Standards

7.18.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.18.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.18.30    Performance Standards for Building Design

7.18.40    Development Standards for Building Design

7.18.50    Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Building Design

Chapter 7.19    Zoning Administration

7.19.10    Purpose of this Chapter

7.19.20    Applicability of this Chapter

7.19.30    General Plan Amendments

7.19.40    Specific Plan Amendments

7.19.50    Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment

7.19.60    Conditional Use Permits

7.19.70    Variances

7.19.80    Standards Modifications

7.19.90    Indemnification

7.19.100    Required Approval Authorities

7.19.110    Minor Exception

Chapter 7.20    Development Agreements

7.20.10    Purpose

7.20.20    Application

7.20.30    Development Agreement Hearings

7.20.40    Contents of Development Agreement

7.20.50    Execution and Recordation

7.20.60    Periodic Review

7.20.70    Effect of Development Agreement

7.20.80    Amendments or Extensions to Development Agreements

Chapter 7.1 Introduction to Article 7
7.1.10 Purpose of this Article
This Article implements the City of La Habra Heights General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the City. This Article also serves as the City’s Development Code and Zoning Ordinance as a means to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of residents. More specifically, the purposes of this Article include the following:

A.    To implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan by regulating the uses of land designated by the General Plan.

B.    To ensure the preservation of community character and residents’ views and privacy.

C.    To avoid conflicts between land uses.

D.    To conserve and protect the natural resources of the City.

E.    To create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation and other public facilities and utilities.

F.    To provide City regulations for the subdivision of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

Chapter 7.2 Application of Development Code and Zoning Ordinance
7.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter establishes the foundation for the implementation of the La Habra Heights Development Code and Zoning Ordinance.

7.2.20 Application of Development Code and Zoning Ordinance
Land or buildings may be used, and structures may be erected or altered, only in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

A.    Zoning Map. The spatial distribution of Zone Districts is reflected on the official zoning map of the City kept on file in the Community Development Department.

B.    Relationship of Zoning to the General Plan. The Zone District designations contained in this article are consistent with the General Plan land use designations.

C.    Consistency with the General Plan. An application for a development must be found by the reviewing body to be consistent with the goals, policies and general land uses of the La Habra Heights General Plan as specified in each chapter of this Article pertinent to the proposed development.

D.    Permitted Uses. No land or building may be used for any purpose or in any manner other than for as listed in this Article.

E.    Zoning Effect on Easements and Covenants. This Article shall not interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other legal agreement in effect at the time of enactment of this Article.

F.    Uncertainty in Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this Article, or its application to a specific case or situation, the Community Development Director shall interpret the intent of the provision in question. Thereafter, the Community Development Director’s written interpretation shall apply in all similar situations unless modified by the Planning Commission or City Council.

G.    Approvals. The approval authorities related to the administration of this Zoning Code are prescribed in Table 7-13 and the approval process is identified in Article 8.

H.    Appeals. Any discretionary permit, project, approval or denial by the Community Development Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission. A decision by the Planning Commission under this Article may be appealed to the City Council. The appeals process is identified in Article 8.

I.    Revocations. The agency responsible for revocations is the same as identified for approvals (refer to Table 7-13). The details of the revocation process are identified in Article 8.

J.    Call for Review. Any member of the Planning Commission or City Council may call for review of any item that is under their respective purview as provided for in Article 8. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 2 – 4; Ord. 2007-01 § 2)

Chapter 7.3 Zone Districts
7.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The incorporated land area of the City of La Habra Heights is divided into specific land use classes, or Zone Districts, consistent with the land use designations contained in the City of La Habra Heights General Plan. This Chapter establishes the Zone Districts and specifies the primary uses, accessory uses, conditional uses, temporary uses and prohibited uses within each Zone District. The following Zone Districts are established:

A.    R-A Zone: Residential-Agricultural Zone.

B.    OS-C Zone: Open Space-Conservation Zone.

C.    OS-R Zone: Open Space-Recreation Zone.

D.    OS-RP Zone: Open Space-Resource Production Zone.

E.    PF Zone: Public Facilities Zone.

F.    SPO Zone: Specific Plan Overlay Zone.

G.    IO Zone: Institutional Overlay Zone.

7.3.20 R-A Zone (Residential-Agricultural Zone)
This section establishes the land uses that are permitted in the R-A Zone.

A.    Primary Uses. Property in R-A Zone may be used for the following:

1.    Single-family dwellings.

2.    Agricultural activities, trees, and nursery stock (this does not permit roadside stands, retail sale from the premises, or advertising signs of any nature).

3.    Equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle trails.

B.    Accessory Uses. Property in R-A Zone may be used for accessory uses indicated in this section in conjunction with a lawfully established single-family residence.

1.    Keeping of large animals and small animals with issuance of an Animal Keeping Permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8.

2.    Home occupations pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter. Home occupations require the approval and issuance of a home occupation permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8.

3.    Personal outdoor entertainment and recreational uses such as swimming pools, barbeque areas, gazebos, Jacuzzis, and other amenities, excluding sports courts.

4.    Guest-houses without kitchens are permitted if total floor area is no more than six hundred and forty (640) square feet. In the event the quarters are detached, the lot shall contain a minimum of forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet and the structure shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet from the residence.

5.    Nonhabitable structures such as studios, workshops, secondary garages and barns are permitted. These structures shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from the residence.

C.    Conditional Uses. A Conditional Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Conditional Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Residences used for licensed child day care of more than six (6) children.

2.    Group care residences for more than six (6) persons used for assisted or unassisted living.

3.    Transitional housing and/or personal rehabilitation.

4.    Sports courts such as tennis, basketball, racquetball and similar courts.

5.    Development on vacant parcels including swimming pools, pool houses (not including living quarters), barbeque areas, gazebos, Jacuzzis, stables, arenas and animal pens if such vacant parcels are under common ownership and located adjacent to a parcel that is occupied by a single-family residence.

D.    Temporary Uses. A Temporary Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Temporary Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Temporary buildings, storage yards or trailers used as part of an approved construction project

2.    Yard and garage sales at private residences up to two (2) times in any calendar year.

3.    Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary in nature and provided that the use is found not to be detrimental to surrounding neighborhood.

E.    Prohibited Uses. Uses not specifically allowed in the R-A Zone are prohibited. Such uses include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Second Units. Second units on R-A Zoned single-family lots are prohibited within the City for the reasons set forth below:

a.    Lack of Sewers. The City of La Habra Heights has no City-wide sanitary sewer system. The sewage effluent of ninety-seven (97) percent of the residential structures in the City is disposed of into cesspools, and leach lines which enter the earth strata and percolate into the soil. The usage of these sewage disposal systems is predicated on the fact that the City has very low density due to the fact that the majority of lots are one (1) acre or larger, which limits the level of risk on the amount of effluent entering the earth strata in the City, but which limit could be exceeded by the addition of second units.

b.    Rural Street Design. The roadways in La Habra Heights are generally curvy and narrow (eighteen (18) feet of paving in many locations), with no curbs, gutters, street lights or sidewalks. Many streets are private and unimproved or not improved to public street standards. In many instances equestrian and pedestrian use is made of shoulders directly adjacent to the roadway paving. Roadways in the City are generally long and narrow with lengthy cul-de-sacs (one way in and out). Virtually all City streets have no provisions for any on-street parking. The current capacity and design of the roadways cannot withstand the increased traffic congestion and parking requirements associated with increased densities.

c.    Public Transportation and Access. There is no means of public transportation within the City and no convenient access to essential shopping facilities. The addition of second units in the City would therefore generate increased traffic beyond the capacity of the City’s roadway network.

d.    Utilization of Existing Dwelling Units. The existing dwelling units in La Habra Heights are not underutilized nor overcrowded as is evidenced by the 1980 U.S. Census which indicated that the average number of persons per dwelling unit in the City is three point two (3.2), the average number of bedrooms per dwelling unit is three point two (3.2), and the vacancy rate is four point seven (4.7) percent.

The City of La Habra Heights acknowledges that the preclusion of second units in La Habra Heights may limit housing opportunities in the region. This limitation is justified, however, by the unusual circumstances described in this section. Given the relatively small number of single-family residences located within the City, this preclusion will not significantly affect housing opportunities in the region.

2.    Gates or guardhouses that restrict access to residential neighborhoods, subdivisions, and multi-lot developments.

3.    Storage yards for materials, mechanical equipment or vehicles inconsistent with permitted uses in the R-A zone, including, but not limited to the overnight storage of any of the following:

a.    Construction equipment used for the removal or transport of construction related materials, including, but not limited to, derricks, hoists, bulldozers, dump trucks, water trucks, earth moving equipment, cranes, drills and fork lifts.

b.    Any commercial vehicle except those that are permitted pursuant to a Home Occupation Permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8.

c.    Any farming equipment unless such equipment is used solely for agricultural uses on the parcel(s) under common ownership.

4.    Off road recreational equipment uses that may include, but not be limited to, motorcycles, all terrain vehicles, etc.

5.    Except as permitted under a home occupation permit, commercial animal-related uses are prohibited.

6.    Commercial shipping containers.

7.    It is unlawful for any person for whom registration is required pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code to reside within two thousand (2,000) feet of any public or private school or instructional facility, public or private park or other location where children regularly gather for educational or recreational purposes. (Ord. 2015-01 § 5; Ord. 2007-02 § 1)

7.3.30 OS-C Zone (Open Space-Conservation Zone)
This Section establishes land uses that are allowable in the OS-C Zone.

A.    Primary Uses. Property in the OS-C Zone may only be used for natural resource conservation.

B.    Accessory Uses. No accessory uses are permitted.

C.    Conditionally Permitted Uses. A Conditional Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Conditional Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Storage, maintenance, parking and caretaker uses ancillary to, and in support of, the primary Open Space Conservation use.

2.    Equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle trails.

3.    Educational uses including, but not limited to, interpretive exhibits, nature center, and ancillary uses.

4.    Special communications systems owned and operated by a governmental agency or utility.

D.    Temporary Uses. A Temporary Use Permit is required for any use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary and provided that the use is found not to be detrimental to surrounding neighborhood or OS-C Zone. Temporary Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

E.    Prohibited Uses. Uses not specifically allowed in the OS-C Zone are prohibited. Any non-approved or non-permitted use of properties within the OS-C Zone must be discontinued immediately pursuant to the requirements of Article 8.

7.3.40 OS-R Zone (Open Space-Recreation Zone)
This section establishes land uses allowable in the OS-R Zone.

A.    Primary Uses. Primary uses include parks, passive open space areas, and equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle trails.

B.    Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted:

1.    Storage and maintenance uses ancillary to, and in support of, the primary recreational use.

2.    The existing uses within the City Park are permitted accessory uses within the Park only.

3.    Educational uses including, but not limited to, interpretive exhibits, nature center, and similar uses.

C.    Conditionally Permitted Uses. The following uses are conditionally permitted:

1.    Special communications systems.

2.    The golf club, the golf course and its ancillary uses (club house, etc.).

3.    Any other use that the Community Development Director determines is similar and not detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood.

D.    Temporary Uses. A Temporary Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Temporary Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Temporary buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during construction.

2.    Temporary storage yards used for staging of projects that are under construction.

3.    Swap meet or rummage sale sponsored by a nonprofit organization.

4.    Carnivals, circuses, and other traveling entertainment events

5.    Seasonal sales.

6.    Special shows such as vehicle displays, auctions, animal association events, etc.

7.    Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary and provided that the use is found not to be detrimental to surrounding neighborhood.

E.    Prohibited Uses. Uses not specifically allowed in the OS-R Zone are prohibited. Any non-approved or non-permitted use of properties within the OS-R Zone must be discontinued immediately.

7.3.50 OS-RP Zone (Open Space-Resource Production Zone)
This Section establishes land uses allowable in the OS-RP Zone.

A.    Primary Uses. Primary uses are limited to the operation and maintenance of resource extraction and transmission facilities with the approval of a Conditional Use Permit.

B.    Accessory Uses. There are no accessory uses permitted in the OS-RP Zone.

C.    Conditionally Permitted Uses. A Conditional Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Conditional Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Resource extraction, transmission, and safety operations.

2.    Limited storage and maintenance facilities and operations ancillary to the primary resource production use.

3.    Equestrian, pedestrian and bicycle trails.

4.    Special communications systems.

5.    Caretaker facilities.

D.    Temporary Uses. A Temporary Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Temporary Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Temporary buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during construction of new wells or facilities.

2.    Temporary storage yards used for staging projects that are under construction.

3.    Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary and provided that the use is found not to be detrimental to surrounding neighborhood.

E.    Prohibited Uses. Uses not specifically allowed in the OS-RP Zone are prohibited. Additionally, quarries are a prohibited use within the OS-RP Zone. Any non-approved or non-permitted use of properties within the OS-RP Zone must be discontinued immediately pursuant to the requirements of Article 8.

7.3.60 PF Zone (Public Facilities Zone)
This Section establishes land uses allowable in the PF Zone.

A.    Primary Uses. Property in PF Zone may only be used for governmental, public health and safety and civic uses and/or activities. The following uses are permitted in this Zone:

1.    City Hall and other ancillary facilities required for the civic functions of the City of La Habra Heights.

2.    Any facility operated by a city, county, state, federal agency or special district for the provision of governmental services.

B.    Accessory Use. There are no accessory uses permitted in the PF Zone.

C.    Conditionally Permitted Uses. A Conditional Use Permit is required for the following uses and/or activities. Conditional Use Permit requirements are identified in Article 8.

1.    Special communications systems.

D.    Temporary Uses. Temporary uses within this Zone District do not require a Temporary Use Permit.

E.    Prohibited Uses. Uses not specifically allowed in the PF Zone are prohibited. (Ord. 2015-01 § 6)

7.3.70 SPO Zone (Specific Plan Overlay Zone) and IO Zone (Institutional Overlay Zone)
This Section establishes land use regulations for the Specific Plan Overlay (SPO) Zone and the Institutional Overlay (IO) Zone.

A.    SPO Zone (Specific Plan Overlay Zone). The Specific Plan Overlay Zone (SPO Zone) designation applies to all properties so designated on the Zoning Map (Exhibit 7-1). Additionally, the SPO Zone applies to larger undeveloped parcels that contain sufficient acreage to be divided into ten (10) or more legal lots and/or properties that may exhibit sensitive or significant environmental attributes. This designation requires the preparation of a specific plan pursuant to the State requirements. This Overlay designation has been assigned to parcels that have base Zone designations of R-A, OS-RP, or OS-R. The conditional and temporary use requirements applicable to any parcel in the SPO Zone are the same as those applicable to the base Zone designations.

B.    IO Zone (Institutional Overlay Zone). The Institutional Overlay Zone (IO Zone) requires a more detailed and specialized level of planning and review for institutional land uses in the City. The following land use regulations are applicable to the IO Zone:

1.    The underlying base Zone District for the IO Zone District is R-A. New residential development and modifications of existing residential structures involving fifty (50) percent or more of the existing structure’s floor area must conform to the requirements of the underlying R-A Zone.

2.    Institutional land uses within the IO Zone are permitted with the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. These institutional uses are limited to educational, religious and recreational activities ancillary to the primary institutional use.

3.    The following requirements shall apply to institutional uses:

a.    Because of infrastructure constraints, institutional uses in the City must be limited in size and scope to the level supportable by the site, the roadways that serve it, and by other available infrastructure.

b.    A Conditional Use Permit may be approved only upon a showing that the proposed use will not over-tax available infrastructure or be incompatible with adjacent and neighboring uses.

c.    Institutional uses are permitted only in areas delineated on the Zoning Map (Exhibit 7-1).

d.    The minimum lot size for a new institutional use is five (5) acres.

e.    Only on-site signs identifying institutional uses are permitted. Such signs shall be in accordance with the City’s sign ordinance. (Ord. 2015-01 § 7)

7.3.80 Land Use Restrictions Summary
Primary, accessory, and conditionally permitted land uses for each Zone District are listed in Table 7-1.

Table 7-1

Land Use Matrix for Zone Districts 

Primary and Accessory Uses

Conditional Uses
(subject to CUP)

Temporary Uses
(subject to TUP)

R-A Zone

•Single-family residential

•Agricultural including keeping of large animals and small animals

•Personal entertainment and recreational uses ancillary to the primary residential use

•Trails

•Child daycare

•Group care including assisted living

•Transitional housing

•Sport courts

•Personal entertainment and recreational uses ancillary to the primary residential use on an adjacent parcel under common ownership

•Fuel tanks for residential generators, when the tank is not factory installed in the generator

•Temporary yards, buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during construction

•Yard and garage sales

•Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary

OS-C Zone

•Areas reserved for natural resource conservation

•Trails

•Storage, parking, caretaker facility and maintenance uses

•Special communications facilities

•Educational activities

•Special shows and/or displays

•Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary

OS-R Zone

•Passive parks

•Passive open space

•Trails

•The City Park (and existing uses)

•Storage and maintenance facilities ancillary to the primary recreational use

•Educational uses (including but not limited to interpretive exhibits, nature center, and similar uses)

•Golf course and ancillary uses

•Special communications facilities

•Temporary yards, buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during construction

•Swap meet or rummage sale sponsored by a nonprofit organization

•Carnivals, circuses, and other traveling entertainment events

•Seasonal sales

•Special shows such as vehicle displays, auctions, animal association events, etc.

•Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary

OS-RP Zone

•All uses require a CUP

•Resource extraction and transmission operations

•Storage and maintenance operations

•Special communications facilities

•Safety related uses

•Trails and other permitted recreational uses

•Caretaker and manned maintenance facilities

•Temporary yards, buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during well or facility construction

•Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary

PF Zone

•City hall and other civic uses-Other governmental and public uses

•Public health and safety

•Special communications facilities

•Temporary Use Permits are not required.

SPO Zone

•Single-family residential

•Same Uses as specified the base Zone (R-A, OS-R, and OS-RP)

•Same conditionally permitted uses noted in the base Zone (R-A, OS-R, and OS-RP)

•Temporary uses are the same as those indicated the base Zone (R-A, OS-R, and OS-RP)

IO Zone

•Single-family residential (Same Primary and Accessory uses as specified in the base Zone (R-A)).

•Same conditionally permitted uses noted in R-A Zone

•Religious uses

•Educational uses

•Special communications facilities

•Temporary yards, buildings or trailers used for office use or storage during construction

•Swap meet or rummage sale sponsored by a nonprofit organization

•Carnivals, circuses, and other traveling entertainment events

•Seasonal sales

•Special shows, such as vehicle displays, auctions, animal association events, etc.

•Special events held at institutional uses not subject to an approved CUP

•Any other similar use that the Community Development Director determines is temporary

(Ord. 2007-02 § 2)

Chapter 7.4 Cannabis Regulations
7.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to impose zoning restrictions on cannabis uses in the City of La Habra Heights as may be authorized by the State of California. This Chapter is not intended to, and does not, give any person or entity independent legal authority to cultivate cannabis or otherwise engage in cannabis-related activity. Nothing in this Chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of State or Federal law. (Ord. 2018-01 § 4)

7.4.20 Definitions
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A.    "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" shall not include industrial hemp, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

B.    "Commercial cannabis use" means and includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products subject to licensing by the State of California pursuant to Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended.

C.    "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

D.    "Personal cultivation" means cultivation conducted by an individual for personal use in accordance with State law, and not intended or conducted for sale, resale, or any other commercial cannabis use or activity.

E.    "Primary caregiver" means the individual, designated by a qualified patient, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient, as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), as may be amended.

F.    "Qualified patient" means a person who is entitled to the protections of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, whether or not that person has applied for and received a valid identification card pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq. (Ord. 2018-01 § 5)

7.4.30 Commercial Cannabis Uses
A.    Commercial Cannabis Uses Prohibited. Commercial cannabis uses are prohibited in all Zoning Districts of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment of commercial cannabis uses as defined herein in any Zoning District, and no person shall otherwise establish such businesses or operations in any Zoning District.

B.    Permitted Personal Cultivation. Notwithstanding the prohibition on commercial cannabis uses, personal cultivation of cannabis is permitted within the City, only to the extent such cultivation is authorized by State law and in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    All personal cultivation, including cultivation by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall occur within the person’s private residence, or inside a fully enclosed and secure accessory structure located on the grounds of the private residence. For purposes of this section, "private residence" means a house or other dwelling unit.

2.    All personal cultivation of cannabis shall be conducted by a qualified patient, primary caregiver, or person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, in accordance with all applicable State law requirements.

3.    Structures and equipment used for indoor personal cultivation, such as indoor grow lights, shall comply with all applicable building, electrical and fire code regulations as adopted by the City.

4.    All accessory structures used for indoor personal cultivation shall comply with the locational, building design standards and other requirements for accessory structures set forth in this Article.

5.    Not more than six (6) living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried or processed within a single private residence, or upon the grounds of that private residence, at one (1) time. This shall be a cumulative total applicable to the residence, regardless of number of persons residing on the property.

6.    No exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation shall be discernible from the public right-of-way or neighboring properties.

7.    Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products in a public place or where smoking tobacco is prohibited. (Ord. 2018-01 § 6)

7.4.40 Penalty for Violation
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this Chapter, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, in accordance with Chapter 1.3. Moreover, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this Chapter, shall be subject to administrative citations and penalties in accordance with Chapter 8.9. In addition to the penalties provided in this Chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is declared a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in Chapter 4.5, Chapter 8.8, and/or under State law. (Ord. 2016-02 § 2)

Chapter 7.5 Nonconforming Structures, Land Uses and Lots
7.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish development standards and regulations for the modification or alteration of nonconforming structures, land uses and lots within the City of La Habra Heights. It is the intent of this Chapter to prohibit the creation of new nonconformities or the exacerbation of existing nonconformities where such nonconforming structures, land uses or lots are in conflict with the City of La Habra Heights General Plan.

7.5.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all existing structures, land uses and lots in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of Zone District.

7.5.30 Modifications to Existing Legal Nonconforming Structures
The following requirements are applicable to the modification of existing legal nonconforming structures:

A.    Legal Nonconforming Nonresidential Structures. Additions or modifications to an existing legal nonconforming structure are permitted only if all of the following conditions are met: 1) the addition or modification does not increase the existing nonconformity or its impact; 2) there is no change in the primary use of the structure; 3) the primary use of the structure is a primary or accessory use authorized under Chapter 7.3; and 4) the following additional finding is made: "Reasonable efforts have been made pursuant to this Article to decrease any pre-existing nonconformity directly related to the proposed project or adversely affecting health and safety and its impact."

B.    Legal Nonconforming Residential Structures. Additions or modifications to a legal nonconforming residential structure are permitted only if one of the following applies:

1.    The addition or modification complies with this Article without any discretionary review and does not increase the existing non-conformity or its impact;

2.    Any discretionary approval required under this Article is obtained; the addition or modification does not increase the existing non-conformity or its impact; and the following additional finding is made: "Reasonable efforts have been made pursuant to this Article to decrease any pre-existing nonconformities directly related to the proposed project or adversely affecting health and safety and their impacts."

3.    A Standards Modification and any other discretionary approval required under this Article is obtained and the following additional finding is made: "Reasonable efforts have been made pursuant to this Article to minimize any nonconformities directly related to the proposed project or adversely affecting health and safety and their impacts."

4.    Projects consisting of an addition to an existing legal nonconforming single-story residential structure, excluding projects consisting of the addition of second or additional stories, may maintain the existing nonconforming setbacks without the approval of a standards modification if the existing setbacks are not less than twenty (20) feet from any front property line or ten (10) feet from any other property line.

C.    Reconstruction of Structure after Damage or Destruction. A damaged or destroyed legal nonconforming structure may be reconstructed as follows:

1.    A structure with fifty (50) percent or more of the total length of its original exterior walls remaining in place after the damaging or destructive event, requiring no replacement, may be reconstructed provided that: a) the reconstructed structure does not increase the pre-existing non-conformity or its impact; and b) a complete application for reconstruction is submitted within twelve months of the date of damage, and reconstruction is commenced within one hundred eighty days of permit approval.

2.    A structure that is damaged so that more than fifty (50) percent of the total length of its exterior walls must be replaced, may also be reconstructed provided that: a) the structure is rebuilt to comply with the City’s development standards or, if it is not, a Standards Modification pursuant to the requirements of this Article must be obtained.

D.    Required for Health and Safety. Alteration or modification of a legal nonconforming structure may be permitted if it is required for conformance with pertinent health and safety regulations. These improvements may include, but are not limited to, any reconstruction legally required to bring the structure up to compliance with seismic building codes. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 8, 9)

7.5.40 Modifications to Existing Legal Nonconforming Uses
The following requirements are applicable to the modification of existing legal nonconforming land uses and improvements:

A.    Required for Health and Safety. Alteration or modification of a structure used for a legal nonconforming use may be permitted if it is required for conformance with pertinent health and safety regulations. These improvements may include, but are not limited to, any reconstruction required to bring the structure up to compliance with seismic building codes.

B.    Legal Nonconforming Uses. No other changes or modifications to any structure used for a legal nonconforming use shall be permitted, other than routine maintenance thereto.

C.    Loss of Nonconforming Status. A legal nonconforming use that is voluntarily discontinued or has ceased operations for a period of one year or more shall be declared abandoned. After a determination of abandonment pursuant to a noticed public hearing under Article 8, further use of the structure or continuance of the nonconforming use shall be prohibited.

7.5.50 Nonconforming Lots
Nonconforming lots that were legal at the time of the City’s incorporation shall be considered legal nonconforming lots or building sites. Pre-existing legal parcels of less than an acre that were created as water tank sites or for other nonresidential purposes may be developed as residential lots only if such development requires no Standards Modifications or Variances beyond those for structure height and size as described in Chapter 7.18.

7.5.60 Review of Existing Nonconformities as Part of Development Review Process
Reasonable efforts to decrease pre-existing nonconformities and their impacts shall include the following:

A.    Corrective Health and Safety Measures. Any nonconforming condition(s) affecting health and safety must be corrected as part of the development.

B.    Remediation of Existing Site Development Deficiencies. Remedies for existing nonconformities that must be considered include, but are not limited to, those identified in Table 7-2.

 

Table 7-2

Development Review of Existing Nonconformities and Potential Remedies 

Existing Nonconformities

Potential Remedies to Correct Existing Nonconformity1

Issue

Description

Applied to Existing Development

Applied to Proposed Development

Building Design, Grading and Hardscape

•Structure size

•Lot coverage

•Structural height

•Architectural design

•Articulation

•Development or structures in setbacks

•Landscape screening

•Removal of development in setback

•Relocation of proposed structure

•Redesign of proposed structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Animal Keeping

•Setback of animal keeping use

•Number of animals

•Landscape screening

•Increased setbacks

•Relocation of existing animal uses

•Conformance to housekeeping requirements

•Alter number or types of animals

•Relocation of proposed structure

•Redesign of proposed structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Setbacks and Yard Uses

•Setbacks

•Yard uses

•Fences and walls type, location and size

•Landscape screening

•Relocation of existing yard uses

•Improve drainage characteristics

•Improve conformance of fences, walls or gates.

•Relocation of structure

•Redesign of structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Landscaping

•Percent screening

•Design type

•Correction of landscape-induced view impediments

•Conformance to landscape Code requirements

•Relocation of structure

•Redesign of structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Parking and Access

•Number of spaces

•Number enclosed spaces

•Space size

•Driveway width

•Landscape screening

•Setbacks

•On-site turnaround

•Landscape screening

•Increase number, size and type of parking spaces

•Provide turnaround

•Relocation of structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Lot Development

•Offsets between structures

•Grading

•Accessory structures and uses

•Underground utilities

•Site drainage

•Right-of-Way encroachments

•Landscape screening

•Discontinue use of accessory structure

•Remove Right-of-Way encroachments

•Correct drainage deficiencies

•Underground utilities

•Relocation of structure on site

•Redesign of structure

•Additional landscaping

•Revision of grading plan

•Increased setbacks

Lighting

•Height of Light Poles

•Height of Light Poles

•Relocation of structure on site

•Redesign of structure

•Additional landscaping

1. No Standards Modification is permitted for structures or uses that are prohibited pursuant to Section 7.3.20.

Chapter 7.6 Noise and Lighting Standards
7.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish development standards to prevent undesirable noise and light and glare resultant from land use and development activity. Further regulation of noise and lighting related public nuisances are found in Article 4.

7.6.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all land uses and activities in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the applicable Zone District.

7.6.30 Performance Standards for Noise Control and Light and Glare
Noise generation and lighting must conform to the following performance standards indicated in this Section.

A.    Light Trespass. All new and existing development must control and limit light and glare and light trespass as a means to preserve the night-time skies that contribute to the City’s community character.

B.    Objectionable Noise. No noise source, type, or level sufficient to cause distress to, or be unpleasant to, a person of reasonable sensitivity shall be allowed at any time.

7.6.40 Development Standards for Noise Control
This Section establishes noise standards applicable to all development in the City. The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to noise control.

A.    Noise Attenuation in Design. All development shall be planned and designed in such a manner so as to ensure that it promotes the maintenance of a quiet environment.

B.    Exterior Noise Standards. Except as provided in Section 7.6.40.C, no noise level shall exceed the noise levels listed in Table 7-3 as measured at any property line of the parcel on which the noise source is located. Pure tones must be mitigated to a level of 10 dBA, CNEL, below the maximum exterior threshold levels listed in Table 7-3. Additionally, no noise source, type or level sufficient to cause distress or be unpleasant to a person of reasonable sensitivity shall be allowed at any time. In addition to the standards outlined in this Section, construction and stationary noise must adhere to the requirements specified in Article 4.

Table 7-3

Exterior Noise Standards 

Land Use

Time Interval

Max. Exterior Noise Level (in dBA, CNEL)

Residential-Agricultural

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

45 dBA

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

50 dBA

Public Facilities

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

50 dBA

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

65 dBA

Institutional Uses

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

45 dBA

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

50 dBA

Resource Production

24-hours a day

55 dBA

Construction Noise

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

65 dBA

C.    Cumulative Exterior Noise Standards. Noise may be permitted at levels greater than that specified in Table 7-3 if the cumulative standards shown in Table 7-4 are not exceeded.

Table 7-4

Cumulative Exterior Noise Standards 

Amount of Time Noise Levels Can Exceed Base Value (Table 7-3) During Any One Hour Period

dBA added to the Base Value Specified in Table 7-3

15 minutes

5 dB(A)

5 minutes

10 dB(A)

1 minute

15 dB(A)

Absolute Maximum (not to be exceeded at any time)

20 dB(A)

7.6.50 Development Standards for Light and Glare Control
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to light and glare for new development.

A.    Lighting Plans. All development applications for approval of new residential construction must include an outdoor lighting plan submitted as part of the development application. For all other development applications, lighting plans are required at the discretion of the Community Development Director and shall not be required when no new exterior lighting or modifications to existing exterior lighting are proposed. Outdoor sport courts shall have an outdoor lighting plan as part of the applicable Conditional Use Permit application if outdoor lighting is proposed.

B.    Limit Light Trespass. All outdoor light fixtures shall limit light trespass and glare through the use of shielding, directional lighting, timers, motion detectors, or other means to prevent skyward lighting. All exterior lights shall be designed, located, installed and directed to prevent objectionable light trespass or glare across property lines. Landscaping may be required in areas where plantings can reduce glare at the discretion of the Community Development Director.

C.    Outdoor Lighting. External lighting fixtures must not create any objectionable light trespass or spillover impacts. This lighting may not remain on all night and if equipped with motion sensors must be adjusted so as not to create an annoyance.

D.    Driveway and Parking Area Lighting. Lighting fixtures located along driveways and parking areas shall be fitted with glare shields or be cut-off type fixtures.

E.    Lighting Levels Standards. Light trespass shall be minimized by designs that comply with the following requirements:

1.    No more than 0.25 footcandles measured at a point located five (5) feet inside any adjacent property.

2.    Lighting fixtures and wall packs shall be mounted in such a manner to direct the light away from any adjacent property.

3.    All other lighting shall be arranged to direct the light away from any adjacent property.

4.    All exterior lighting visible from off-site must be equipped with motion detectors and all decorative lighting and game court lighting must be equipped with automatic timer switches, to ensure that the lighting is turned off when not in use.

F.    Residential Outdoor Lighting Standards. Outdoor light fixtures for residential use including, but not limited to, outdoor recreation, decorative lighting and parking shall be fully shielded to prevent light trespass. The following minimum requirements shall apply.

1.    Exterior lighting pole height, other than those used for game court lighting, shall not exceed ten (10) feet.

2.    No more than two lights shall be located on gates or entry area onto property.

3.    No exterior lighting may be directed off-site.

4.    Light poles for game court lighting may not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground surface.

G.    Nonresidential Outdoor Lighting Standards. Outdoor light fixtures for nonresidential use including, but not limited to, outdoor recreation, parking, resource production, institutional uses, etc., shall be fully shielded to prevent light trespass beyond the immediate area in which the activity is conducted. The following minimum requirements shall apply.

1.    All outdoor lighting fixtures not attached to a building wall (wall packs) shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15) feet in height.

2.    All lighting fixtures must be fully shielded with the light cone restricted to the area of the use.

3.    Light intensity, beyond that needed for safety, must be mitigated through a variety of means including the use of non-reflective surfaces to prevent reflected light. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 10, 11)

Chapter 7.7 Congestion and Traffic Demand Management Standards
7.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to create a trip reduction and travel demand management program that promotes alternative transportation methods for nonresidential development within the City of La Habra Heights. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.20 Definitions
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this Chapter:

A.    "Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

B.    "Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 7.7.50.

C.    "Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.

D.    "Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

E.    "The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.

F.    "Developer" shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this Chapter as determined by the property owner.

G.    "Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 7.7.50 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.

H.    "Employee parking area" means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless specified in the City/County Zoning/Building Code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/Professional

85%

Industrial/Manufacturing

90%

I.    "Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles.

J.    "Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this Chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.

K.    "South Coast Air Quality Management District" (SCAQMD) is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).

L.    "Tenant" means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

M.    "Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

N.    "Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles.

O.    "Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis.

P.    "Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses, and motorcycles. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.30 Impact Analysis for Projects Requiring an EIR
Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be exempted from its provisions. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent an NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the Draft EIR prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.40 Applicability of Requirements
Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, at a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.

This Chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the City pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.50 Development Standards
A.    Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the City:

1.    A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a.    Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

b.    Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

c.    Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

d.    Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

e.    A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

B.    Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsection A of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the City:

1.    Not less than ten (10) percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the City. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided, that at all times at least one (1) space for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and two (2) spaces for projects over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

2.    Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven (7) feet and two (2) inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

3.    Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four (4) bicycles per the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development and one (1) bicycle per each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the City.

C.    Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsections A and B of this section, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the City:

1.    A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.

2.    Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development.

3.    If determined necessary by the City to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The City will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

4.    Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on site. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.60 Monitoring
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the City will inspect the site to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

7.7.80 Enforcement
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor that shall be punishable pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8. (Ord. 2015-04 § 1)

Chapter 7.8 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
7.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide placement, design and screening criteria for wireless telecommunication facilities, in order to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and quality of life in the City of La Habra Heights consistent with the policy direction of the La Habra Heights General Plan, while preserving the rights of wireless telecommunications providers. It is recognized that unrestricted installations are contrary to the City’s efforts to stabilize economic and social aspects of neighborhood environments, and the City’s efforts to promote safety and aesthetic considerations, family environments and a basic residential character within the City. It is the intent of this chapter to permit wireless telecommunication facilities where they can be installed without creating adverse economic, safety or aesthetic impacts on neighboring property owners and the overall community. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.20 Exempt Telecommunication Facilities
The following types of facilities are exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter:

A.    Exempt by State and/or Federal Regulations. A wireless telecommunication facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter if and to the extent State or Federal law preempts local regulation of the facility.

B.    Exempt Subject to Locational Requirements. The following are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter if such facilities meet all required setbacks and development standards as outlined in this Article:

1.     Radio or Television Antenna. Any single ground- or building-mounted receive-only radio or television antenna for the sole use of owners or occupants of the parcel or common interest development on which such antenna is located. The maximum height of such antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet above the building height prescribed for the zone in which the antenna is located.

2.     Satellite Dish Antenna. Up to five (5) ground- or building-mounted receive-only radio or television satellite dish antennas, each not exceeding one (1) meter in diameter for the sole use of owners or occupants of the parcel or common interest development on which the antenna is located.

3.    Citizens’ Band Antenna. Any ground- or building-mounted citizens’ band radio antenna not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet above grade, including any mast.

4.     Amateur Radio Antenna. Any antenna support structure such as a mast, tower and/or building, and including the antenna(s) affixed thereto, used by authorized amateur radio stations licensed by the FCC which is no more than thirty-five (35) feet above grade as measured by Section 7.8.70, and no wireless telecommunication facility may be located on it.

5.     Government Antennas. Antennas owned and operated by the City or any other public entity. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.30 Application and Permitting Process
A.    A Conditional Use Permit is required for the following:

1.     Wireless telecommunication facilities that are: (a) not colocated; and (b) on a parcel zoned Institutional or Public Facilities.

2.    Ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facilities that are (a) zoned residential or open space and (b) located on parcels not owned by the City.

3.    Building-mounted facilities that are on facilities not owned by the City.

4.    Amateur radio antennas, including the antenna support structure such as a mast, tower and/or building, and including the antenna(s) affixed thereto, exceeding thirty-five (35) feet above ground level or more than ten (10) feet wide.

a.    To approve such an application, in addition to any other required findings, the Planning Commission must find that:

i.    The application is submitted by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC;

ii.    The permitted location is listed by the FCC as the address associated with the amateur radio operator or is the primary residence of the amateur radio operator;

iii.    Allowance of the additional heights and/or widths is necessary to reasonably accommodate amateur radio service communications;

iv.    Based on technical showings by the amateur radio operator applicant, no lesser antenna heights and no alternative antenna structures (such as retractable antennas support structures) would reasonably accommodate the amateur radio operator’s needs;

v.    The regulation constitutes the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the City’s goal of promoting public health and safety;

vi.    The regulation does not preclude amateur radio service communications;

vii.    The installation will comply with adopted Building Code and all other adopted codes and shall be subject to inspection by the City to determine compliance therewith.

b.    A permit for an amateur radio antenna shall be personal to the amateur radio operator to whom the permit is granted, and shall not run with the land, and shall only be transferable to another amateur radio licensee taking possession of the property where the permitted amateur radio antenna is located upon prior application to and nondiscretionary approval by the City.

c.    A City-approved permit for an amateur radio antenna shall automatically terminate and the permitted facilities shall be removed within ninety (90) days thereafter if the permittee:

i.    Has his or her amateur radio license revoked by the FCC; or

ii.    Voluntarily cancels or forfeits his or her amateur radio license; or

iii.    Nonrenews his or her amateur radio license within three (3) months of its expiration.

d.    Amateur radio antennas shall comply with the balance of this Chapter except where specifically exempted.

B.    Administrative Review. Unless a wireless telecommunication facility is exempt pursuant to Section 7.8.20 or a Conditional Use Permit is required pursuant to subsection A of this section, administrative review is required for all proposed wireless telecommunication facilities, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.    Wireless telecommunication facilities located on property owned or controlled by the City.

2.    Wireless telecommunication facilities located within the public right-of-way to the extent required by Public Utilities Code Sections 7901 and 7901.1.

3.    Temporary facilities operated by wireless telecommunication service providers, such as Cell on Wheels (COW) facilities, for a maximum period of sixty (60) days.

4.    Colocated wireless facilities located on an approved wireless telecommunication facility.

C.    Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way. Any wireless telecommunication facility to be placed over, within, on or beneath the public right-of-way shall comply with the following:

1.    Prior to installation, the City must have issued an encroachment permit.

2.    All equipment associated with the operation of a facility (including but not limited to cabinets and transmission cables but excepting antennas) shall be placed underground if such equipment is within fifty (50) feet of cable television, telephone or electric lines that are underground. All wiring and cabling that is to be placed underground shall be placed only in conduit that meets the requirements of the adopted Building Code and all other adopted codes.

3.    The City Engineer shall determine the time, place, and manner of construction for all facilities located within public rights-of-way consistent with Public Utilities Code Sections 7901 and 7901.1.

D.    Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to other application submittal requirements that are imposed by this Chapter, the Community Development Director shall develop and update as necessary an application form which shall include the following for any application for a wireless telecommunication facility:

1.    Site plan, drawn to scale, indicating all existing and proposed features of the proposed site.

2.    A complete project description, including the following information regarding the proposed wireless telecommunication facility:

a.    Number, size, and approximate orientation of antennas.

b.    Heights of proposed facilities.

c.    Equipment enclosure type and size.

d.    Construction timeframe for equipment enclosure.

e.    Materials and colors of antennas.

f.    Description of structures necessary to support the proposed antennas and to house ancillary equipment.

g.    Description of lighting.

h.    Description of noise/acoustical information for equipment such as air conditioning units and backup generators.

i.    Description of identification and safety signage.

j.    Description of access to the facility.

k.    Description of utility line extensions needed to serve the facility.

l.    Backup power sources, if proposed.

3.     Floor plans, elevations and cross sections of any proposed equipment shelter or other appurtenant structure at a scale no smaller than one-fourth (1/4) inch equals one (1) foot with clear indication of all exterior materials and colors. Paint and materials samples shall be provided.

4.     Photo simulations depicting the actual size of the proposed facility in relation to its surroundings, including all antennas and equipment shelters, shall be submitted for review. The number of photo simulations required to fully depict the impact of the facility on the surrounding area shall be at the discretion of the Community Development Director.

5.    A landscape plan including but not limited to landscaping or vegetation replacement and maintenance consistent with the type of facility proposed and the zone in which it is located.

6.    A plan for maintenance of the site, including trash and graffiti removal, and facility upkeep.

7.    Demonstration of any existing gap(s) in coverage, and the radius of area in which an antenna may be located to eliminate the gap(s).

8.    A justification study with a search ring indicating the rationale for selection of the proposed site, in view of the relative merits of any feasible alternative site within the service area. This study shall also include the applicant’s master plan, which indicates the proposed site in relation to the provider’s existing and proposed network of sites within the City and surrounding areas, including map and narrative description of each site. For modifications or alterations to existing facilities, the applicant may be required to submit a justification study limited to the need to modify, alter or expand the facility.

9.    Documentation that the proposed wireless facility complies with all applicable FCC rules, regulations and standards.

10.    A statement that includes a declaration regarding the facility’s capacity for future colocation, supporting information regarding why the proposed wireless facility location is required, and a brief explanation as to why the site was not colocated. In the case of noncolocated ground-mounted facilities, applications shall state the alternative sites considered and why they were rejected. The applicant shall demonstrate good faith to colocate on existing facilities.

11.    A description of services offered in conjunction with the proposed facility.

12.    At the discretion of the Community Development Director, the City may hire an independent, qualified consultant (the "technical consultant") to evaluate any technical aspect of the proposed telecommunication facility, including but not limited to potential for interference with existing or planned public safety emergency response telecommunication facilities, or analysis of feasibility of alternate screening methods or devices, or alternate (more suitable) locations. Where the Community Development Director elects to hire a technical consultant, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum equal to the expected fee of the technical consultant, and shall promptly reimburse the City for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation exceeding the expected fee. Any unexpended deposit held by the City at the time of withdrawal or final action on the application shall be promptly returned to the applicant.

13.    Any additional items deemed necessary by the Community Development Director to make the findings required in Section 7.8.40. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.40 Findings of Approval
In addition to the general findings required by Chapter 7.19, the following findings must be made for the approval of a wireless telecommunication facility except for amateur radio antennas:

A.     The placement, construction, or modification of a wireless telecommunication facility in the proposed location is necessary for the provision of wireless services to City residents, businesses, and their owners, customers, guests or other persons traveling in or about the City.

B.    The proposal demonstrates a reasonable attempt to minimize stand-alone facilities, is designed to protect the visual quality of the City, and will not have an undue adverse impact on historic resources, scenic views, or other natural or manmade resources.

C.    Where an applicant claims a significant gap in its coverage, that gap must be geographically defined and the gap proved by clear and convincing evidence. The burden of objectively proving a significant gap in its coverage rests solely with the applicant. Where a significant gap in the applicant’s coverage is so proved, the applicant must also prove by clear and convincing evidence that the application is the least intrusive means of closing the significant gap in coverage.

D.    That at least one (1) of the following is true:

1.     All applicable requirements and standards of this Chapter have been met;

2.     A variance has been granted from any requirement or standard of this Chapter which has not been met; or

3.     Strict compliance with the requirements and standards of this Chapter would not provide for adequate radio frequency signal reception and that no other alternative and less intrusive design of the facility that would meet the development standards is feasible.

E.    The following findings shall be adopted when approving a Conditional Use Permit that increases the allowable height (except that such findings shall not be required for proposals of amateur radio antennas):

1.    Review alternatives shall be provided to staff, including but not limited to additional and/or different locations and designs, and has determined that the application as approved would have a lesser impact on the aesthetics and welfare of the surrounding community as compared to other alternatives;

2.    Based on the evidence presented, the additional height above the maximum building height for the applicable zone is reasonably necessary for colocation of facilities for the efficient operation of the proposed facility; and

3.    Any negative impacts of the proposed facility are properly mitigated. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.50 Locational Standards
A.    General.

1.     Wireless telecommunication facilities except amateur radio antennas shall be installed on properties, in the following order of preference (the highest preference is listed first):

a.     City-owned or -controlled properties or rights-of-way where the wireless telecommunication facility would not be within five hundred (500) feet of any primary residence.

b.    City-owned or -controlled properties or rights-of-way where the wireless telecommunication facility would not be within two hundred (200) feet of any primary residence.

c.     Parcels zoned Public Facilities.

d.     Parcels zoned Open Space-Recreation.

e.    Parcels zoned residential.

No wireless telecommunication facility may be installed unless it would be infeasible to install the facility in a more preferred zone and still close the proven significant gap in coverage by the least intrusive means.

2.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be colocated where technologically feasible and where colocation would be visually superior to the otherwise necessary noncolocated facility.

3.    Wireless telecommunication facilities located on vacant lots shall be considered temporary and when the site is developed the City may require such facilities be removed and, if appropriate, replaced with building-mounted facilities.

B.    Restricted Locations. No wireless telecommunication facility except amateur radio antennas shall be permitted in any of the residential or open space zones (excluding rights-of-way) unless:

1.    The facility is designed as a stealth facility; and

2.    The law otherwise requires the City to permit such location. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.60 Design and Screening Criteria
All wireless telecommunication facilities except amateur radio antennas shall comply with the following design and screening criteria:

A.    To the extent practical, wireless telecommunication facilities shall be integrated into existing or newly developed facilities that are functional for other purposes.

B.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall incorporate stealth design whenever feasible so as to minimize aesthetic impacts on surrounding land uses.

C.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed with subdued colors and nonreflective materials which will architecturally blend with surrounding materials and colors.

D.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located in areas where existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening so as to minimize aesthetic impacts on surrounding land uses.

E.    Screening for building- or roof-mounted facilities shall be compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture, and/or materials of the building.

F.    Ground-mounted facilities shall be compatible with the architecture, color, texture, and/or materials of the building or surrounding area and landscaping.

G.    Stealth wireless facilities designed to resemble natural features such as trees or rocks shall be integrated into the surrounding environment through the planting of trees and/or shrubs distributed around the entire facility to appear as a naturally occurring or integrated landscape element. Newly installed trees shall be a minimum size of thirty-six (36) inch box. Palm trees shall have a minimum brown trunk height of sixteen (16) feet.

H.    Any mono-pine, mono-palm or other type of artificial tree shall incorporate enough architectural branches (including density and vertical height), three (3) dimensional bark cladding, and other design materials or appropriate techniques to cause the structure to appear as natural as feasible.

I.    Accessory support facilities such as electrical cabinets and equipment rooms shall be placed inside an existing building, underground in flush to grade vaults with vents no larger than twenty-four (24) inches above grade and twenty (20) inches in diameter, within a landscape planter within an existing parking lot, or on the roof of an existing building. Support facilities shall be designed to match the architecture of adjacent buildings and/or be screened from public view by walls, fences, parapets, landscaping and similar treatments. Any tree removed within landscaped areas shall be replaced with one (1) or more trees of similar quality and of a size deemed acceptable by the Community Development Director. Landscaping shall be compatible with surrounding landscaping and shall be of a type and variety that the Community Development Director or designee determines is capable of screening all or a portion of the facility.

J.    Support equipment for colocated facilities shall be colocated within the existing equipment enclosure, or if not possible then located as close to the existing equipment enclosure as possible.

K.    The accessory equipment associated with a facility located on public property not in a public right-of-way shall be located within an underground vault, attached to a pole, or within an enclosure deemed suitable by the Community Development Director or designee.

L.    The foundations for all freestanding wireless telecommunication facility support structures shall be capable of supporting additional height and weight to accommodate colocation.

M.    Any new structure, building-mounted facility or antenna, or ground mounted wireless facility in a residential zone that is not colocated must use stealth design.

N.    Any facility located on a publicly owned or controlled property or utility infrastructure shall be compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture and/or materials of the structure so as to be camouflaged from view.

O.    Facade- and roof-mounted antennas and equipment shall be architecturally integrated into the building design and otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible. If possible, antennas should be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from view. Facade-mounted facilities shall generally not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches out from the building face.

P.    Roof-mounted antennas and necessary equipment shall be screened from above if visible from higher elevations.

Q.    All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed to deter unauthorized access such as climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other activities which may result in hazardous conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances. Graffiti must be removed from a wireless telecommunication facility by the permittee within forty-eight (48) hours after the City provides notice of the graffiti.

R.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than government-required certifications, warnings, or other required seals or signage approved by the City. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.70 Site Development Standards
A.    General Development Standards. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following:

1.    The maximum height of any wireless telecommunication facility, other than roof-mounted facilities and amateur radio antennas, located on private property shall be ten (10) feet above the height requirement of the zone in which the facility is located. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted to exceed the maximum height as described in Section 7.8.40(E).

2.    Height shall be measured as follows:

a.    Ground-Mounted Antennas. The height of the antenna structure shall be measured from the natural undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of the antenna support (i.e., tower) to the top of the tower or from the top of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto, whichever is higher.

b.    Building-Mounted Antennas. The height of the antenna structure shall be measured from the top of the building roof the antenna is mounted on to the top of the antenna or screening structure, whichever is higher.

c.    Utility Tower/Pole-Mounted Antennas. The height of the antenna structure shall be measured from the base of the utility tower/pole, not the grade of the climbing leg foundation of the structure if the climbing leg foundation of the utility tower/pole structure is not at grade due to exposed footings.

3.    Facilities located on properties owned or controlled by the City shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height.

4.    Wireless telecommunication facilities shall conform to all building setback requirements, and all equipment associated with their operation shall comply with the development standards for the zone in which they are located.

5.    Monopoles, antennas, and support structures for antennas shall be no greater in diameter or any other cross-sectional dimension than is reasonably necessary for the proper functioning and physical support of the wireless telecommunication facility.

6.    All wireless telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FCC, and any other agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate wireless telecommunication facilities.

7.    No wireless telecommunication facility shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential structure except amateur radio antennas.

8.    Barbed wire, razor wire, electrified fence, and any other type of hazardous fence is prohibited.

9.    All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed, located and operated to avoid interference with the quiet enjoyment of adjacent properties, and at a minimum shall be subject to the noise standards of Chapters 4.11 and 7.6. Where the director finds that the noise of such facility may have a detrimental effect on an adjacent property, he/she may require an independent acoustic analysis, at the applicant’s expense, to identify appropriate mitigation measures.

10.    Excluding those facilities that are colocated, located within the public right-of-way, amateur radio antennas, or located on publicly owned or controlled property or utility infrastructure, wireless telecommunication facilities shall be separated from each other as follows, unless the separation requirement would prevent the provider from closing a significant gap in its coverage: any new ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facility located within one-quarter (1/4) mile (one thousand, three hundred twenty (1,320) feet) of an existing ground-mounted facility must be of stealth design, regardless of the zone in which it is located.

B.    Guidelines for Placement on a Structure. The preferred methods for mounting an antenna on a structure are, in order of preference, as follows (starting with the most preferable):

1.    Mounted on an existing structure on the facade, roof or colocated on an existing antenna support structure;

2.     Mounted on an existing steel or concrete pole (i.e., light standard); or

3.    Incorporated into a new freestanding stealth wireless telecommunication facility.

C.    Noise Standards. All wireless telecommunication facilities and accessory wireless equipment shall comply with the applicable provisions of the City’s noise ordinance.

D.    Building-Mounted Facilities, Except Amateur Radio Antennas.

1.    Antenna elements may be mounted on rooftops; provided, that they do not exceed ten (10) feet in height as measured from the roof plane, and the combined height of the building and antenna does not exceed the height limitations of the underlying zone. If the building itself exceeds the height limitations of the zone, and such excess height was legally established (for example, approved by a conditional use permit), then the combined height of the building and antenna shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by such approval.

2.    Antennas and ancillary equipment shall be scaled and designed to integrate with building design so as to be visually unobtrusive.

3.    If antennas are mounted flush against a building wall, the color and material of the antenna and other equipment shall match the exterior of the building.

4.    Roof-mounted antennas and equipment shall be located as far from the edge of the building as feasible, unless fully screened from public view.

E.    Development Standards for Monopoles. In addition to all other applicable development standards, monopoles except for amateur radio antennas shall comply with the following standards:

1.     An applicant shall demonstrate that a proposed facility cannot be placed on an existing building or colocated and the Community Development Director may require an independent, third party review, at the applicant’s expense, to identify alternatives to a proposed monopole.

2.     A monopole on private property shall not exceed the height limit established for the zone in which it is to be located, unless the proposed facility is compatible with surrounding properties, the additional height is necessary to provide service within the City, and a Conditional Use Permit is granted under the standards of Section 7.19.60. In no event shall a monopole exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height.

3.     Guy wires or support structures are prohibited.

4.    Monopoles shall be designed to allow for colocation of additional antennas when feasible.

5.    Exterior lighting of monopoles is prohibited.

6.     A maintenance agreement shall be entered into between the City and the property owner or service provider when regular maintenance is required for the approved monopole. For example, the installation of a mono-flagpole will require a maintenance agreement to ensure the flag is maintained and replaced when needed.

F.    Development Standards for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way. In addition to all other applicable development standards, wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall comply with the following standards:

1.     Facilities shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials which blend in with the surrounding area as recommended and approved by the Community Development Director.

2.     Ground-mounted equipment shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping, walls, or other decorative feature, as recommended and approved by the Community Development Director.

3.    Facilities shall be of a camouflage design with all equipment (excluding required electrical meter cabinets) to be located underground or pole-mounted. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened as recommended and approved by the Community Development Director.

4.     Pole-mounted equipment shall not exceed six (6) cubic feet.

5.    Antennas must be installed on existing utility or light poles. No new poles may be installed except as replacement for existing poles. An exception to this requirement shall be where an operator shows that it cannot otherwise close a significant gap in its radio frequency coverage from any other site or combination of sites.

a.     Utility Poles. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches above the height of the existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than sixteen (16) feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply as designed and constructed with California Public Utilities Commission General Order 95.

b.     Light Poles. The maximum height of any antenna or antenna radome shall not exceed six (6) feet above the existing height of the light pole. Any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet above any drivable road surface.

6.     For accessory equipment within a residential zone, underground equipment is required unless an underground solution is not feasible. In that case, ground-mounted equipment may be installed if it does not exceed a height of six (6) feet and a total footprint of twenty (20) square feet, excluding the required electric meter.

7.     Equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the right-of-way, or create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists as determined by the City Engineer. In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping be located within eighteen (18) inches of the edge of pavement.

8.    Facilities shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another wireless telecommunication facility on the same side of the street; this does not include colocation of sites.

9.     All facilities shall be built in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (for example: access around facilities in the public right-of-way).

G.    Development Standards for Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS). In addition to all other applicable development standards, DAS facilities located in the public right-of-way shall comply with all development standards for wireless telecommunication facilities in the public right-of-way and the following:

1.    The applicant shall follow the application requirements in Section 7.8.30.

2.    The applicant for a DAS installation shall not be permitted to place its facilities in any location or in any manner that would not be permitted hereunder for any wireless telecommunication facility.

3.    A DAS provider shall not be issued City permits to install any portion of its interconnecting wireline network to a distributed antenna system antenna site location within the City until that location is first permitted pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.80 Sustainability
As the push for developers to build "green" facilities continues to increase and as technology for wireless telecommunication facilities is constantly advancing, it is expected that design of "green" telecommunication facilities will be introduced as a design alternative in the near future. It is possible that new facilities that are proposed using "green" technology would not fall within the strict guidelines of this Code. To accommodate these facilities, the City may consider factors such as whether the facility has no carbon footprint and/or whether the facility produces power through solar or wind generated means. These proposed facilities shall require a Conditional Use Permit and will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and may be permitted to stray from the specific design requirements of this Code when it is found that the benefit to be found by being "green" outweighs the potential negative impacts of not meeting all requirements of this Chapter. The Planning Commission shall be the decision-making body for all Conditional Use Permits requested for proposals which are proposed by the applicant or determined by the City to be "green" facilities, unless the matter is appealed to or called for review by the City Council, in which case the City Council shall be the decision-making body. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.90 Operational Standards
A.    General. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be erected, located, operated and maintained at all times in compliance with this section and all applicable City, State or Federal laws and regulations.

B.    Radio Frequency Emissions Compliance. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the federal requirements relating to radio frequency emissions and maximum exposure limits, including those provided in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 1.1310 et seq. and FCC Office of Engineering and Technology Bulletin 65, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.100 Standard Conditions of Approval
Each wireless telecommunication facility or antenna which is approved through a Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to the following standard conditions of approval, in addition to any other condition deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority:

A.    The wireless telecommunications antenna and/or facility permitted by this Chapter shall be erected, operated, and maintained in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

B.    Within thirty (30) calendar days following the installation of any wireless telecommunications antenna and/or facility permitted by this Chapter, the applicant shall provide FCC documentation to the Community Development Director indicating that the unit has been inspected and tested in compliance with FCC standards. Such documentation shall include the make and model (or other identifying information) of the unit tested, the date and time of the inspection, the methodology used to make the determination, the name and title of the person(s) conducting the tests, and a certification that the unit is properly installed and working within applicable FCC standards. As to DAS installations, the required FCC documentation certification shall be made only by the wireless carrier(s) using the DAS system rather than the DAS system provider.

C.    The installation of any wireless telecommunications antenna and/or facility shall be in compliance with Article 5 of this Code and all applicable provisions of the State Building Standards Code and any applicable local amendments thereto.

D.     Any substantial change in the type of antenna and/or facility installed in a particular location shall require the prior approval of the Community Development Director or designee.

E.     Colocation of wireless telecommunications antennas and facilities pursuant to this Chapter shall be required whenever it is feasible to do so. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.110 Operation and Maintenance Standards
Wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following operation and maintenance standards at all times. Failure to comply shall be considered a violation of the conditions of approval and constitute a violation of this Code subject to any remedy available under this Code or other applicable law as well as a basis for revocation of a permit pursuant to Section 7.8.120.

A.    Except for exempt telecommunication facilities, a maintenance and facility removal agreement shall be executed by the operator and the property owner (if other than the City). No permit shall become effective until such agreement has been executed. Said agreement shall bind the operator and property owner and their successors and assigns as to the facility to the following:

1.     Maintain the appearance of the facility;

2.     Remove the facility when required by this Chapter or by any condition of approval, or when it is determined that the facility will not have been used during any current consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period, or if the facility will be abandoned;

3.     Except for amateur radio antennas, pay all costs the City reasonably incurs to monitor a facility’s compliance with conditions of approval and applicable law;

4.     Reimburse the City for any and all costs incurred for work required by this Chapter, applicable law, or the conditions of a permit issued by the City for the facility which the operator and property owner fail to perform within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City to do so or sooner if required by the City for good cause;

5.     In the case of a freestanding tower or monopole, except for an amateur radio antenna, the agreement shall obligate the operator and owner to lease space on the tower, at a fair market rent, to other wireless telecommunication providers to the maximum extent consistent with the operational requirements of the facility;

6.     Where the Commission or Council, as the case may be, determines that it is necessary to ensure compliance with the conditions of approval or otherwise provide for removal of a facility that is temporary in nature or upon its disuse, the operator or owner shall post a performance bond, cash or a letter of credit or other security acceptable to the Director in the amount of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars, or such higher amount as the Director reasonably determines is necessary to ensure compliance with the maintenance and facility removal agreement. This requirement shall not apply to an amateur radio antenna.

B.    Each wireless telecommunication facility shall include signage approved by the Director identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. Such signage must comply with any applicable provisions of this Chapter.

C.     Wireless telecommunication facilities and the sites on which they are located shall be maintained in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism. Any damage from any cause shall be repaired within five (5) days of written notice by the City to do so. Graffiti shall be removed as soon as practicable, and within forty-eight (48) hours of notice by the City to do so.

D.    The owner or operator of a wireless telecommunication facility shall maintain landscaping in accordance with an approved landscape plan and shall replace dangerous and/or dead trees, foliage or other landscape elements shown on the approved plans. Amendments or modifications to the landscape plan shall be approved pursuant to this Article.

E.    A wireless telecommunication facility shall be operated to minimize noise impacts to surrounding residents and persons using nearby facilities and recreation areas. All equipment that may emit noise in excess of the levels permitted by Chapters 4.11 and 7.6 shall be enclosed. Backup generators shall only be used during periods of power outages or for testing.

F.     Temporary power may be allowed during the initial construction or major repair of a facility for the minimal amount of time necessary to complete the work. The operator shall provide a timeline to the Community Development Department and keep staff updated as to the time of completion.

G.    Electromagnetic Field Exposure. No wireless telecommunication facility may, by itself or in conjunction with other wireless telecommunication facilities, generate electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure or other measurable radiation in excess of the standards for permissible human exposure, as provided by applicable Federal regulations. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.120 Duration, Revocation and Discontinuance
A.    One (1) Year Expiration. A permit for a wireless telecommunication facility shall expire one (1) year after permit approval unless the applicant has obtained by that time approval of a building permit and has requested an initial building inspection.

B.    Duration of Permits and Approval.

1.     Permits for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be valid for an initial period of ten (10) years unless for a shorter period as authorized by California Government Code Section 65964(b), or as specified by the approving body, from the date of the final building inspection.

2.     A permit may be extended without a public hearing for a maximum of three (3) two (2) year terms by the Community Development Director upon verification of continued compliance with conditions of approval under which the permit was originally approved and a determination based on substantial evidence in the record of his/her decision that findings for issuance of a new facility could be made.

3.    A permit may be revoked pursuant to Chapter 8.7 of this Code.

4.    All costs reasonably incurred by the City in verifying compliance and in extending or revoking an approval shall be borne by the applicant and/or permit holder.

C.    Discontinuance of Use.

1.    All equipment and improvements associated with a wireless telecommunication facility shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the discontinuation of the use and the site shall be restored to its original, preconstruction condition, or other as approved by the Community Development Director. For facilities located on property owned or controlled by the City, this requirement shall be included in the lease. Written verification of the removal of a facility from private property shall be provided to the director within thirty (30) days of the discontinuation of the use.

2.     The operator shall be responsible for removing the wireless telecommunication facility from the site within thirty (30) days of discontinuation of use. If an operator fails to remove a wireless telecommunication facility from the site within thirty (30) days of discontinuation, the property owner shall be responsible for removal.

3.     If a facility is not removed within the required thirty (30) days, the site may be deemed a public nuisance and a code violation, pursuant to the terms of Article 8.

4.     Failure to inform the Community Development Director of cessation of use of any existing facility shall constitute a violation of this Code and be grounds for a nuisance prosecution or revocation or modification of a permit.

D.    Existing Facilities. All equipment and improvements associated with a wireless telecommunication facility permitted as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter may continue as they presently exist, but constitute legal nonconforming uses to the extent they do not conform to the standards of this Chapter (a "legal nonconforming wireless facility"). Routine maintenance on existing, operational equipment and facilities at a legal non-conforming wireless facility shall not require compliance with this Chapter. However, replacement or modification of a legal non-conforming wireless facility shall require issuance of a permit pursuant to, and in compliance with, this Chapter.

E.    Upgrades with New Technology. The City finds that the technology associated with telecommunications equipment is subject to rapid changes and upgrades as a result of industry competition and customer demands, and anticipates that telecommunications antennas and related equipment with reduced visual impacts will be available from time to time with comparable or improved coverage and capacity capabilities. The City further finds that it is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare that telecommunications providers be required to replace older facilities with newer equipment of equal or greater capabilities and reduced visual impacts as technological improvements become available. Therefore, any modifications requested to an existing facility for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this Article authorizing establishment of a wireless telecommunication facility shall permit the Community Development Director or designee to review the carrier’s existing facility to determine whether requiring newer equipment or applying new screening techniques that reduce visual impacts is appropriate if technically feasible. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.8.130 Federal Preemption
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, if any provision(s) of this Chapter would give rise to a claim by an applicant that a proposed action by the City would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services within the meaning of 47 USC 332(c)(7), or would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service within the meaning of 47 USC 253, then, at or prior to the public hearing on the application, the applicant shall submit clear and convincing evidence attesting to all specifics of the claim. If such evidence is submitted, the decision-making body shall determine if this is in fact the case, and if so shall, as much as possible, keep the intent of this Chapter the same while applying the provision(s) in such a manner as to avoid any violation of Federal law. If that is not possible, the decision-making body shall find that the provision(s) cannot be implemented in a manner that does not violate Federal law, and shall override the offending provision(s) to the extent necessary as to comply with Federal law. (Ord. 2010-03 § 1 (Exh. A))

Chapter 7.9 Sign Standards
7.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards for signs.

7.9.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the applicable Zone District.

7.9.30 Development Standards for Signs
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to signs.

7.9.40 IO Zone Standards for Signs
The following standards apply to signs in the IO Zone District only.

A.    Maximum Total Sign Area. The maximum total sign area per site, excluding exempt signs, is as follows:

1.    The maximum total sign area per site may not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage. The Director of Community Development may designate another side of a building as the building frontage if it is determined that the primary access is from a side facing an interior side lot line and the interior lot line is longer than the front lot line.

2.    The maximum total sign area for freestanding or monument signs is one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of street frontage up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet on one face or sixty-four (64) square feet on two faces.

3.    Where the street frontage exceeds 250 feet, one additional freestanding or monument sign with no more two than faces, not to exceed 32 square feet on one face or 64 square feet on two faces, is permitted.

B.    Additional Regulations for Signs. In determining compliance with maximum sign area, the following additional regulations shall apply:

1.    Only the street frontage that is developed, or is approved for development, is counted for purposes of determining the maximum allowable sign area. Undeveloped land reserved for future development may not be used in determining the maximum allowable sign area.

2.    The sign area may be allocated among wall signs, freestanding signs, and shingle signs, provided that each sign conforms to the applicable regulations of this section.

3.    No sign or sign area permitted on one frontage shall be transferred to another frontage.

C.    Wall signs. A wall sign shall conform to the following requirements:

1.    Wall signs shall not project above an eave or parapet including the eave of a simulated mansard roof.

2.    Wall signs shall not project more than six (6) inches from the face of the building.

3.    No portion of a wall sign shall be more than fifteen (15) feet above grade.

D.    Freestanding or Monument Signs. A freestanding or monument sign shall conform to the following requirements:

1.    Only one sign is permitted on each street frontage less than two hundred and fifty (250) feet in length.

2.    The sign must be placed at least five (5) feet from edge of roadway pavement.

3.    The sign may not be closer than thirty (30) feet to another freestanding or monument sign or to a shingle (projecting) sign.

4.    The sign may not exceed six (6) feet in height.

E.    Shingle or Projecting Sign. A shingle or projecting sign shall conform to the following requirements:

1.    The sign may not exceed four (4) square feet in area.

2.    The sign may not be more than six (6) feet in height.

3.    The sign may not project above an apparent eave or parapet, including the eave of a simulated mansard roof.

7.9.50 Allowed Signs
The following signs are allowed in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    Unless prohibited by this Chapter, street address numbers and nameplates, not over two (2) square feet in area, displaying the name of the occupant at the address. The sign lettering must conform to all pertinent Fire Department requirements.

B.    Public information, identification, and directional signs erected or required by a public agency.

C.    Notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agency in the performance of a public duty or by any person giving due legal notice. Such notices shall be removed within thirty (30) days following the resolution of the item being noticed.

D.    City entry and community identification signs installed by the City.

E.    Unless prohibited by this Chapter, construction signs with a cumulative surface area of less than six (6) square feet and five (5) feet in height (such signs shall be removed before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued).

F.    Unless prohibited by this Chapter, two temporary on-site real estate signs, each not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, and less than six (6) feet in height that advertises the sale, lease or rental of a structure or land. The sign shall be removed within seven (7) working days following the sale, lease or rental of the property. Open house signs shall be removed within a twenty-four (24) hour period following the conclusion of the open house.

G.    On-premises parking or other directional signs, not exceeding one double-faced sign per entrance and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height. These signs are not permitted to contain advertising material.

H.    Name of the building, date of erection, commemorative tablet and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type material and made an integral part of the structure. Such signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in area.

I.    The flag(s) of the United States, State of California, or other flags mounted or flown no higher than the maximum building height of that Zone District and with a cumulative total area not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet.

J.    Holiday displays and lights so long as they are erected for a cumulative period of not more than ninety (90) days.

K.    Two (2) garage or yard sale signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet in surface area each, and erected for not more than three (3) days.

L.    A temporary noncommercial sign for less that forty-five (45) days, once per year, and placed by the property owner. Temporary noncommercial signs placed on property owned by others are allowed with the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8.

M.    Signage required for health and safety as determined by the City.

N.    Non-conforming signs that are legal nonconforming are subject to the requirements of this Chapter.

O.    Uses within the Open Space Recreation and Open Space Conservation Zones may employ a single identification sign at each public entrance not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet on either side.

P.    Open Space Resource Production uses are permitted to display only that signage required by law.

7.9.60 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    Signs determined to be unsafe, a danger to the public, or a traffic hazard by the Community Development Director or City Engineer.

B.    Off-site or off-premise signs, other than those exempted by Section 7.9.50 with the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit.

C.    Signs on public property, unless otherwise permitted by this Chapter.

D.    Portable A-frame or sidewalk signs, other than those exempted by Section 7.9.50 with the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit.

E.    Three-dimensional objects or statues including air or gas-filled objects used as a sign.

F.    Abandoned signs.

G.    Roof signs.

H.    Revolving, flashing, fluttering, spinning or reflective signs, or signs not consistent with the color palette maintained by the City.

I.    Banner signs other than those exempted by Section 7.9.50 with the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit.

J.    Lighted signs.

K.    All other signs not permitted by this Chapter.

Chapter 7.10 Animal Keeping Development Standards
7.10.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance and development standards and the findings required to modify an applicable development standard for animal keeping activities and development.

7.10.20 Applicability of this Chapter
Animal keeping is only permitted in the R-A Zone District.

7.10.30 Performance Standards for Animal Keeping Development
Animal keeping development must conform to the following performance standards to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety.

A.    Maintenance of Community Character, Views and Privacy. The design and placement of any structure or improvement for the keeping of animals must facilitate the maintenance of community character, views and privacy.

B.    Portable Facilities. The construction, placement, and use of portable facilities including, but not limited to, fences, structures used for the storage of animal feed, and animal shelters must be in conformance with all of the provisions of this Chapter.

C.    Water Runoff. All animal-keeping facilities must be designed in a manner so that water runoff is contained and disposed of and does not contribute to the pollution of local groundwater or the flooding of adjacent properties.

D.    Pollution Control. Pens, corrals, stables and other animal keeping facilities shall employ appropriate controls to facilitate the control, containment, and removal of animal waste.

E.    Open Water Containers or Standing Water. Open watering containers must be designed so that they do not become breeding grounds for mosquito larvae. Standing water is not permitted.

F.    Feed Storage. Feed storage facilities must be designed and constructed of materials to ensure that such feed is not an attractant to insects, rodents and other vectors.

G.    Health and Safety Code. Animal-keeping development shall comply with applicable Los Angeles County health and safety codes.

7.10.40 Development Standards for Animal Keeping Development
This section implements the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies regarding development for keeping of animals. Animal keeping is only allowed within the R-A Zone District. Further animal keeping regulations are identified in Article 4.

A.    Allowed Numbers of Animals. The maximum number of large animals, including horses, donkeys, mules, other equine, cattle and cows permitted on any parcel may not exceed one (1) per five thousand (5,000) square feet up to a maximum of ten (10) per contiguous property under single ownership. The maximum number of small animals, including miniature horses, sheep and goats permitted on any parcel may not exceed one (1) per five (5,000) square feet up to a maximum of ten (10) per contiguous property under single ownership. No swine may be kept on any property, except: (a) pot-bellied or miniature variety kept as pets and weighing less than one hundred (100) pounds; and (b) no more than two (2) swine under the age of six (6) months for use in a 4-H, FFA or similar project.

Table 7-5
Space Requirements and Limits on Large and Small Animals 

Type of Animal

Number of Animals Permitted

Large animals including: horses, donkeys, mules, other equine, cattle and cows

One (1) large animal over nine (9) months of age for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area up to a maximum of ten (10) per property. A minimum lot size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet is required for the keeping of large animals.

Small animals including sheep, goats, and miniature horses

One (1) over nine (9) months of age for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area up to a maximum of ten (10) per property. The minimum parcel size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet is required for the keeping of small animals.

Swine, including pot belly pigs (PBPs)

Swine, including pot belly pigs (PBPs) or miniature pigs or maximum of two (2) under six (6) months of age for use in project on any property of area greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. (Ord. #2007-01, § 3)

B.    Stables, Corrals, Riding Arenas, Pens and Enclosures. Stables, corrals, pens, enclosures or other structures used for animal keeping, whether permanent or portable, are permitted only on lots that have a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Riding arenas are permitted only on lots that have a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No such stable, corral, riding ring, pen, or enclosure or other animal keeping structure shall be located in any required yard area (refer to Exhibit 7-2).

C.    Environmental Management. Facilities for large animal keeping uses (pens, stables, corrals, arenas, etc.) must utilize design measures to prevent animal waste runoff. Provisions must be made for the collection, storage and disposal of such waste pursuant to the provisions of an Animal Keeping Permit.



Exhibit 7-2. Animal Keeping Uses Setbacks and Waste Impoundment

(Ord. 2007-01 § 3)

7.10.50 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Animal Keeping Standards
In addition to the general findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a standards modification relating to animal keeping.

A.    The design and placement of any proposed structure or improvement for the keeping of animals or the number of animals per property over the maximum number permitted in this Chapter, will not impair the maintenance of community character, views, privacy, or public health and safety.

B.    The proposed animal keeping facilities or the number of animals per property over the maximum number permitted in this Chapter, will not result in any adverse impact on the neighboring properties or the environment such as waste runoff, noise, light and glare, odors or fugitive dust.

Chapter 7.11 Setback and Yard Use Standards
7.11.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standard for setbacks and yard uses.

7.11.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all land uses, structures, and lots in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the applicable Zone District.

7.11.30 Performance Standards for Yards
All new development and modifications to existing structures must adhere to the City’s setback and yard use performance standards designed to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety. The following performance standards are applicable to setback and yard uses:

A.    Maintenance of Views, Privacy, Community Character, and Public Health and Safety. All lot development and the attendant setback and yard use requirements shall be implemented in a manner that will promote the maintenance of views, privacy, community character and public health and safety.

B.    Encroachments May be Permitted. Many existing parcels were developed prior to the City’s incorporation. In these instances, the strict application of the development standards contained herein may be unreasonable or may result in development that is more detrimental to applicable performance standards (excessive grading, loss of views, elimination of landscaping, etc.). As a means to permit the improvement of existing structures while adhering to the performance standards, encroachments into the setbacks may be allowed subject to review and imposition of conditions. (Ord. 2015-01 § 12)

7.11.40 Development Standards for Yards
This Section defines the development standards for setbacks and yard uses. Further, this Section implements the City of La Habra Heights General Plan’s goals and policies as they relate to setbacks and uses of the yard areas. All new structures and projects consisting of modifications to existing structures shall comply with the requirements of the applicable Zone District in the absence of a standards modification request.

A.    Encroachment of Structures Prohibited. Portions of any structure(s), including eaves and roof overhangs, shall not extend beyond a property line or into an access easement or street right-of-way.

B.    Measurement of Setbacks. Setback lines used for the delineation of required yard areas shall be established as follows:

1.    The front yard setback line comprises all points located a specified distance, measured at right angles, from any property line having frontage along any street or private road.

2.    The other yard setback lines comprise all points located a specified distance, measured at right angles, from property lines other than a front yard property line (refer to Exhibit 7-3).

3.    The setbacks for a multiple-lot development must be varied as indicated in Chapter 7.14.



Exhibit 7-3. Structure Setbacks and Required Yards R-A Zone

C.    Determination of Yards. For those parcels where the location of yards or setback areas are not clearly defined, the following shall apply:

1.    On lots where the provisions of this Article do not clearly establish location of yards and lot lines, the Community Development Director shall make the determination of the required setback lines (refer to Exhibit 7-3).

2.    For those parcels where a private residential access road traverses the parcel, the setbacks are measured from the easement lines as if they are property lines (refer to Exhibit 7-4).

3.    For flag lots, the front yard is that portion of the lot that connects with the access road.



Exhibit 7-4. Setbacks and Yards Fronting Public Roads and Private Residential Roads and Driveways for R-A Zone

D.    Parking Setbacks. The setback requirements for parking areas and driveways are provided in Table 7-6.

Table 7-6

Minimum Setback Requirements for Driveways1 and Parking Areas 

Zone District

Front Setback

Other Setback

Residential-Agricultural Zone (R-A Zone)

10 ft.

10 ft.

Institutional Overlay Zone (IO Zone)

35 ft.

25 ft.

Open Space-Resource Production Zone (OS-RP Zone)

35 ft.

25 ft.

Open Space-Recreation Zone (OS-R Zone)

35 ft.

25 ft.

Open Space-Conservation Zone (OS-C Zone)

35 ft.

25 ft.

1. Does not apply to that portion of a driveway that provides access from the right-of-way.

E.    Setback Standards for Structures. The required setbacks applicable to new development within all Zone Districts are listed in Table 7-7.

 

Table 7-7

Minimum Setback Requirements for Structures 

Zone District

Front Setback

Other Setback

 

1st Floor

2nd Floor

1st Floor

2nd Floor

Residential-Agricultural (Zone RA)

35 ft.

35 ft.

25 ft.

25 ft.

Institutional Overlay Zone

60 ft.

70 ft.

40 ft.

50 ft.

Open Space-Resource Production (Zone OS-RP)

100 ft.

NA

100 ft.

NA

Open Space-Recreation (Zone OS-R)

50 ft.

60 ft.

40 ft.

45 ft.

Public Facilities (Zone PF)

50 ft.

50 ft.

40 ft.

40 ft.

F.    Variable Setback Standards. In addition to the minimum setback requirements shown in Table 7-7, those portions of residential structures located in an RA zone that exceed eighteen (18) feet in height shall be subject to the following:

1.    Front Setbacks. The minimum required front setbacks shall be the sum of the following: (35 feet) + [(height of structure minus 18) * (1.4)].

2.    All Other Setbacks. The minimum required setback for non-front setbacks shall be the sum of the following: (25 feet) + [(height of structure in feet minus 18) * (1.1)].

G.    Access Gates. Gates for vehicles must be setback a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from the roadway edge of pavement. (Ord. 2019-02 § 3; Ord. 2015-01 § 13; Ord. 2012-04 §§ 1, 2)

7.11.50 Uses and Development Permitted and Prohibited in Yards
This Section identifies permitted and prohibited development within yards and setback areas.

A.    Development Permitted. The following are permitted in the required setback areas (yards).

1.    Landscaping, garden paths, and/or steps are permitted in all yard areas.

2.    Retaining walls and graded slopes are permitted subject to the following requirements:

a.    Retaining walls less than three (3) feet in height above grade and used for landscaping and decorative purposes may encroach into the required yards.

b.    For retaining walls and cut or fill slopes three (3) feet in height or greater, the minimum setback distance of any portion of any cut, fill or retaining wall from any property line is three (3) times its visible height at that point but not more than the baseline required setback.

3.    Certain architectural features attached to the main structure may extend into a required setback area as specified in Table 7-8.

Table 7-8

Allowable Encroachments into Yards 

Projections

Setback Encroachment

Bay Windows and Similar Projections

24-inches

12 ft. in width

Chimney and Fireplace

24-inches

8 ft. in width

Cornice, Eave, Awning, or Roof Overhang

36-inches

4.    Other uses may be allowed with the approval of a Standards Modification.

B.    Exemptions to the Requirements of this Section. Fences or walls not used for earth retention, six (6) feet or less in height above the finished grade of the fence or wall, may be used in all required yards. The fence or wall must also be setback a minimum of six (6) feet from the edge of any pavement of a roadway, public or private or shared multiple lot driveway. Any wall or fence located within a right-of way, or within six (6) feet of the edge of any pavement, must conform to the terms of an Encroachment Permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8. Barbed wire, razor ribbon and other security fencing materials are prohibited.

C.    Prohibited Uses in Yards. The following uses are prohibited in required yards unless a Standards Modification is obtained.

1.    Trash receptacles, except for fully screened enclosures located adjacent to the right-of-way and used for storage prior to the regular collection of trash.

2.    Air conditioning units, pool pumps, compressors and other mechanical equipment that generates noise. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 14, 16, 17)

7.11.60 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Yards and Setbacks
The General Findings required by Section 7.19.80 must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification.

Chapter 7.12 Landscaping Standards
7.12.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standards for landscaping.

7.12.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the Zone District.

7.12.30 Performance Standards for Landscaping
All new development and modifications of existing structures must adhere to the City’s landscaping performance standards designed to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety.

A.    View Enhancement and Protection. All development applications for approval of new residential construction, modifications of existing structures involving fifty (50) percent or more of the existing structure’s floor area, the addition of a second or higher story to an existing residential structure, or an increase of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, must include a landscaping plan submitted as part of the development application. For all other development applications, landscaping plans are required as determined by the Community Development Director to ensure that the visual impact of new structures and modifications to existing structures is softened by providing screening, privacy for adjoining structures, and preservation of the rural appearance of the community. Approved landscape plans shall be monitored to ensure they are implemented. Protected views enjoyed by residents shall be protected from unnecessary/unreasonable obstruction by any new development’s structures or landscape elements.

B.    Maintenance of Privacy. Landscaping must be designed, installed, and maintained in such a manner to preserve the privacy of adjacent properties.

C.    Reduction of Light Trespass. Landscaping should consist of materials that reduce potential light and glare impacts on adjacent properties.

D.    Landscaping on Graded Surfaces. Landscaping shall be adequate to prevent grading-induced erosion and to restore the look of the natural terrain.

E.    Landscaping for Screening. Landscaping must be used to screen all retaining and other walls, parking areas, and other hardscape areas. Landscaping shall screen obtrusive structures, provide privacy and soften the impact of new development.

F.    Preservation of Significant Trees. Existing significant trees shall be preserved whenever possible.

G.    Invasive Plants Prohibited. Invasive plant species listed on the plant palette shall not be allowed on any landscape plan nor planted on any property. A list of such plants is maintained by the Planning Division or the California Native Plant Society. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 18, 19; Ord. 2009-08 § 1)

7.12.40 Development Standards for Landscaping
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to landscaping as a means to protect views, privacy, and community and neighborhood character.

A.    Landscaping and Irrigation Plan Required. A Landscaping and Irrigation Plan is required for any project that will result in the following: alteration of any yard associated with new construction; modifications of existing structures involving fifty (50) percent or more of the existing structure’s floor area; the addition of a second or higher story to an existing residential structure; or an increase of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. For projects of these types, the plans shall be provided as part of the application package submitted to the City as required by Article 8. The requirement for a Landscaping and Irrigation Plan for all other development projects shall be at the discretion of the Community Development Director, and a Landscape and Irrigation Plan shall not be required if no new or modified landscaping and irrigation is proposed.

B.    Minimum Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping that screens the residence and all other structures from the street and neighboring residences must be provided in the front and other yards. Landscaping shall be provided in the following locations:

1.    All required setback areas pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 7.11, except where a required setback is occupied by the access portion of a driveway, shall be landscaped.

2.    Those areas used for fire control and/or erosion control more than five (5) feet from the edge of pavement of the adjacent streets shall be landscaped and maintained.

C.    Landscape Materials. The following requirements are applicable to landscape materials:

1.    Plant materials shall not consist of invasive species that will affect natural areas.

2.    Plant materials used in any landscaping must conform to Fuel Modification Zone requirements specified in Article 4.

3.    Existing on-site natural and/or landscape materials may be integrated into landscaping plans.

4.    A plant palette, which is maintained by the Planning Division, shall be used wherever possible.

D.    Use of Landscaping for Screening. On-site landscape materials must provide at least fifty percent (50%) screening, as certified by a licensed landscape architect, of all elevations of all structures and fences and retaining walls visible from the street and from other parcels, within five (5) years following completion of the project. The screening of the structures shall not adversely impact the distant views from the neighboring properties, public or private (refer to Exhibits 7-6 and 7-8).

Exhibit 7-6. Use of Landscaping for Screening

E.    Arrangement of Shrubs. Shrubs visible from adjacent private and public properties shall be arranged in broad, informal masses to produce a mounded, textured slope surface (refer to Exhibit 7-7).

F.    Arrangement of Trees. Tree plantings visible from adjacent private and public properties shall be placed on the property in a random (non-formal) manner in locations where they will be most effective in softening the impact of construction (refer to Exhibit 7-7).

Exhibit 7-7. Arrangement of Trees and Shrubs

G.    Protection of Views. Landscape materials must be selected to minimize the obstruction of protected views both at the time of planting and when the landscaping reaches maturity (refer to Exhibit 7-8). The consideration of the expected height and bulk of landscaping at maturity will take into account the selected plants and the City’s climate and growing conditions.



Exhibit 7-8 Landscaping and Obstruction of Significant Views

H.    Parking Area Landscaping Requirements. Parking areas in all Zone Districts must be screened from view from adjacent public and private properties including roads.

I.    Additional Parking Area Landscaping Requirements for Non-Residential Zones. For all parking lots containing more than ten (10) stalls or with a paved area of more than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, fifteen percent (15) of the total parking area shall be designed, constructed and maintained as landscaped areas. A minimum of three (3) trees per six (6) parking stalls shall be employed in addition to trees required for periphery screening.

J.    Landscaping for Erosion Control. All graded areas must be landscaped to control erosion and restore the look of the natural terrain. Landscaping, which may include trees, shrubs, and ground covers, shall be utilized immediately or before the next rainy season after grading to stabilize and hide all graded areas. All landscaping used for erosion control must be maintained and irrigated. Measures other than landscaping may be used for temporary erosion control prior to completion of construction.

K.    Fuel Modification Zones. Landscape plans must incorporate Fuel Modification Zone requirements as detailed in Article 4. These requirements are designed to lessen the potential for wildfire and must be maintained at all times.

L.    Public Safety. Within the public right-of-way, landscape plans must incorporate a landscape buffer zone for public safety in compliance with Section 4.4.20(D)(3). The Public Works Department may determine a larger buffer zone is required for public safety. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 20, 21; Ord. 2007-02 § 3)

7.12.50 Tree Preservation
Significant trees, as defined in this section, shall be conserved wherever possible.

A.    Identification of Significant Trees. Significant trees include the following:

1.    Trees that are at least twenty (20) inches in circumference measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the mean natural grade.

2.    Trees with more than one trunk whose combined circumference is at least thirty (30) inches as measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the mean natural grade.

3.    Any tree that is visible from grounds or structures off site and either screens structures from view of other properties or is required as part of a landscaping plan.

B.    Preservation of Significant Trees During Site Development. Significant trees shall be preserved where reasonably possible during grading, site development or other site work or construction activities.

C.    Tree Removal Permit is Required. No significant tree shall be removed or damaged without an approved Tree Removal Permit. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8. Tree removal in excess of that allowed by this Chapter without permit is subject to legal penalties as specified in Article 4. Up to four (4) non-significant trees or twenty-five (25) percent of the non-significant trees, whichever is less, may be removed in any single year without permit.

D.    Tree Replacement. The following tree removal requirements are applicable to all Zone Districts:

1.    The site plan and landscape plan for any new development must identify the trees that will be removed as part of the proposed development and indicate the location, size, species, and extent of the replacement trees.

2.    The tree replacement shall consist of trees of sufficient number and size so that the neighborhood character, views and privacy are restored or enhanced.

E.    Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply under the following conditions:

1.    Emergencies caused by trees being in a hazardous or dangerous condition as determined by City personnel.

2.    Emergency maintenance by a public utility necessary to protect or maintain an electric power or communication line or other property of a public utility.

3.    Repair and maintenance of existing parkways, highways, and streets and/or other public facilities.

4.    Routine maintenance intended to ensure the continued health of a tree, including the trimming of branches. (Ord. 2015-01 § 22)

7.12.60 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Landscaping
In addition to the General Findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification.

A.    The requested landscaping modification will not result in a nuisance.

B.    The requested modification does not result in any change in the Fuel Modification Zone requirements unless approved by the Fire Chief.

Chapter 7.12.5 Water Efficient Landscaping
7.12.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is:

A.    To establish water efficient landscape requirements that are at least as effective in conserving water as the model local water efficient landscape ordinance adopted by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) pursuant to Government Code Section 65595;

B.    To assure beneficial, efficient, and responsible use of water resources for all water users within the City of La Habra Heights;

C.    To recognize that landscapes enhance the aesthetic appearance of developments and communities;

D.    To encourage the appropriate design, installation, maintenance, and management of landscapes so that water demand can be decreased, runoff can be retained, and flooding can be reduced without a decline in the quality or quantity of landscapes;

E.    To preserve existing natural vegetation and the incorporation of native plants, plant communities and ecosystems into landscape design, where possible;

F.    To promote and encourage the use of low water use plants;

G.    To minimize the use of cool season turf;

H.    To promote the conservation of potable water by maximizing the use of recycled water and other water conserving technology for appropriate applications;

I.    To promote public education about water conservation and efficient water management; and

J.    To reduce or eliminate water waste. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.20 Definitions
"Amendments" means any material added to a soil to improve its physical properties, such as water retention, permeability, water infiltration, and drainage.

"Anti-drain check valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads when the system is off.

"Applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 7.12.5.70 to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City Engineer. Applicant can be the property owner or an agent of the property owner.

"Application rate" means the depth of water applied to a given area, measured in inches per minute, or inches per hour, or gallons per hour.

"Applied water," as used in estimated annual applied water use and maximum annual applied water allowance, means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

"Botanical gardens and arboretums" means gardens open to the public in which a variety of plants are grown for scientific and educational purposes.

"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited educational institution or a professional trade organization.

"Control valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. It may also mean all of the sprinklers or emitters in a line controlled by the valve.

"Controller" means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves or heads according to an irrigation schedule. A weather-based controller is a controller that uses evapotranspiration or weather data. A self-adjusting irrigation controller is a controller that uses sensor data (i.e., soil moisture sensor).

"Developer" means a property owner or an agent of the property owner responsible for the development of the property. Such property does not include a single-family home.

"Discretionary permit" means any permit requiring a decision-making body to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval, or disapproval.

"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

"Estimated annual applied water use" or "EAWU" means the portion of the estimated total water use that is derived from applied water. The EAWU is calculated according to the formula set out in the landscape documentation package. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

“Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

"Hydrozone" means a section or zone of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (i.e., inches per hour).

"Invasive species" means nonindigenous species that adversely affect the habitats they invade economically, environmentally, or ecologically.

"Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Chapter is 0.71.

"Irrigation system" means the network of piping, valves, and irrigation heads.

"Landscape architect" means a person licensed to practice landscape architecture in this State pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 06000&file=5615-5624" target="_top">5615) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.

"Landscape concept plan" means the portion of a landscape documentation package that includes a design statement, irrigation notes, planting notes, and the plant palette.

"Landscape construction drawings" means the portion of a landscape documentation package that includes the irrigation plan, plant and soils plan, and water management plan.

"Landscape documentation package" or "documentation package" means the complete packet of documents required under Sections 7.12.5.40 through 7.12.5.100 to be submitted to the City Engineer to apply for a permit for landscaping projects under this Chapter. Documentation packages include the landscape concept plan and landscape construction drawings.

"Landscape water audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. Audits include, but are not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity and verification of minimal overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

"Low-head drainage" means drainage from a sprinkler that is caused by water flowing down an irrigation system from a higher level of elevation.

"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, or inorganic material such as pebbles, stones, gravel, decorative sand or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

"Operating pressure" means the designed pressure of the sprinkler in an irrigation system, usually indicated at the base of a sprinkler.

"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area onto pavements, walks, structures, or other nonlandscaped areas.

"Planting plan" means a plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating a list and quantity of plants.

"Potable water" means water intended for human consumption that is treated to legal standards for human consumption.

"Pressure regulator" means a device used in sprinkler systems for radius and high pressure control.

"Project net landscape area," "landscaped area," "landscape project area," or "landscape" means all of the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

"Recycled water" means water that, as a result of treatment of waste water, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur and is therefore considered a valuable resource.

"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per month and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four (4) to seven (7) inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered.

"Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, and the modified landscape area is greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and is at least fifty (50) percent of the total landscaped area.

"Runoff" means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area.

"SMART irrigation controller" means a weather-based or soil moisture-based irrigation controller that monitors and uses information about the environmental conditions at a specific location and landscape to automatically adjust watering schedules.

"Soil management plan" means the plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating results from soil tests and recommended soil amendments.

"Soil test" means a test done by a soil test lab that indicates at minimum: soil texture, water holding capacity, pH, and soluble salts.

"Soil type" means the classification of soil based on the percentage of its composition of sand, silt, and clay.

"Special landscape area" means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses, where turf provides a playing surface.

"Sprinkler head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

"Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass or grass-like sedge with its roots, a groundcover surface of mowed grass, or grass-like sedge.

Common types of cool season turf are annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue.

Common types of warm season turf are Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass, Carex pansa, and buffalo grass.

"Water efficient landscape worksheet" means a worksheet which calculates a site's water budget.

"Water feature" means any water applied to the landscape for nonirrigation, decorative purposes. Fountains, streams, ponds, lakes, and swimming pools are considered water features.

"Water management plan" means a plan submitted with the construction drawings as part of the landscape documentation package.

"Water schedule" means a schedule of irrigation times throughout a given year. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.30 Applicability of Water Efficient Landscape Requirements
A.    After January 1, 2010, Sections 7.12.5.40 to 7.12.5.100 shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

1.    New construction and rehabilitation of landscapes for public agency projects and private developer projects with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Such projects will require a landscape permit.

2.    New construction and rehabilitation of landscapes for residential projects by developers with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Such projects will require a landscape permit.

3.    New landscapes for residential projects by individual homeowners with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet. Such projects will require a landscape permit.

4.    Existing landscapes equal to or greater than one (1) acre, with a dedicated or mixed use water meter. Such landscapes are limited to preparing a water efficient landscape worksheet according to the specifications for existing landscapes in the landscape documentation package.

5.    New and rehabilitated cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries shall require the preparation of a water efficient landscape worksheet, an irrigation maintenance schedule, and an irrigation audit, survey and water use analysis. Existing cemeteries are limited to preparing a water efficient landscape worksheet according to the specifications for existing landscapes in the Landscape Documentation Package.

B.    Sections 7.12.5.40 through 7.12.5.100 do not apply to:

1.    Registered local, State, or federal historical sites;

2.    Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3.    Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

4.    Botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.40 Landscape Design and Plant Requirements
A landscape documentation package prepared by a licensed landscape architect shall include the following landscape design criteria:

A.    Plant Selection and Grouping.

1.    Any plant may be used in the landscape, providing the estimated annual applied water use (EAWU) does not exceed the maximum annual applied water allowance (MAWA) and that the plants meet the specifications set forth in subsections (A)(2), (3), and (4) of this section.

2.    Plants having similar water needs shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

3.    Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climate, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of existing native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of appropriate trees is encouraged.

4.    Minimize the use of turf. Turf shall be used wisely in response to functional needs and shall not be planted if the EAWU exceeds the MAWA. Turf shall not be used on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent, as calculated by rise divided by run, if nonpermeable pavements are installed adjacent to the toe of the slope. Where turf is planted, the use of warm season turf is strongly encouraged.

5.    Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in fire-prone areas . Design should be consistent with regulations from the Fire Department and incorporate the defensible space as required by Public Resource Code Section 4291(a).

6.    The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged. Such plant species should be avoided especially near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies, and open spaces because of their potential to cause harm in sensitive areas.

B.    Water Features.

1.    Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

2.    Where available, recycled water shall be used as the source for decorative water features. Recycled water is not to be used for swimming pools and spas.

3.    Covers for swimming pools and spas are highly recommended.

4.    The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the MAWA and the EAWU calculations. For the purposes of the water use calculation sheet, water features are deemed to have the highest plant category, which is equivalent to an average plant factor of 0.8.

C.    Mulch.

1.    A minimum two (2) inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

2.    Stabilizing mulch shall be planted on slopes. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.50 Irrigation Requirements
A.    All irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff, overspray, low-head drainage and other similar conditions. Soil types and infiltration rates shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall be designed, constructed, managed, and maintained to achieve the maximum possible overall efficiency.

B.    A dedicated landscape water meter shall be installed for each landscape project greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet, except for single-family residences. Dedicated landscape water meters are also highly recommended on landscape areas less than five thousand (5,000) square feet to facilitate water management.

C.    All irrigation systems shall include:

1.    A SMART irrigation controller, or other equivalent technology which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather conditions. The planting areas shall be grouped and irrigated in relation to hydrozones based on similarity of water requirements (i.e., turf separate from shrub and groundcover, full sun exposure areas separate from shade areas, top of slope separate from toe of slope);

2.    Anti-drain check valves to prevent low-head drainage in sprinkler heads;

3.    A pressure regulator to prevent the static water pressure from exceeding the maximum recommended operating pressure of the irrigation system; and

4.    Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation during unfavorable weather conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during wind, freeze, or rain.

D.    Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance as provided by Section 7.12.5.90. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.60 Soil and Grading Requirements
A.    To ensure the selection of appropriate plants suitable for the site, soil testing shall be performed prior to the installation of landscaping and reported in a soil management plan. The soil management plan shall include:

1.    A determination of soil texture, indicating the available water holding capacity;

2.    An approximate soil infiltration rate, either measured or derived from soil texture/infiltration rate tables, indicating a range of infiltration rates where appropriate;

3.    The measure of pH, total soluble salts, and sodium; and

4.    Any recommended amendments to the soil.

B.    Grading on site shall be designed to minimize unnecessary soil compaction, erosion and water waste. Grading plans must satisfy the City ordinances relating to grading and be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.70 Implementation
Applicants subject to the requirements of Sections 7.12.5.40 to 7.12.5.100 of this Chapter shall submit a complete landscape documentation package to the City Engineer. The application may be submitted in two parts: (A) a landscape concept plan, which is submitted with a discretionary permit application or when otherwise required by the City Engineer, and (B) landscape construction drawings, submitted as a ministerial application. All applications and plans shall conform to the plant, irrigation, and water budget formula requirements set forth in this Chapter and the landscape documentation package.

A.    Landscape concept plan shall include:

1.    Design statement;

2.    Irrigation notes;

3.    Planting notes;

4.    Conceptual plant palette identifying proposed hydrozones; and

5.    The MAWA calculation for the landscape project area.

B.    Landscape Construction Drawings.

1.    Landscape construction drawings shall include:

a.    An irrigation plan;

b.    A planting and soils plan; and

c.    A water management plan with detailed notes and legends necessary for a complete landscape plan review.

2.    The landscape construction drawings shall be consistent with the landscape concept plan. If the City Engineer determines that the landscape construction drawings significantly differ from the landscape concept plan, the applicant must resubmit an overall water budget calculation in accordance with the landscape documentation package.

C.    Irrigation plan shall include pressure calculations and the location, installation details, and specifications of control valves, irrigation heads, piping, irrigation controllers, and power supply.

D.    Planting plan shall include:

1.    A description of any existing plant material to be retained or removed;

2.    A plan showing the planting areas and hydrozones, plant spacing, plant location and size, natural features, water features and all paved areas;

3.    A legend listing the common and botanical plant names and total quantities by container size and species;

4.    A description of the seed mixes with application rates and relevant germination specifications;

5.    Soil management plan, including the soil test results and recommendations; and

6.    A grading plan, submitted for reference.

E.    Water management plan shall include:

1.    An introduction and statement of site conditions or a landscape concept plan;

2.    The party(ies) responsible for implementation of the water management plan;

3.    The anticipated water requirements in inches per year, and water budget for the various hydrozones identified in the landscape concept plan, including calculations demonstrating an overall water budget that requires irrigation of no more than the 0.7 of the ETo adjustment factor;

4.    A description of the water delivery systems, including the type of irrigation system to be used, water conservation methods to be applied, and precipitation rates for each hydrozone; and

5.    Seasonal irrigation water schedules or procedures for programming of proposed SMART controllers. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.80 Compliance and Enforcement
The City Engineer or designee shall have the duty and authority to administer and enforce this Chapter.

A.    Prior to the issuance of a permit for a project subject to Sections 7.12.5.40 through 7.12.5.100, a complete landscape documentation package prepared by an independent licensed landscape architect shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. The licensed landscape architect shall ensure that all components of the package adhere to the requirements of Sections 7.12.5.40 through 7.12.5.100. Any documentation packages submitted without the signature of a licensed landscape architect shall not be accepted for review.

The decision of the City Engineer to grant or deny a permit for a landscape project will be final unless appealed according to the appeal procedure set out in Chapter 8.6.

B.    Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection for a project subject to Sections 7.12.5.40 through 7.12.5.100, a certificate of completion shall be submitted to the City Engineer, certifying that the landscaping has been completed in accordance with the approved planting and irrigation plans for the project. The certificate of completion shall be signed by a licensed landscape architect and shall indicate that:

1.    The landscaping has been installed in conformance with the approved planting and irrigation plans;

2.    The SMART irrigation controller has been set according to the irrigation schedule;

3.    The irrigation system has been adjusted to maximize irrigation efficiency and eliminate overspray and runoff; and

4.    A copy of the irrigation schedule has been given to the property owner.

C.    Upon notice of the applicant, the City Engineer shall have the right to enter the project site to conduct inspections for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter before, during, and immediately after installation of the landscaping.

D.    A copy of the completed landscape documentation package shall be given to the the City Engineer. If the property is found to be exceeding its established MAWA, the property shall be subject to a landscape water audit by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.90 Irrigation Audit and Maintenance
A.    When submitting the certificate of completion to the City Engineer, the project applicant seeking a permit for new construction or rehabilitation of a landscape, as described in Section 7.12.5.40, shall submit a report of an irrigation audit conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. The irrigation audit may include, but is not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

B.    A landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule shall also be submitted with the certificate of completion. The landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning and weeding in all landscape areas, and obstruction to emission devices.

C.    Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.100 Recycled Water
A.    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (i.e., dual distribution systems) is required, unless a written exemption has been granted by the City Engineer stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards will not be available in the foreseeable future.

B.    The recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all City, County, and State codes. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.110 Stormwater Management
A.    Stormwater management combines practices to minimize runoff and water waste to recharge groundwater, and to improve water quality. Project applicants are highly encouraged to implement stormwater best management practices into the landscape, irrigation, and grading design plans to minimize runoff, and effectively retain and reuse stormwater in landscaping.

B.    For effective stormwater management, project applicants shall refer to the Department of Public Works or the Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on other stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.120 Water Waste Prevention
A.    Runoff shall not leave the target landscape due to low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

B.    Failure to comply with subsection A of this section can result in the assessment of civil or administrative fines up to one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars. Willful or repeat offenses of subsection A of this section can result in revocation of permit provided under this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

7.12.5.130 Public Education
A.    Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management, and maintenance that save water are encouraged in the community.

The City Engineer shall provide information to owners of new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management and maintenance of water efficient landscapes.

B.    Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this Chapter.

1.    Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape, featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient landscape theme.

2.    Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1 (Exh. A))

Chapter 7.13 Parking and Access Standards
7.13.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standard for parking and site access.

7.13.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the Zone District.

7.13.30 Performance Standards for Parking and Access
All new development and modifications to existing structures must adhere to the City’s parking and access performance standards designed to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety.

A.    Off-street Parking. Sufficient off-street parking must be provided to accommodate the demand generated by the use. Areas providing off-street parking must be readily accessible, well designed, secure, maintained, and screened from adjacent properties.

B.    Safety. Off-street parking, and the access to such areas, must be designed so as to prevent queuing, traffic congestion, and other roadway hazards. Access for emergency vehicles must also be considered in the design of off-street parking areas.

C.    Environmental Effects. Off-street parking areas must be designed and located so as to protect neighboring residential uses from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic as well as any secondary impacts related to the use of the parking areas.

D.    Community and Neighborhood Character. The existing driveways in La Habra Heights generally reflect the local topography. New driveways should be similarly constructed. (Ord. 2015-01 § 23)

7.13.40 Development Standards for Parking and Access
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to parking and access as a means to protect views, privacy, and community and neighborhood character. Emergency vehicle access and turn around space must be designed for all development regardless of Zone District.

A.    Off-street Parking Required for Residential Development. New residential development must provide on-site (off-street) parking sufficient to serve the development. In addition, the application for any modification to an existing structure requiring discretionary review must include a review of the adequacy of existing off-street parking. The parking requirements indicated in this section and summarized in Table 7-9, shall apply to residential uses including homecare (for twelve (12) or fewer persons):

1.    Every residential unit shall provide a minimum of six (6) parking spaces of which at least two (2) parking spaces must be in an enclosed garage.

2.    For any residential development having more than four (4) bedrooms, one (1) additional parking space will be required for each additional bedroom beyond the first four bedrooms.

3.    For residences that have a living area in excess of 6,000 square feet, one additional parking space will be required for each additional 1,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.

4.    Residential driveways must provide a minimum paved width of twelve (12) feet and graded width of fifteen (15) feet unless lesser widths are approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief.

5.    Residential driveways and parking areas must provide sufficient area on-site to accommodate vehicle turn around.

6.    Residential access must be limited to a single driveway with no more than two access points on a single road.

B.    Off-Street Parking Required for Nonresidential Development. All nonresidential land uses and development within the City are required to provide on-site parking sufficient to serve the patrons and/or employees as summarized in Table 7-9. The following minimum parking requirements are applicable to non-residential uses:

1.    Any elementary school or pre-school, public or private, must provide a minimum of one (1) parking space per classroom and one additional space for every three hundred (300) square feet of office and/or administrative use. The design of the parking and on-site circulation must prevent the queuing of traffic within a public right-of-way.

2.    The parking requirements for institutions are one of the following, whichever is greater:

a.    One (1) parking space for every three (3) fixed seats within the sanctuary.

b.    One (1) parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of floor area devoted to the primary assembly use.

c.    One (1) parking space per every three (3) persons where the maximum occupancy load has been determined by the City of La Habra Heights Fire Department.

3.    The parking requirements for recreational uses will include the following where applicable:

a.    One (1) parking space for every three (3) fixed seats of assembly areas.

b.    One (1) parking space per every three (3) persons where the maximum occupancy load has been determined by the City of La Habra Heights Fire Department.

c.    One (1) parking space for every three-hundred (300) square feet of office and/or administrative areas.

d.    Six (6) spaces for each hole of a golf course.

e.    Any field recreational activity must provide one (1) square foot of parking area for every one (1) square foot of field area.

4.    All resource production uses shall meet all of the following requirements where applicable.

a.    One (1) parking space for every seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of land area.

b.    One (1) parking space for every two-hundred (200) square feet of office or administrative areas.

c.    Separate parking must be provided for special equipment and vehicles routinely parked at the facility.

5.    Overnight parking is prohibited at Institutions.

6.    Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall include parking spaces accessible to the handicapped in compliance with the parking requirements established by the State. The Planning Division maintains information on current requirements and space design.

7.    Driveways for nonresidential uses must provide separate ingress and egress lanes.

C.    Parking Space Design Standards. The following requirements are applicable to the design of all parking spaces regardless of Zone district.

1.    All parking spaces shall have a maximum grade of five (5%) percent, measured in any direction.

2.    Parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length.

3.    Covered or garage parking spaces shall have interior clear dimensions of ten (10) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in length with a minimum height clearance of seven (7) feet.

4.    All parking areas shall be constructed with an all-weather surface. The parking areas shall be completed and maintained to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

Table 7-9

Parking Standards 

Land Use

Minimum Standards

Additional Standards

Residential

•Minimum of 6 spaces (inc. 2 enclosed spaces)

•1 additional space for every additional bedroom more than 4

•1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of living area in excess of 6,000 sq. ft.

•Sufficient turn-around area must be provided.

Institutional Uses

•1 space for every 3 fixed seats, or

•1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of floor area devoted to assembly uses, or

•1 space for every 3 persons based on the occupancy load

•No overnight parking permitted.

•Separate ingress and egress lanes.

Recreational Uses

•6 spaces for every 1 golf course hole, or

•1 sq. ft. of parking for every 1 sq. ft. of field area

•1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of office

•1 space for every 3 fixed seats, or

•1 space for every 3 persons based on the occupancy load,

•No overnight parking permitted.

•Separate ingress and egress lanes.

Resource Production

•1 space for every 7,500 sq. ft. of land area.

•1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of office

•Separate off-street parking must be provided to meet the parking demand of special vehicles.

•Separate ingress and egress lanes.

D.    Landscaping for Parking Area Screening. All parking areas must be screened by landscaping so that the vehicles do not dominate the views from the public right-of-way or from the ground-level view from an adjacent property. View of the parking areas, driveways, garage doors, and parked vehicles must not dominate any view from the public right-of-way. The provision of parking must not be permitted to adversely impact the community character, privacy, and views from adjacent properties.

E.    Parking of Large Vehicles. Large vehicles including, but not limited to, motor homes and boats, must be parked on an approved parking surface and screened from view.

F.    Commercial Vehicle Parking. The parking and/or storage of commercial vehicles is prohibited in all areas except for: vehicles used for agricultural purposes; vehicles of less than one (1) ton used by a resident in connection with an off-site business; and equipment that is permitted pursuant to Chapter 7.3.20.

G.    Construction Equipment Parking. The parking, storage, or staging of construction equipment is permitted only during the construction of the improvements on the lot on which the equipment is located. (Ord. 2015-01 § 24)

7.13.50 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Parking
In addition to the General Findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification.

A.    The requested modification will not result in a nuisance with respect to the parking of vehicles.

B.    The requested modification will not result in the need for off-site parking.

Chapter 7.14 Lot Development Standards
7.14.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standard for all lot development. Lot development includes development of a single lot or of multiple lots.

7.14.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the Zone District.

7.14.30 Performance Standards for Lot Development
All new development and modifications to existing structures must adhere to the City’s lot development performance standards designed to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety.

A.    Primary Criterion. Lot development must be designed to minimize impacts on community character, the surrounding neighborhood and natural features.

B.    Design Considerations in Lot Development. The development and site plan review of lot development must consider potential alternative designs regarding the placement of structures and uses within the lot in order to optimally meet the goals and policies of the City of La Habra Heights General Plan.

C.    Environmental Impacts. Lot development shall have minimal adverse impacts on the environment, hydrology and natural topography including ridgelines.

D.    Drainage and Water Courses. Lot development must preserve or enhance natural storm water and other drainage courses and not result in negatively altered flows onto other properties.

E.    Grading. All lot and multi-lot development must employ a Grading and Earthworks plan that ensures that the structure conforms to the site rather than the reverse.

F.    Environmental Protection. Development shall minimize the loss of significant trees and not result in adverse impacts upon sensitive environmental features, natural topography, ridgelines, open space preserves or Open Space Conservation areas.

G.    Multiple-Lot Design. Multiple lot development must include a variety of architectural designs, styles and sizes. The development must be planned so as to avoid the uniformity typically seen in conventional tract development. (Ord. 2015-01 § 25)

7.14.40 Development Standards for Lot Development
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to all lot development as a means to protect views, privacy, and community and neighborhood character.

A.    Comprehensive Site Development Plan Review. Conceptual site development plans are required for new development that involves yard uses or modifies structural areas or heights that do not meet ministerial development standards. This review must identify any possible adverse impacts that may arise from that development as well as any existing development nonconformities. As part of any discretionary review of a proposed development, mitigation of existing conditions may be required to conform to the goals and policies of the City of La Habra Heights General Plan.

B.    Accessory Structures and Uses. Accessory structures and uses shall be located at different elevations and distances from each other and from the primary residence of not less than twenty (20) feet horizontally and a corresponding amount vertically based upon the slope of the lot, in order to conform to the existing topography. (Thus, for example, a horizontal offset of 20 feet would result in no vertical offset on a flat lot and a 10 foot vertical offset on a 2.1 sloped lot.)

C.    Selection of Development Site. Where there are multiple developable areas within a lot in compliance with the requirements of this Article, new development shall be placed in the area that has the least significant adverse impact on the natural surroundings, including ridgelines (refer to Exhibit 7-9). Applications for development approvals shall identify what alternative building areas were considered and why the proposed site was determined to have the least adverse impact on the surroundings, including natural topography (defined as that which existed prior to 1978), ridgelines, protected views, neighbor privacy and neighborhood and community character.

Exhibit 7-9 Significant Ridgelines

D.    Grading Requirements. The use of mass grading techniques in the creation of lot development areas, including grading that creates large linear of planar surfaces continuous between lots or development areas, are prohibited. Contour grading and other techniques must be utilized to mimic the look of natural landform (Refer to Chapter 7.17).

E.    Remediation of Existing Nonconformities. Existing nonconformities must be reviewed as part of any requested Standards Modification to ensure that the requested Standards Modification does not exacerbate the existing nonconformity. Potential remedies that may be required to correct an existing nonconformity that directly relates to the proposed project or adversely affecting health and safety may include, but not be limited to, those identified in Table 7-2.

F.    Storm Water Management. Provisions for storm water and other water runoff must be planned for the entire development in a comprehensive manner. Storm water and drainage requirements must not only conform to any SUSMP requirements but must also conform to the City Storm Water Management Program (CSWMP) requirements. These include, but may not be limited to, the following:

1.    The development must maintain or improve the site’s existing runoff characteristics.

2.    All development resulting in more than one-thousand (1,000) square feet, but less than three-thousand (3,000) square feet of new hardscape or other impervious surface shall be subject to SUSMP requirements. These will include, but not limited to, onsite retention of storm water runoff.

3.    All development that results in a net increase in the hardscape or impervious area of three-thousand (3,000) square feet or greater will require application of SUSMP to consider both existing and new development areas within the development site.

4.    Runoff after the initial SUSMP required retention must be distributed over the property and released in a manner that approximates or improves upon the distribution and manner existing prior to the development. Additionally, swales and other similar devices may be used to contain and percolate runoff up to and beyond SUSMP required limits. All sport courts must be designed for safe release of post SUSMP runoff water. Areas used by animals regulated by this Municipal Code must be graded in such a manner to adequately impound and/or control water runoff pursuant to the applicable SUSMP or NPDES requirements.

5.    No routine disposal of any water onto roads will be allowed.

6.    All streets, driveways and vehicle parking areas are considered to be hardscape. Gravel parking areas are not permitted within those areas where gravel could be transported into the public road.

7.    All new development or redevelopment projects, as defined by Section 4.16.90(L)(1), shall comply with the low impact development requirements of the Municipal NPDES Permit, as required by Section 4.16.90(L)(2).

G.    Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles and enclosures visible from the adjacent right-of-way or adjacent properties must be fully screened.

H.    Siting of Waste Disposal. The siting of on-site liquid waste disposal systems must be set back from storm water drainage courses, blue line streams, surface water areas or other areas that may be subject to periodic flooding such as in canyon bottoms.

I.    Property Address. The address of the property must be clearly visible from the access road. All lettering must be at least five (5) inches in height.

J.    Right-of-Way (ROW) and Parkway Maintenance and Encroachment. Plans must be prepared for maintenance of Parkway and ROW and an Encroachment Permit obtained for any encroachment into those areas. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8.

K.    Existing Code Violations. Existing Building Code violations must be remedied before or as part of the proposed development.

L.    Open Space Conservation. Development adjacent to Open Space Conservation property must include notification of the owner of that property of restrictions on development including prohibitions on creating access trails onto the conservation property, the use of invasive plant species, the use of animal forage plantings, provision of water accessible to wildlife, and light trespass.

M.    Variable Setbacks. Simultaneous development of more than one parcel shall provide that structural front yard setbacks not be uniform within the developments but must vary by at least thirty (30) percent between adjacent lots to avoid uniformity (refer to Exhibit 7-10). Similarly, other yard setbacks must exhibit non-uniformity between parcel developments.

N.    Variable Structure Design. Simultaneous development of more than one parcel must exhibit variable architectural styles and building footprint varying by at least thirty (30) percent between adjacent primary residential structures (refer to Exhibit 7-10).

O.    Roadway Design. Roadway construction required for subdivisions or multiple-lot development must use existing La Habra Heights roadways as their standard and must provide access infrastructure. New roadway cross-sections cannot exceed the existing roadway cross-sections in the area and shall similarly conform to the alignments that are representative of the area (refer to Exhibit 7-10). Modifications to existing roadways that would require a change in the roadway designation that would result in a significant impact or a change in the level of service, are not permitted.

Exhibit 7-10. Multiple Lot Development Standards

P.    Roadway Capacity. Any alteration or modification to a roadway providing access to the development will not be permitted to adversely impact the character of the neighborhood.

Q.    Environmental Protection. Lot development shall not adversely impact any environmentally significant features, open space preserves, Open Space Conservation areas or areas with significant environmental species. The species identified on the State of California Natural Diversity Database and those sensitive habitats identified and mapped by Los Angeles County are available at the Planning Division.

R.    Infrastructure Requirements. All utility services, including cable, must be placed underground. This requirement does not apply to solar systems. Further, hydrologic studies for storm water and other water runoff must be performed for the entire development to assess and mitigate cumulative impacts. Similarly, solid and liquid waste handling must be planned for the entire development and any adverse cumulative effect prevented.

S.    Fire Protection. Special requirements related to hydrants, fire-flow, water pressure, and emergency access designed to facilitate fire prevention and suppression may be required as identified during the development review process.

T.    Modifications Not Allowed. Pre-existing legal parcels of less than an acre that were created as water tank sites or for other nonresidential purposes may be developed only if such development requires no Standards Modifications or Variances beyond those for structure height and size and setbacks as described in Chapter 7.18.

U.    Development in Hazard Areas. Development in flood or seismic hazard zones must demonstrate that mitigation can be implemented. Such documentation must be provided by certified and/or licensed professionals for the respective discipline.

1.    Active Fault Line. For those parcels located within the designated Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone (APSSZ) for the Whittier Fault, all new habitable development (pursuant to the definition of the APSSZ) must comply with applicable APSSZ requirements. Maps indicating the APSSZ provided by the California Geological Survey are on file at the Community Development Department.

2.    Drainage Channel. Existing hydrologic characteristics of a site must be identified on the Development Application. No structures or grading may be constructed within twenty (20) feet of the high water line of a designated blue line stream or storm water drainage channel. Lesser setbacks may be permitted if it can be demonstrated by a qualified engineer that such development or grading will not result in any adverse alteration to the surface or subsurface drainage characteristics of the parcel. The placement of any structures adjacent to a blue line stream must conform to the applicable Streambed Alteration Permit requirements of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers.

3.    Septic Tanks/SUSMP Requirements. Septic tanks, dry wells, cesspools, leach lines, retention basins or cisterns must be set back a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the down-slope property line or from any storm water drainage channel. The setback requirements herein do not supersede any other requirements governing the installation or use of septic tanks or any pertinent Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSUMP) Ordinance requirements. (More information is available through Los Angeles County Department of Public Works.)

4.    Flood and Slope Dedications and Easements. No development or grading is permitted within any recorded flood or slope dedication or easement that would be in violation of the terms of the recorded dedication or easement.

V.    Slope Density Requirements. All new parcels must conform to the Slope Density Formula that governs minimum new residential parcel sizes (refer to Table 7-9.1). No new residential parcel may be created that has a net area of less than one acre. New Open Space-Resource Production parcels must be a minimum of five (5) acres, except that pursuant to a lawful subdivision in compliance with Article 9, Open-Space Resource Production parcels of not less than 2 acres may be created where:

1.    the average slope of the parcel to be subdivided is less than 10%;

2.    the parcel is surrounded by existing development on all sides; and

3.    the uses, including all well heads, parking and other activities on the site, remain fully screened from the view of adjacent properties, including the public right-of-way.

This requirement is not subject to relaxation by a standards modification.

Table 7-9.1

Slope Density Provisions for New Subdivision of Land 

(Percentages Must Be Rounded to the Next Whole Number)

Average Slope of a New Parcel to Be Created by the Proposed Subdivision

Minimum Lot Area in Gross Acres

Less Than 30%

1.00 (43,560 sq. feet)

30%

1.06 (46,174 sq. feet)

31%

1.13 (46,223 sq. feet)

32%

1.21 (52,708 sq. feet)

33%

1.30 (56,628 sq. feet)

34%

1.44 (62,726 sq. feet)

35%

1.61 (70,132 sq. feet)

36%

1.84 (80,150 sq. feet)

37%

2.14 (93,218 sq. feet)

38%

2.55 (111.078 sq. feet)

39%

3.16 (137,650 sq. feet)

40%

4.00 (174,240 sq. feet)

41% and above

5.00 (215,800 sq. feet)

W.    Parcel Size and Dimensions. For newly created parcels, seventy-five (75) percent of that parcel’s land area must conform to the minimum dimension requirements specified in Exhibit 7-12. For example, a portion of a one (1) acre parcel must have a minimum dimension of one-hundred and fifty (150) feet in all directions and must be at least seventy-five (75) percent of the parcel’s land area (or three-quarters (3/4) of an acre).

X.    Limit on Variances and Modification. Applications for tract and parcel maps must demonstrate that the resulting lots may be developed without requiring any Variance or Standards Modification other than those that may be required for building height and structural size as described in Chapter 7.18 or those that would have been required to develop the pre-existing lots.

Y.    Non-Uniform Parcel Frontage. The widths of all parcels’ frontage along roads must vary by more than thirty (30) percent between all adjacent parcels (refer to Exhibit 7-10).

 

MINIMUM PARCEL DIMENSIONS

(Based on formula ft. = 150 + 290*log A (number of acres)

Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum. Dimension (feet)

Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum. Dimension (feet)

Parcel Area (acres)

Minimum. Dimension (feet)

1

150

 

4

325

 

7

395

1.25

178

4.25

332

7.25

399

1.5

201

4.5

339

7.5

404

1.75

220

4.75

346

7.75

408

2

237

5

353

8

412

2.25

252

5.25

359

8.25

416

2.5

265

5.5

365

8.5

420

2.75

277

5.75

370

8.75

423

3

288

6

376

9

427

3.25

298

6.25

381

9.25

430

3.5

308

6.5

386

9.5

434

3.7

315

6.75

390

9.75

437

Exhibit 7-12. Minimum Parcel Dimensions

(Ord. 2015-01 §§ 26 – 28; Ord. 2014-01 § 3; Ord. 2009-08 § 3; Ord. 2008-07 § 1)

7.14.50 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification for Lot Development
In addition to the General Findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification:

A.    The composite effect of all lot development activities enhances community and neighborhood character and does not promote the appearance of uniformity typical of tract development.

B.    The requested modification will not adversely affect environmentally sensitive features, open space preserves or Open Space Conservation areas.

C.    The requested modification will not adversely affect infrastructure serving existing homes, neighborhoods or the community.

Chapter 7.15 Reserved
Chapter 7.16 Reserved
Chapter 7.17 Grading, Retaining Walls, and Hardscape Standards
7.17.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standard for grading, retaining walls, and hardscape development. For purposes of this Chapter, grading refers to both rough grading and permanent grading. Rough grading is defined as any activity, including earthworks, that disturbs the existing ground surface through earth movement. Permanent Grading is defined as grading that results in a permanent alteration of the land surface that remains in place after development. Therefore, both rough grading and permanent grading, as used hereafter, include the construction of all retaining walls and hardscape surfaces.

7.17.20 Applicability of this Chapter
Appendix Chapter J of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, amended and in effect on January 1, 2008, which constitutes an amended version of the California Building Code, 2007 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference as the Grading Code of the City of La Habra Heights. A copy of the Grading Code has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of La Habra Heights and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. Unless otherwise noted, this Chapter applies to all grading, retaining walls, and hardscape development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the Zone District. A Grading Permit and Haul Route Permit are required under the provisions of this Chapter. Permit application procedures are identified in Article 8. (Ord. 2008-02 § 2 (Exh. A))

7.17.30 Performance Standards for Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape
All new development and modifications to existing structures must adhere to the City’s grading, retaining walls, and hardscape performance standards designed to maintain community character, privacy, views and public health and safety.

A.    Natural Topography. Grading shall be undertaken in such a manner as to minimally affect the appearance of visible natural topography, surroundings and ridgelines, while still respecting appropriate uses, including agricultural uses.

B.    Environmental Impacts. Grading shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize the impacts of the development on community character, including agricultural uses, the surrounding neighborhood, and any natural features.

C.    Site Drainage. Grading, retaining walls, and hardscape shall be implemented such that natural storm water and other drainage courses are preserved in their existing location and elevation or changed and enhanced without a negative impact on surrounding properties, the natural appearance of the site or upon community or neighborhood character.

D.    Natural Landforms. Grading that results in an alteration of the land surface that remains in place after development shall be minimized and natural landforms, including ridgelines, preserved. Grading shall be used to conform the structures to the site and shall feature grading techniques that mimic natural landforms. Where possible, grading shall rely upon natural-appearing development areas at differing elevations to avoid visible, graded pads that extend substantially beyond the use area or structure footprint.

E.    Placement of Building Pads. Grading shall be limited to that necessary for the primary structure, accessory structures and uses and for access. Accessory structures and uses shall be placed at varying distances and elevations from the primary structure, where practical, to minimize the size of the graded pad, eliminate the creation of unnatural linear features, and preserve the natural topography.

F.    Views. Grading and earthworks otherwise unnecessary shall not be conducted solely to provide or enhance views from the project site.

G.    Landscaping. Measures shall be implemented on all graded surfaces immediately after grading to prevent erosion. Permanent landscaping shall be installed as soon as feasible to preserve community character and to control erosion. Landscaping, which may include, trees, shrubs and ground covers, shall be utilized immediately after grading or prior to the next rainy season to stabilize and hide all graded areas. All landscaping used for erosion control must be maintained and irrigated.

H.    Erosion. All grading shall utilize interim protection during grading activities and permanent protection thereafter against erosion of soil onto adjacent roads or other property. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 29)

7.17.40 Development Standards for Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape
The following development standards implement the goals and policies of the La Habra Heights General Plan related to grading, retaining walls and hardscape.

A.    Selection of Development Site. Where there are multiple developable areas within a lot, grading shall be limited to those areas that have the least adverse impact on the natural surroundings, including ridgelines. Development applications shall identify what alternative graded areas were considered and those determined to have the least adverse impact on the natural surroundings. Development application procedures are identified in Article 8.

B.    Allowable Maximum Permanent Graded and Hardscape Areas. Allowable permanent graded and hardscape area standards depend upon the size of the parcel as shown in Exhibit 7-13. Permanent graded or hardscape areas include areas such as driveways in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. Up to one thousand (1,000) square feet of a pool area capable of accepting at least three-quarters (3/4) of an inch of additional water shall not be considered hardscape and shall not be counted towards hardscape area.

1.    With an approved standards modification, agricultural grading for orchards, groves or other agricultural plantings, which does not use retaining walls and is otherwise in conformance with the grading standards of this Chapter applicable to accessory uses, may be excluded in determining permanent graded area.

2.    In order to utilize the exclusion provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, a permanent restrictive covenant, requiring that the designated area be limited in use to agricultural purposes only, must be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder against the property.

 

ALLOWABLE MAXIMUM PERMANENT GRADED AND HARDSCAPE AREAS

MAXIMUM GRADED AREA

Less than 0.5 acre =

 

10,000 sq. ft.

Greater than 0.5 acres =

 

If footprint is over 4,000 square feet: 12,000 sq. ft. + (4,000 sq. ft. * (area in acres -1)) + (footprint - 4,000)

 

 

If footprint is less 4,000 square feet: 10,000 sq. ft.

MAXIMUM HARDSCAPE AREA

Less than 0.5 acre =

 

Maximum graded area minus 4,000 square feet

Greater than 0.5 =

 

Maximum graded area minus 4,000 square feet

Exhibit 7-13. Allowable Maximum Permanent Graded and Hardscape Areas

C.    Size Limit on Retaining Walls and Slopes. The height, length and visible extent of graded slopes and retaining walls are limited to preserve community character. Allowable dimensions of such walls and slopes are limited by the purpose of the wall or slope. Retaining walls and slopes are not allowed except to implement development of the lot for its primary and accessory uses and structures. The height and length of any such wall or slope is defined as that which is visible (refer to Exhibits 7-14, 7-15, 7-16 and 7-17) as shown in Table 7-10.

Table 7-10

Cut Slopes, Fill Slopes and Retaining Walls Height, Length and Other Limits 

Use/Type

Cut Slopes

Fill Slopes

Retaining Wall (cut)

Retaining Wall (fill)

Retaining Wall or Slope Creating Area for Primary Structure (refer to Exhibits 7-14 and 7-15)

Maximum total height of all walls and slopes for primary structure

Lesser of height of structure or 20 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 20 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 20 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 20 ft.1.

Maximum total length of all walls and slopes for primary structure

Total width of structure parallel to slope plus 40 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to slope plus 40 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 40 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 40 ft.

Retaining Wall or Slope Creating Area for Accessory Structure (refer to Exhibits 7-14 and 7-15)

Maximum total height of all walls and slopes for accessory structures

Lesser of height of structure or 12 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 12 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 12 ft.1.

Lesser of height of structure or 12 ft.1.

Maximum total length of all walls and slopes for accessory structures

Total width of structure parallel to slope plus 20 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to slope plus 20 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 20 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 20 ft.

Retaining Wall or Slope Creating Area for Accessory Use (refer to Exhibits 7-14 and 7-15)4.

Maximum total height of all walls and slopes for accessory uses

Eight (8) feet

Eight (8) feet

Eight (8) feet

Eight (8) feet

Maximum total length of all walls and slopes for accessory uses

Total width of use parallel to slope plus 12 ft.

Total width of use parallel to slope plus 12 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 12 ft.

Total width of structure parallel to wall plus 12 ft.

Slope Steepness Limits (refer to Exhibit 7-16)

Maximum slope.

Maximum of 2 to 1.

Maximum of 2 to 1.

Maximum of 2 to 1 between walls

Maximum of 2 to 1 between walls

Minimum Slope Boundary Radii (refer to Exhibit 7-17)

Minimum top of slope curvature radius:

Five (5) feet

Five (5) feet

NA

NA

Minimum bottom of slope curvature radius:

Five (5) feet

Twenty Five (25) feet

NA

NA

Minimum edge of slope curvature radius:

Five (5) feet

Twenty Five (25) feet

Five (5) feet

NA

Landscaping Requirements for Erosion Control and Screening of Slopes and Walls

Erosion control measures required upon completion of wall or slope.

100% of surface

100% of surface

100% of disturbed area

100% of disturbed area

Landscape screening standards to achieve within three years following completion of project.3.

75% of visible surface.

75% of surface area.

75% of visible surface.

75% of visible surface.

1. Measured to the double plate or top of full-width wall section. 2. Modification allowed per UBC.3. Landscape planting must be installed over the entire slope. 4. For purposes of this Chapter, guest houses are considered accessory structures.



Exhibit 7-14. Measurement of Wall and Slope Heights

Exhibit 7-15. Measurement and Limits on Wall and Slope Lengths



Exhibit 7.16 Limitations on Maximum Slope Angles



Exhibit 7-17. Minimum Slope Boundary Radii

D.    Landform Contour Grading. Contour grading shall be utilized to mimic the look of natural topography. Typical contour grading features include variable slope angles and undulating top and toe of fill lines. These features are shown in Exhibit 7-18.



Exhibit 7-18. Contour Grading Concept

E.    Gradable Area. Any additional grading on a site that has been previously graded shall require a Standards Modification in the event the total cumulative graded area exceeds the maximum permitted (refer to Exhibit 7-13).

F.    Other Development Standards for Cut Slopes, Fill Slopes and Retaining Walls. The following development standards are applicable to cut slopes, fill slopes, and retaining walls:

1.    Retaining walls up to three (3) feet may be allowed in the public right of way (ROW) with an approved Encroachment Permit, Grading Permit, and a Haul Permit where applicable. The procedures for obtaining these permits are identified in Article 8. The retaining walls shall be setback from the edge of the roadway pavement by at least five (5) feet.

2.    No individual retaining wall shall have a visible section greater than eight (8) feet in height except for walls required for access to the ROW.

3.    Fences, garden walls or safety fences on top of retaining walls not used for driveways are allowed but shall be setback at least three (3) feet from top of the retaining wall. Fences, garden walls or safety fences need not be setback from the top of retaining walls protecting a cut below grade if the retaining wall faces the property interior (Exhibit 7-19). Safety fences on top of driveway retaining walls are not required to be setback if such setback would require additional grading to provide the required width.



Exhibit 7-19. Fences on Top of Retaining Walls

4.    For staggered retaining wall systems, the next higher wall shall be separated from the next lower wall by at least one and one-half times the visible height of the taller wall. The separation space shall be landscaped (refer to Exhibit 7-20).



Exhibit 7-20. Minimum Distances Between walls

5.    Structure walls must conform to all pertinent provisions of the Uniform Building Code as they apply to development setbacks from the toe and top of slopes.

6.    Junctions between different use retaining walls and/or graded slopes must display horizontal and vertical offsets of at least five (5) feet and be screened using landscaping adequate to obscure the entire junction to minimize visibility of large linear or planar surfaces from other public or private property.

7.    The minimum setback distance of any portion of any cut or fill or retaining wall from any property line, except for those required for access from right-of-way, is three (3) times its visible height at that point but not more than the applicable baseline setback.

8.    No structures or grading may be constructed within twenty (20) feet of the high water line of a designated blue line stream or storm water drainage channel. Lesser setbacks may be permitted if it can be demonstrated by a qualified engineer that such development or grading will not result in any adverse alteration to the surface or subsurface drainage characteristics of the parcel. The placement of any structures adjacent to a blue line stream must conform to the applicable Streambed Alteration Permit requirements of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

G.    Storm Water Management. Provisions for storm water and other water runoff must be planned for the entire development in a comprehensive manner. Storm water and drainage requirements must not only conform to any SUSMP requirements but must also conform to the City Storm Water Management Program (CSWMP) requirements. These include, but may not be limited to, the following:

1.    The development must maintain or improve the site’s existing runoff characteristics.

2.    All development involving more than one thousand (1,000) square feet, but less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of new hardscape or other impervious surface shall be subject to SUSMP requirements. These will include, but not be limited to, onsite retention of storm water runoff.

3.    All development that results in a net increase in the hardscape or impervious area of three thousand (3,000) square feet or greater, will require application of SUSMP to consider both existing and new development areas within the development site.

4.    Runoff after the initial SUSMP required retention must be distributed over the property and released in a manner that approximates or improves upon the distribution and manner existing prior to the development. Additionally, swales and other similar devices may be used to contain and percolate runoff up to and beyond SUSMP required limits. All sport courts must be designed for safe release of post SUSMP runoff water. Areas regularly used by large animals must be graded in such a manner to adequately impound and/or control water runoff pursuant to the applicable SUSMP or NPDES requirements.

5.    No routine disposal of any water will be allowed onto roads.

6.    All new development or redevelopment projects, as defined by Section 4.16.90(L)(1), shall comply with the low impact development requirements of the Municipal NPDES Permit, as required by Section 4.16.90(L)(2).

H.    Access and Parking Surfaces. Except as follows, all streets, driveways and vehicle parking areas are considered to be hardscape and may not consist of gravel surfaces where the gravel may be transported into a public road:

1.    The portion of a primary driveway or access road up to twelve (12) feet in width that is more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the point of access to the parcel from a public road shall not count as hardscape or graded area where application is made for: (a) an addition to or modification of an existing, lawfully permitted structure; or (b) a new structure on a lot where placement of the structure more than thirty-five (35) feet from the access point will reduce the visibility of the structure from the public right-of-way, or improve the drainage of the site.

2.    Required parking spaces that are constructed of pervious material, are outdoors and are not covered by any structure or improvement, shall not count as hardscape to the extent that they are sustainably pervious. The percentage of the area considered to be sustainably pervious shall be determined by the Community Development Director based upon industry specifications and standards and historical data and experience.

3.    Any street, driveway or other road to another parcel for the purpose of providing access to another parcel or for the purpose of providing access to a public road shall not count towards hardscape or graded area. (Ord. 2015-01 § 30; Ord. 2014-01 § 4; Ord. 2012-04 § 3; Ord. 2009-08 §§ 2, 4; Ord. 2008-07 §§ 2, 3)

7.17.50 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification of Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape
In addition to the General Findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification:

A.    The full development plan that requires the grading has been provided and approved.

B.    The proposed grading, cuts, fills and retaining walls will minimize potential impacts on community and neighborhood character, natural topography, and ridgelines. The proposed grading, cuts, fills and retaining walls conform the development to the site and mimic the natural landform.

C.    The proposed grading, cuts, fills and retaining walls facilitate onsite water retention, do not substantially increase drainage onto roads, do not create nor increase erosion or flooding, and do not adversely impact or will improve the pre-existing natural storm water drainage patterns.

D.    The visual impact of the proposed grading, cuts, fills, and retaining walls will be mitigated by the submitted architectural and landscape plans.

Chapter 7.18 Building Design Standards
7.18.10 Purpose of Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish performance standards, development standards and the findings required for the modification of any applicable development standard for building design. For purposes of this Article, building design refers to all permanent construction and improvements including, but not limited to, primary structures, accessory structures, fences and walls, sheds and animal pens.

7.18.20 Applicability of this Chapter
This Chapter applies to all structures and development in the City of La Habra Heights regardless of the Zone District.

7.18.30 Performance Standards for Building Design
All building design must adhere to the following performance standards related to the maintenance of community and neighborhood character, privacy, and views.

A.    Conformance to Natural Topography. All development shall conform to and not adversely affect the appearance of natural topography and landforms including ridgelines.

B.    Neighborhood and Community Character, Views, and Privacy. All structural development shall be designed and constructed in such a manner so as to promote the protection of views, privacy, and neighborhood and community character.

C.    View Protection. Development shall not significantly obstruct protected views nor shall development result in an appearance from other public or private property significantly altered from an existing pastoral or natural appearance to one primarily of structures and development features. This is particularly important on ridgelines or other development areas visible from large numbers of private and public properties and roadways.

D.    Building Mass. A structure’s height, bulk, and mass must be scaled so as to not visually overwhelm the surrounding properties.

E.    Siting of Accessory Structures. Accessory structures and uses shall be located at different elevations and distances from each other and from the primary residence of not less than twenty (20) feet horizontally and a corresponding amount vertically based upon the slope of the lot, in order to conform to the existing topography. (Thus, for example, a horizontal offset of 20 feet would result in no vertical offset on a flat lot and a 10 foot vertical offset on a 2.1 sloped lot.)

F.    Lighting. All lighting shall be designed to minimize visibility from other properties. All exterior lighting must adhere to the requirements of Chapter 7.6.

7.18.40 Development Standards for Building Design
The following sections implement the City of La Habra Heights General Plan goals and policies related to building design as a means to protect views, privacy, and community and neighborhood character.

A.    Limits on Square Footage of Structures. The maximum permitted structural footprint of any new covered structure without a Standards Modification is one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. The maximum allowable square footage shall not exceed the limits identified in Exhibit 7-21 by more than two thousand (2,000) square feet without a variance (refer to Table 7-12 at Section 7.19.80). For the purposes of this section, decks, awnings, retaining walls, corrals and garden trellises are not to be considered in the calculation of square footage. The maximum permitted square footage of any accessory structure without a Standards Modification shall not exceed seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet.

Maximum Allowable Square Footage (All Structures First and Second Floor)

Zero to 1 acre =

 

7,500 sq. ft.

Greater than 1 acre =

 

7,500 sq. ft. + ((total acres minus 1)*1,500 sq. ft.)

Exhibit 7-21. Maximum Allowable Square Footage (All Structures First and Second Floor)

B.    Modification of Nonconforming Structures. Modification of any legal nonconforming residential structure that exacerbates an existing nonconforming condition requires, at a minimum, a Standards Modification. The application will also be subject to review of any existing nonconformities that might be affected by the proposed modification, pursuant to the requirements of Section 7.5.60 (refer to Table 7-2).

C.    Height Limits on Primary Structures. This section establishes the structure height limits applicable to all new and modified portions of primary structures.

1.    The maximum height for a primary structure and any element, component, or appurtenance, is sixteen (16) feet measured vertically at any point from natural existing grade or visible finished grade, whichever is lower, without a Standards Modification. The natural grade is defined as that which existed prior to 1978. This height may be exceeded for the primary structure by obtaining a Building Design Standards Modification, but in no case shall exceed thirty (30) feet measured vertically at any point from visible finished grade or natural existing grade, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the structure (refer to Exhibit 7-22) without a Variance.

2.    The maximum elevation difference from lowest footing to highest point of the primary structure may not exceed forty (40) feet. This elevation difference is measured from the lowest point of the structure or foundation at the intersection with the visible finished grade or with natural existing grade, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the structure including any element, component, or appurtenance (refer to Exhibit 7-23).

3.    The lowest point of any structure will be taken as the intersection of any fill retaining wall at the finished grade wherever such wall is within fifteen (15) feet of the structure (refer to Exhibits 7-22 and 7-23).

D.    Height Limits on Accessory Structures and Other Improvements: The following height requirements are applicable to accessory structures.

1.    The maximum height for any accessory structure including any element, component, or appurtenance is sixteen (16) feet measured vertically at any point from the visible finished grade or natural existing grade, whichever is lower, to the highest structural element (refer to Exhibit 7-23) without a Variance.

2.    The maximum elevation difference from lowest footing to highest roofline of the structure may not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. This elevation difference is measured from the lowest point of the structure or foundation at the intersection with visible finished grade or with natural grade, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the structure including any element, component, or appurtenance (refer to Exhibit 7-23).

3.    The lowest point of the structure will be taken as the intersection of any fill retaining wall at finished grade wherever such wall is within ten (10) feet of the structure (refer to Exhibits 7-22 and 7-23).

4.    No other improvements or structures, other than the primary structure, may exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.

Exhibit 7-22. Maximum Building Height Envelope

Exhibit 7-23. Maximum Total Height Envelope

E.    Repealed by Ord. 2015-01.

F.    Ground Level and Second Level Area Ratio. The second level areas, including open areas or balconies above the ground level, are limited to a maximum area in relation to underlying ground level area as illustrated in Exhibit 7-24.



Exhibit 7-24. Maximum ratio of second level area to underlying first level area.

G.    Architectural Articulation. Requirements for architectural articulation are provided in Table 7-11. The architectural articulation of walls greater than the length specified in Table 7-11 must provide a continuous horizontal offset in the wall plane that is consistent with the architecture of the structure and reduces the appearance of large flat walls. This requirement cannot be met by nonstructural elements. Roof articulation must have a continuous vertical offset of the roof plane that results in various roof lines and not one (1) continuous roof line.

Table 7-11

Requirements for Architectural Articulation 

Zone District

Wall Length Requiring Horizontal Off-set

Roof Dimensions Requiring Offset

 

Wall Less than 12 ft. Height

Wall Greater than 12 ft. Height

Area

Length

Residential Agricultural (Zone RA)

35 linear feet

25 linear feet

3,000 sq. ft.

60 feet

Institutional Overlay Zone

35 linear feet

25 linear feet

6,000 sq. ft.

60 feet

Open Space Resource Production (Zone OS-RP)

25 linear feet

20 linear feet

3,000 sq. ft.

60 feet

Open Space Recreation (Zone OS-R)

30 linear feet

25 linear feet

3,000 sq. ft.

60 feet

Public Facilities (Zone PF)

35 linear feet

25 linear feet

6,000 sq. ft.

60 feet

H.    Single Kitchen Limit. No single-family residential development may have more than one kitchen.

I.    Other Architectural Features. All visible walls of any structure must include architectural features or fenestration such as balconies, window boxes or other details to minimize the appearance of large flat surfaces.

J.    Maximum Roof Pitch. The maximum roof pitch shall not exceed 6 feet in 12 feet unless fire sprinklers are installed in that attic area.

K.    Other Accessory Structure Restrictions. All storage sheds, gazebos, sports and tennis courts, pool pump and filter houses and stables or other structures shall include architectural features that are compatible with the primary residential design.

L.    Fences and Walls. Fences and garden walls must be less than six (6) feet in height and must be architecturally compatible with the primary structure design where adjacent to right-of-way or developed areas of adjacent parcels. Barbed wire, razor ribbon and other security fencing materials are prohibited. Chain-link fencing in front yard areas must be landscaped or otherwise screened. Unless approved by a standards modification, at least ninety (90) percent of the portion of any wall over forty-two (42) inches in height shall be constructed of non-view-obscuring, open materials, such as wrought iron when located in the front yard setback area. Properties with multiple front yard setbacks which results in the rear yard area adjacent to a street may be permitted solid fencing if the fence is set back ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement and is architecturally compatible with the primary structure design. Fences and walls shall not substantially impair either distant views from public streets and rights-of-way or primary views.

M.    Garage Structure Restrictions. Residential garages shall not have access doors greater than ten (10) feet in height if visible from other public or private properties.

N.    Limitation on Roof-Mounted Utilities. No visible roof mounted mechanical equipment is allowed. This requirement does not apply to satellite dishes with diameters of less than two (2)-feet.

O.    Repealed by Ord. 2015-01.

P.    Undergrounding of Utilities. All local utilities (electrical, telephone, cable, etc.) must be placed underground. This requirement does not apply to solar panels. The under grounding of utilities must occur with any new construction or addition in excess of one thousand, five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area.

Q.    Building Materials. Restricted and prohibited building materials include the following:

1.    Highly finished wood shall be restricted to ornament and areas subject to human contact such as railings.

2.    Building surfaces must not be shiny or reflective.

3.    Exterior color schemes shall not draw attention to themselves and must blend into the natural setting. Colors that conform to the approved color palette on file at the Planning Division are presumed to conform to this requirement.

R.    Building Roofs. The following requirements are applicable to building roofs:

1.    Metal roofs that are reflective and/or create glare are prohibited.

2.    Exposed gutters, downspouts, flashing, sheet metal, vent stacks and pipes shall be painted or otherwise treated to match the architectural style of adjacent roofs or walls to minimize their visibility.

3.    Chimneys, cupolas, exposed wood beams, roof overhangs, and trellises consistent with the primary residential design are all acceptable and encouraged roof features as a means to break up a straight roof line.

4.    Skylights and solar panels are permitted but shall be integrated with the roof slope and architectural design of the building.

S.    Fire Suppression Measures. All development must comply with the provisions of Article 4 including, but not limited to, distance from hydrants, flow rate requirements, interior sprinklers, installation of an approved draft hydrant on any new swimming pool where the LHH Fire Department determines that water pressure is insufficient to meet fireflow demands and all other Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone requirements. (Ord. 2015-01 §§ 32 – 35; Ord. 2012-04 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 2007-02 § 4)

7.18.50 Findings Required for Approval of a Standards Modification of Building Design Standards
In addition to the General Findings required by Section 7.19.80, the following additional findings must be made for the approval of a Standards Modification:

A.    The requested modification will not result in an adverse impact related to community or neighborhood character, and will not result in a development that appears significantly larger or more massive than nearby structures.

Chapter 7.19 Zoning Administration
7.19.10 Purpose of Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures governing General Plan amendments, Specific Plan amendments, Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance text amendments, Conditional Use Permits, variances, and Standards Modifications.

7.19.20 Applicability of Chapter
This Chapter applies to all existing and proposed land uses, structures, and lots in the City of La Habra Heights.

7.19.30 General Plan Amendments
This Section is established to permit the amendment of the City of La Habra Heights General Plan.

A.    Providing Proof of Vested Interest. An application to amend the General Plan text or maps may be initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply shall be included as part of any application along with a notarized signature.

B.    General Plan Amendments for Properties Under Multiple Ownership. If the property for which the General Plan Amendment is proposed is under more than one (1) ownership, all owners shall be required to sign the application and the signatures must be notarized.

C.    General Plan Amendments Initiated by the City Council. The City Council may initiate an application to amend the General Plan to the fullest extent permitted by State law.

D.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and providing a recommendation. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing.

E.    Planning Commission Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Articles 2 and 8. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Article, the General Plan, and the development policies of the City.

F.    Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed application. A majority vote of the Planning Commission is required to recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial. The Planning Commission’s resolution shall include its recommendation and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk.

G.    City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council as provided for in Articles 2 and 8. At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission’s recommendation and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the General Plan, this Article, and other pertinent development policies of the City.

H.    City Council Action. The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application. A majority vote of the entire City Council is required to amend the General Plan. The City Council’s action to amend the General Plan shall be by Resolution.

I.    Required Findings. Prior to approving a General Plan Amendment, the City Council shall make the following findings:

1.    The proposed General Plan Amendment is in the public interest and there will be a community benefit resulting from the amendment.

2.    The proposed General Plan Amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan.

3.    The proposed General Plan Amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties.

7.19.40 Specific Plan Amendments
This Section is established to permit the amendment of Specific Plans.

A.    Specific Plans Amendments. The City Council or a private property owner may initiate an application to amend any Specific Plan to the fullest extent permitted by State law. A private application to amend a Specific Plan may be initiated by any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply shall be included as part of any application along with a notarized signature.

B.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and providing a recommendation. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing.

C.    Planning Commission Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Articles 2 and 8. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed Specific Plan Amendment is consistent with the objectives of this Article, the General Plan, and the development policies of the City.

D.    Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act by Resolution to recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed Specific Plan amendment. A majority vote of the Planning Commission is required to recommend approval, approval with modifications, or denial. The Planning Commission’s Resolution shall be transmitted to the City Clerk.

E.    City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission Resolution, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council as provided for in Articles 2 and 8. At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Commission’s recommendation and may receive evidence as to how or why the proposed Specific Plan Amendment is consistent with the General Plan, this Article, and other pertinent development policies of the City.

F.    City Council Action. The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application. A four-fifths (4/5) vote of the entire City Council is required to amend the Specific Plan. The City Council’s action to amend the Specific Plan shall be by Resolution.

G.    Required Findings. Prior to approving a Specific Plan Amendment, the City Council shall make the following findings:

1.    The proposed Specific Plan Amendment is in the public interest and there will be a community benefit resulting from the amendment.

2.    The proposed Specific Plan Amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan.

3.    The proposed Specific Plan Amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties.

7.19.50 Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment
Because physical, economic, and other conditions in the City may change over time, provisions are hereby made to allow for amendments to the Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text in accord with the procedures outlined in this Section. All such changes to the Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance Text shall be adopted in the manner in which other City ordinances are adopted.

A.    Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate the application for a change to the Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply and a notarized signature shall be included as part of any application.

B.    Zone Changes for Properties Under Multiple Ownership. In the case of a change of Zone for properties under multiple ownership, all owners shall be required to provide notarized signatures on the application.

C.    City Council Initiated Zone Change. The City Council may initiate an application to change the Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text.

D.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and providing a recommendation. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing.

E.    Planning Commission Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Articles 2 and 8.

F.    Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act by Resolution to recommend to the City Council approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the proposed application.

G.    City Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission Resolution recommending approval or denial of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text amendment, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council. At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Planning Commission’s recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the proposed change of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text is consistent with the objectives of this Article, the City of La Habra Heights General Plan and development policies of the City.

H.    City Council Action. The City Council is responsible for making a final decision regarding a Zoning Map and/or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment. The City Council shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Prior to approving a change to the Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text, the City Council shall make the following findings:

1.    The proposed change of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text is in the public interest and there will be a community benefit resulting from the change.

2.    The proposed change of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text is consistent with the other goals and policies of the General Plan.

3.    The proposed change of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text will not adversely affect surrounding properties.

7.19.60 Conditional Use Permits
Certain land uses, due to the use, intensity, or size, may require special review to determine if the use is compatible with surrounding uses or whether the use can be made compatible through the imposition of certain conditions of approval. The Conditional Use Permit is provided for this purpose.

A.    Providing Proof of Vested Interest. Any person that is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a Conditional Use Permit. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply and a notarized signature shall be included as part of any application. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply shall be included as part of any application along with a notarized signature.

B.    Scope of Application. Applications for Conditional Use Permits may be submitted only for those uses specified as allowable conditional uses in the applicable Zone District. A Conditional Use Permit is not a substitute for a change of Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text.

C.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and providing a recommendation. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing.

D.    Planning Commission Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Articles 2 and 8. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings required by this Article.

E.    Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning Commission approval shall become effective immediately upon the conclusion of the appeal period. Planning Commission decisions may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Article 8.

F.    Required Findings. The Planning Commission (and the City Council upon appeal) may approve or modify a Conditional Use Permit in whole or in part, with or without conditions, provided that all of the following findings are made:

1.    The proposed use is one conditionally permitted within the subject Zone District.

2.    The proposed use would not impair the integrity and character of the Zone in which it is located and will adhere to all applicable performance standards.

3.    The subject site is physically suitable for the type of land use being proposed.

4.    The proposed use is compatible with land uses adjacent to the subject property.

5.    The proposed use would be compatible with future land uses within the Zone District and the general area in which the proposed use is to be located.

6.    There would be adequate provisions for water, sanitation, circulation, and public utilities and other services.

7.    There would be adequate provisions for public access to serve the use.

8.    The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies and general land uses of the City of La Habra Heights General Plan.

9.    The proposed use would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare.

10.    The proposed use is not in conflict with the neighborhood and community character and will maintain views and privacy.

G.    Imposition of Conditions of Approval. The following provisions apply to the imposition of conditions of approval:

1.    In approving a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission (or City Council upon appeal) may impose such conditions as it deems necessary.

2.    Approved conditions shall be binding upon the applicant and its heirs, successors, or assignees.

3.    Any required deed restriction must be recorded with the Los Angeles County Clerk after approval by the City Attorney.

H.    Conditional Use Permit Time Limits. The grantee of a Conditional Use Permit shall have one (1) year from the effective date of the permit to establish a right to use under the permit or the Conditional Use Permit shall lapse and become void. For the purposes of this section, such a right to use shall be established where any of the following occur:

1.    A Building Permit has been issued and construction commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved.

2.    In the event no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved.

3.    In the event no building permit or occupancy is required, the site for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved is occupied and used for the permitted purpose.

4.    Prior to the date on which the Conditional Use Permit will lapse, the grantee files an application to renew the permit pursuant to subsection I below.

I.    Conditional Use Permit Lapse in Time. A Conditional Use Permit subject to lapse may be renewed for up to an additional one-year period provided that the application for renewal is filed with the Community Development Department prior to the expiration date.

7.19.70 Variances
The Variance procedure is provided to grant relief from Zoning provisions when, because of special circumstances applicable to a property (such as size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings), the strict application of this Article deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other similar properties in the vicinity and/or under the identical Zone classification.

A.    Limitations in Variances. Variances shall not be granted to authorize a use or activity on a property that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. A financial hardship alone does not represent grounds on which to file a Variance application to gain relief from zoning provisions

B.    Application. Any person who is able to demonstrate a legal vested interest in the proposed application may initiate an application for a Variance. The Community Development Director may request proof of ownership or authorization to apply prior to the acceptance of any application. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply and a notarized signature shall be included as part of any application.

C.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal, including the analysis of precedent cases as appropriate, and shall prepare a report outlining facts and providing a recommendation. The report shall be provided to the Planning Commission and the applicant prior to any scheduled public hearing.

D.    Public Hearing. A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Articles 2 and 8. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and proposal and receive evidence concerning the proposed Variance and the proposed conditions of approval.

E.    Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective immediately upon the completion of the appeal period, unless an appeal is filed pursuant to the provisions of this Municipal Code.

F.    Findings of Approval. In granting a Variance, the Planning Commission must make all of the following findings.

1.    There are extraordinary circumstances or other conditions applicable to the property or to the intended development of the property that do not apply generally to other similar property in the same zone.

2.    The granting of a Variance will not constitute the granting of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other similar properties in the vicinity classified in the same zone.

3.    The granting of a Variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the zone or neighborhood in which the property is located.

4.    The granting of such Variance will not create any inconsistency with the General Plan.

G.    Conditions of Approval on Specific Property. A Variance that is valid and in effect and granted pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be valid only for the property for which it was granted. The Variance shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the property.

H.    Variances Time Limits. The grantee of a Variance shall have one (1) year from the effective date of the approval to establish a right to use the approval or the Variance shall lapse and become void.

I.    Renewal. A Variance subject to lapse may be renewed for up to an additional one (1) year period provided that the application for renewal is filed with the Community Development Department prior to the expiration date.

7.19.80 Standards Modifications
The purpose of a Standards Modification is to provide flexibility necessary to enable individual property owners to achieve the objectives of the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance by providing for adjustments to development standards in those circumstances where such request constitutes a reasonable use or development of an individual property that will be compatible with adjoining uses and development.

A.    Use of Standards Modifications. The relief offered through the Standards Modification process is to be used where deviations from established Development Standards help maintain conformance with the overall Performance Standards.

B.    Application. An application for a Standards Modification shall be made by the property owner or authorized applicant on a City approved application form. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply and a notarized signature shall be included as part of any application.

C.    Applicability. An Applicant may apply for a Standards Modification to relax certain development standards as indicated in Table 7-12.

D.    Review and Approval of Standards Modifications. Development standards that may be modified are provided in Table 7-12. The threshold limits for each modifiable standard and the approval authority are also provided in Table 7-12.

Table 7-12

Residential Development Standards That Can Be Modified and Limits of Modification 

Standards Modification Limits

Ministerial Standard

Administrative Limit

Planning Comm. Limit

Numeric (Quantifiable) Standards

Chapter 7.6: Noise and Lighting Standards

None allowed

None

None

None

Chapter 7.9: Signs Standards

None allowed

None

None

None

Chapter 7.10: Animal Keeping Standards

Minimum lot size requirement

15,000 sq ft

None

Reduce to 10,000 sq ft

Number of animals

10 maximum per parcel

None

Increase to 5/acre

Structural setbacks

35 ft front/25 ft other

Reduce to 15 ft front/10 ft other

Reduce to 10 ft front/5 ft other

Chapter 7.11: Setbacks and Yard Use Standards

Structure in ROW

None

None

None

Front yard setback

35 ft front

Reduce to 10 ft front

Reduce to 5 ft front

Other yard setback

25 ft other

Reduce to 10 ft front

Reduce to 5 ft front

Parking setback

10 ft

N/A

5 ft

Setback from road easement

35/25 ft

Reduce to 10/10 ft

Reduce to 5/5 ft

Garden wall or fence in setback

6 ft height; 6 ft from pavement

Allow 6 ft @ 6 ft

Allow 9 ft @ 4 ft

Footprint related setback

Exhibit 7-5

Reduce excess by 50 %

Reduce excess by 100 %

Chapter 7.12: Landscaping Standards

Degree of screening

50%

None

None

Chapter 7.13: Parking and Access Standards

Parking beyond basic six required

1/bdrm>4; 1/1,000 ft > 6,000 ft

Reduce by 2

Reduce by 50 %

Additional access points

Total of 2 access points on a single road

Total of 2 access points on 2 roads

Total of 3 or more access points on any road or roads

Chapter 7.14: Lot Development

Accessory structure location

Offset 20 ft horiz.

Reduce to 10 ft

Reduce to 10 ft

Multi lot setbacks

Front 30 % variation

Reduce by 50 %

Reduce by 100 %

Multi lot parcel frontage width

Frontage 30 % variation

Reduce by 50 %

Reduce by 100 %

Chapter 7.17: Grading, Retaining Walls and Hardscape Standards

Graded area

Exhibit 7-13

Increase by 25 %

Increase by 100 %

Hardscape area

Exhibit 7-13

Increase by 25 %

Increase by 100 %

Cumulative wall or slope height

20/12/8

None

Increase by 25 %

Wall or slope length

Structure width + 40/20/12

Increase by 25%

Increase by 100 %

Wall or slope setback

3 times height

Decrease by 25 %

Decrease by 100%

Height of wall in setback

6 ft

Increase by 2 ft

Increase by 4 ft

Individual wall height

8 ft

Increase by 2 ft

Increase by 4 ft

Safety fence setback

3 ft

Decrease by 3 ft

Decrease by 3 ft

Offsets between walls

5 ft horizontal and vertical

Decrease by 5 ft

Decrease by 5 ft

Distance between walls

1.5 x height tallest wall

Decrease to 1.0 x

Decrease to 0.5 x

Chapter 7.18: Building Design Standards

Basic 1500/750 sq ft building footprints

1500 primary/ 750 accessory

To limits of Exhibit 7-21

To limits of Exhibit 7-21

Cumulative footprint

Exhibit 7-21

Increase by 1,000 sq ft

Increase by 2,000 sq ft

Basic 16-foot height limit

16 ft

30 ft

30 ft

Maximum height limit

30 ft primary/16 ft accessory

To 30 ft/ 20 ft

To 34 ft/24 ft

Elevation difference lowest to highest

40 ft primary/ 25 ft accessory

To 40 ft/ 30 ft

To 45 ft/ 30 ft

Large structure setback

Exhibit 7-5

Decrease by 10 %

Decrease by 50 %

Second floor area reduction

Exhibit 7-24

Decrease by 10 %

Decrease by 50 %

Structural articulation

Walls 35/25

Roof 3000/60

Walls 40/30

Roof 3500/80

Walls 50/40

Roof 4000/100

Building materials

None allowed

None

None

E.    Findings of Approval. A Standards Modification shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the following findings are made in addition to any other applicable findings identified elsewhere in this Article:

1.    The requested modification will not significantly impair the neighbors’ privacy or enjoyment of their properties.

2.    The requested modification will not significantly impair: (a) a primary view, or (b) a distant view from a public street or right-of-way.

3.    The requested modification minimizes the adverse impacts on protected views as compared to other reasonable and practical alternatives.

4.    The requested modification will blend into the natural setting and will not result in an appearance that is significantly altered from one of pastoral or natural features to one primarily of man-made features.

5.    The strict adherence to the standards will:

a.    Exacerbate an existing nonconformity; or

b.    Lead to cumulative adverse environmental impacts including, but not limited to, additional grading or other development more detrimental to neighborhood or community character; or

c.    Not preserve or enhance community or neighborhood character; or

d.    Impose an economic burden that is disproportionate in relation to the impact of the modification being sought.

6.    Existing nonconformities will not be exacerbated by the requested modification and, to the extent practical, have been mitigated to conform to the Performance Standards of this Municipal Code.

7.    Conditions of approval will mitigate any adverse effects to the degree required to ensure conformance with the Performance Standards applicable to the requested Standards Modification. (Ord. 2009-08 § 5; Ord. 2008-07 § 4; Ord. 2007-02 § 5)

7.19.90 Indemnification
The City, its employees, agents and officials shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, be fully protected from any loss, injury, damage, claim, lawsuit, expense, attorneys’ fees, litigation expenses, court costs or any other costs arising out of or in any way related to any and all land use or development application approvals, including General Plan Amendments, Specific Plan Amendments, Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment, Conditional Use Permits, Variances and Standards Modifications. Accordingly, the City shall impose as a condition of approval of any land use or development application that the applicant and owner or owners of the real property obtaining such approval shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its employees, agents and officials, from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including, but not limited to, actual attorneys’ fees, litigation expenses and court costs of any kind without restriction or limitation, incurred as a consequence of, arising out of or in any way attributable to, such approval, or the activities conducted pursuant thereto. The real property owner(s) shall pay such obligations as they are incurred by the City, its employees, agents and officials, and in the event of any claim or lawsuit, shall submit a deposit in such amount as the City reasonably determines necessary in its discretion to protect the City from exposure to fees, costs or liability with respect to such claim or lawsuit.

7.19.100 Required Approval Authorities
The authority required for approval of any Zoning Action is provided in Table 7-13.

Table 7-13

Approving Agency for Zoning Administration 

Requested Approval

Approving Agency for Zoning Administration

Administrative

Planning Commission

City Council

General Plan Amendment

•Not applicable

•Recommendation only

•Approving authority

Specific Plan Amendment

•Not applicable

•Recommendation only

•Approving authority

Zoning Map or Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment

•Not applicable

•Recommendation only

•Approving authority

Development Agreement

•Not applicable

•Recommendation only

•Approving authority

Conditional Use Permit

•Not applicable

•Approving authority

•Appeal

•Call for review

Variance

•Not applicable

•Approving authority

•Appeal

•Call for review

Standards Modifications

•See Table 7-12.

•See Table 7-12.

•Appeal of administrative approval - Call for review

•Appeal

•Call for review

Minor Exception

•Administrative approval

•Appeal of administrative approval - Call for review

•Appeal

•Call for review

Lot Line Adjustments

•Administrative approval

•Not applicable

•Appeal

•Call for review

1. No Standards Modification is permitted for structures or uses that are prohibited pursuant to Section 7.3.20.

2. Any expansion in areas of a legal nonconforming structure triggers discretionary review.

(Ord. 2017-03 § 2; Ord. 2013-04 § 1)

7.19.110 Minor Exception
The purpose of a minor exception is to provide the flexibility necessary to enable individual property owners to achieve the objective of the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance by allowing the Community Development Director to grant minor deviations to the development standards for additions and modifications to existing single-family residences in those circumstances where such request constitutes a reasonable use or development of an individual property that will be compatible with surrounding uses and developments.

A.    Applicability. This section provides for the consideration of minor exception process for deviations from the established development standards for additions or modifications to existing single-family residences by the Community Development Director for the following development standards:

1.    Reduction of front yard setbacks, other yard setbacks, parking setbacks, and setbacks from a road easement by fifteen (15) percent of the applicable requirements.

2.    Reduction of accessory structure separation requirements by twenty (20) percent of the applicable requirement.

3.    Increase the allowable graded area and hardscape area by ten (10) percent of the applicable requirement.

4.    Increase the basic sixteen (16) foot height limit by ten (10) percent of the applicable requirement.

5.    Increase the structural articulation by ten (10) percent of the applicable requirement.

B.    Application. An application for a minor exception shall be made by the property owner or authorized applicant on a City approved form, along with the fee as established by City Council resolution. Proof of ownership or authorization to apply and a notarized signature shall be included as part of an application.

C.    Review of Application by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall review the application and proposal for a minor exception for completeness. Once the application has been deemed complete, notification of the requested minor exception shall be sent to adjacent property owners.

D.    Notification. Upon receipt of a complete application for a minor exception, the Community Development Director shall notify the owner/s of all adjacent properties of the requested minor exception by letter and provide ten (10) days to comment. Adjacent properties shall include all lots which directly abut or are directly across any right-of-way from the subject property.

E.    Action by Community Development Director. Not sooner than ten (10) days after the owner/s of adjacent property are notified, and not later than ten (10) days after the application was deemed complete, the Community Development Director shall review the requested minor exception and any comments from adjacent property owner/s and either grant, deny or grant with conditions the minor exception.

F.    Findings of Approval. A minor exception shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the following findings are made:

1.    The requested minor exception will not significantly impair the neighbors’ privacy or enjoyment of their properties.

2.    The requested minor exception will not significantly impair: (a) primary view, or (b) a distant view from a public street or right-of-way.

3.    The granting of a minor exception will not constitute the granting of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other similar properties in the vicinity classified in the same zone.

4.    The granting of a minor exception will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the zone or neighborhood in which the property is located. (Ord. 2017-03 § 5)

Chapter 7.20 Development Agreements
7.20.10 Purpose
This Chapter outlines the procedures and requirements for the review and approval of development agreements. The provisions of this Chapter are fully consistent with the provisions of State law governing development agreements (Article 2.5 of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of Title 7, commencing with Section 65864 of the California Government Code). (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.20 Application
A.    Filing. Any owner or lessee of real property may request and apply through the Community Development Director to enter into a development agreement provided the following are met:

1.    The status of the applicant as the owner or lessee of the property or the designated agent of the owner or lessee is established to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director; and

2.    The application is made on forms approved, and contains all information required, by the Community Development Director.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, an application for a development agreement shall contain the following information:

a.    The name and address of the applicant and of all persons and entities having any legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement;

b.    Evidence demonstrating that the applicant has a legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement;

c.    A legal description of the real property, title report, and a listing of the Assessor’s parcel numbers for the property, including an approximation of the total area of the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement;

d.    Information detailing the current uses of the subject property and all existing development on the site, including any existing legal nonconforming uses or structures on the site;

e.    Identification of the location of the property with respect to neighboring development;

f.    A description of the planned development of the property in sufficient detail to identify the intended permitted uses and development of the property, typically requiring complete structural plan and elevation views of any structures together with a site plan identifying the existing and proposed topography of the property; and

g.    Any explanatory text, plans, maps, drawings, pictures, and such other documentation, information and supporting data as the Community Development Director may request.

A separate development agreement application shall be filed for each development project for which a development agreement is requested.

B.    Processing. The Community Development Director is empowered to receive, review, process and prepare, together with recommendations for commission and council consideration, all applications for development agreements. The Community Development Director shall determine whether an application for a development agreement is complete.

C.    Fees. Processing fees shall be collected for any application for a development agreement made in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.30 Development Agreement Hearings
A.    Planning Commission Review. Upon determining that the application for a development agreement is complete, the Community Development Director shall set the application, together with staff recommendations, for a public hearing before the Planning Commission in compliance with Chapter 8.4. Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a written recommendation to the City Council.

B.    City Council Consideration. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Clerk shall set the application, proposed ordinance adopting the agreement, and written report for public hearing before the City Council in compliance with Chapter 8.4. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application.

C.    City Council Action. Should the City Council approve or conditionally approve the application and grant first reading to the proposed ordinance, it shall as a part of its action to direct the preparation of a development agreement embodying the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved. Upon final reading the City Council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute the development agreement. The City Council’s approval of a development agreement by ordinance is a legislative act subject to referendum.

D.    Ordinance Content. The ordinance approving the development agreement shall contain findings that the development agreement is consistent with this Chapter, the General Plan, and any applicable specific plans. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.40 Contents of Development Agreement
A.    Mandatory Contents. All development agreements shall contain the following provisions:

1.    Duration of the agreement;

2.    Permitted uses for the subject property;

3.    Density or intensity of the permitted uses;

4.    Approved site plans, elevations, floor plans and sections, including the maximum height and size of proposed buildings;

5.    Provisions, if any, for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes or other contribution to public improvements and amenities of benefit to the City;

6.    Protection from either a future growth control ordinance or a future increase in development impact fees;

7.    Provisions that address the applicable environmental review for the project;

8.    Provisions requiring periodic review of the development agreement under Section 7.20.60; and

9.    Provisions which would necessitate a reconsideration or amendment of the development agreement if any health and safety issues of compelling public necessity are discovered (i.e., a new environmental health hazard is discovered).

B.    Permissive Contents. A development agreement may include the following at the option of the City Council:

1.    Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that these provisions shall not prevent development of the land in the manner specified in the agreement;

2.    Provisions which require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project, or any single phase, be completed within a specified time;

3.    Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public improvements and facilities, including applicant participation in benefit assessment proceedings; and

4.    Any other terms, conditions and requirements as the City Council may deem necessary and proper, including, a requirement for ensuring, to the satisfaction of the City, performance of all provisions of the agreement in a timely fashion by the applicant/contracting party.

C.    Construction and Interpretation. In defining the provisions of any development agreement executed in compliance with this Chapter, each provision shall be consistent with the language of this Chapter, State law (Article 2.5 of the California Government Code, cited above), and the agreement itself. Should any discrepancies between the meaning of these documents arise, reference shall be made to the following documents, and in the following order:

1.    The plain terms of the development agreement itself;

2.    The provisions of State law (Government Code Sections 65864 et seq., cited above); and

3.    The provisions of this section. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.50 Execution and Recordation
A.    Effective Date. The City Manager shall execute development agreements on or after the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement, as directed to do so by the City Council.

B.    Recordation. A development agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder no later than ten (10) days after it is executed. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.60 Periodic Review
A.    Review Required. Every development agreement approved and executed in compliance with this section shall be subject to periodic City review during the full term of the agreement, at least once every twelve (12) months. Appropriate fees to cover the City’s costs to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant in compliance with Section 8.2.30(E).

B.    Purpose of Review. The purpose of the periodic review shall be to determine whether the applicant or its successor-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or its successor to demonstrate compliance to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the City.

C.    Action Based on Noncompliance. If, as a result of periodic review, the City Council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or its successor-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the Council may order, after a noticed public hearing, that the agreement be terminated or modified. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.70 Effect of Development Agreement
A.    Applicable Regulations. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement itself, the rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, density and design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement.

B.    Additional Requirements. A development agreement does not prevent the City, in subsequent actions, from applying new rules, regulations and policies that do not conflict with those applicable to the property, nor does a development agreement prevent the City from conditionally approving or disapproving any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations and policies. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

7.20.80 Amendments or Extensions to Development Agreements
A.    Changes to Approved Development. Other than a termination or modification of a development agreement under Section 7.20.60(C), any cancellation or amendment to a development agreement must be approved by mutual agreement of the parties to the agreement. The procedure for amending or canceling a development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for approval of the agreement, including notice of public hearings on the matter in the manner provided by Section 7.20.30. The Community Development Director is authorized to correct typographical errors, references to statutes, code provisions, exhibits, page and section numbers, to correct maps, and to make any similar nonsubstantive changes to the agreement without processing an amendment. If any development agreement is amended during its term, any change in the overall intensity of development or revisions to approved land uses shall be consistent with the provisions of the General Plan. In any case where State law requires a finding of consistency with the General Plan in order to approve an amendment to a development agreement, the provisions of the amendment shall be made consistent with the General Plan.

B.    Extension of Agreement. If the term of a development agreement is extended, any development that occurs after the original expiration date shall be consistent with the provisions of the General Plan as of the adoption date of the amended development agreement. (Ord. 2013-04 § 4)

Article 8
Administrative Procedures
Contents of Article

Chapter 8.1    Introduction to Article 8

8.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 8.2    Land Use and Development Applications

8.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.2.20    Land Use and Development Applications

8.2.30    Land Use and Development Applications Process and Procedures

8.2.40    Land Use and Development Applications Deemed Approved

8.2.50    Performance Guarantees

8.2.60    Time Limits and Extensions of Entitlements

8.2.70    Changes to an Approved Project

8.2.80    Land Use and Development Entitlement Runs With the Land

Chapter 8.3    Other Permit Applications

8.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.3.20    Permit Application Process and Procedures

8.3.30    Effective Date of Permits

8.3.40    Performance Guarantees

8.3.50    Time Limits and Extension of Permits

Chapter 8.4    Public Hearing and Notice Procedures

8.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.4.20    Notice of Hearing

Chapter 8.5    Reserved

Chapter 8.6    Appeals Procedures/Calls for Review

8.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.6.20    Appeals/Call for Review Procedures

Chapter 8.7    Enforcement Procedures

8.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.7.20    Violations

8.7.30    Remedies are Cumulative

8.7.40    Legal Remedies

8.7.50    Recovery of Costs

Chapter 8.8    Abatement Procedures

8.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.8.20    Penalty

8.8.30    Abatement of Public Nuisances

8.8.40    Continuing Obligation of Responsible Persons to Abatement a Public Nuisance

8.8.50    Procedures for the City to Establish the Right to Enter Private Real Property to Abate a Public Nuisance

8.8.60    Additional Requirements For Demolition of Buildings or Structures

8.8.70    Service of Notice of Abatement

8.8.80    Right of Appeal From a Notice of Abatement

8.8.90    Sample Notice of Abatement

8.8.100    Consequence of an Untimely Appeal

8.8.110    Abatement by Responsible Person Prior to Hearing

8.8.120    Review by Hearing Officer

8.8.130    Decision and Notice by Hearing Officer

8.8.140    Abatement of Nuisance by Responsible Persons Prior to City Abatement Actions

8.8.150    Emergency Action to Abate an Imminent Hazard

8.8.160    Combination of Notices

8.8.170    Establishment of Costs of Abatement

8.8.180    Collection of Costs of Abatement by Special Assessment

8.8.190    Collection of Costs of Abatement by Nuisance Abatement Lien

8.8.200    Treble the Costs of Abatement

8.8.210    Recordation of Substandard Notice

8.8.220    Code Enforcement Fees

8.8.230    Recovery of Attorney’s Fees

8.8.240    Applicability of Other Laws

8.8.250    Severability

Chapter 8.9    Administrative Citations

8.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

8.9.20    General Enforcement Authority

8.9.30    Notice of Violation

8.9.40    Issuance of Notice of Violation

8.9.50    Authority to Inspect

8.9.60    Notice of Pending Administrative Enforcement

8.9.70    Administrative Fines and Penalties

8.9.80    Administrative Citations

8.9.90    Contents of Administrative Citation

8.9.100    Consideration in Other Proceedings

8.9.110    Issuance of Administrative Citations

8.9.120    Amount of Administrative Fines and Penalties

8.9.130    Payment of Fine

8.9.140    Preliminary Review

8.9.150    Administrative Hearing

8.9.160    Hearing Procedures

8.9.170    Judicial Review

8.9.180    Collection of Delinquent Fines and Penalties and Other Remedies

Chapter 8.1 Introduction to Article 8
8.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for the implementation and enforcement of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code including notice, consideration and issuance of permits, entitlements, approvals and citations.

Chapter 8.2 Land Use and Development Applications
8.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to prescribe procedures for the submission, consideration, processing and issuance of land use and development applications specified in Article 7 of this Municipal Code or by state law.

8.2.20 Land Use and Development Applications
The provisions of this Chapter apply to all land use and development applications including, but not limited to, municipal code amendments, General Plan amendments, Zoning Code amendments, conditional use permits, variances, standards modifications, minor exceptions, lot line adjustments, and tree removal permits. Applications for development agreements shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 7.20. (Ord. 2017-03 § 3; Ord. 2013-04 § 2)

8.2.30 Land Use and Development Application Process and Procedures
This Section provides the procedures for submittal and processing of land use and development applications.

A.    Eligibility for Filing. Applications must be completed either by the owner, or designated agent, of the property for which the application is requested.

B.    Application Submittal. Land use and development applications shall be filed with the individual or department specified in the Municipal Code or, if none is specified, with the Community Development Director. Land use and development applications must be submitted on forms prescribed by the Community Development Director and contain all information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director for a complete review. The following procedures govern this process:

1.    The completed application form, all required fees and any other information required for the processing of the land use and development application must be submitted for the application to be considered complete.

2.    Whenever more than one approval under Article 7 or 9 is required, all applications shall be filed and processed concurrently.

3.    Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied with prejudice, or revoked, and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new application for the same or substantially similar request may be accepted within one (1) year of the date of the denial.

C.    Pre-Application Conference. The applicant or agent is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the appropriate City Department prior to completion of project design and the formal submittal of the application. The purpose of this conference is to inform the applicant of City requirements as they apply to the proposed project, review the procedures outlined in this Municipal Code, explore possible alternatives or modifications to the project and to identify any technical studies that may be necessary before the application is filed. The pre-file application review does not result in any official recommendation or final decision with respect to the application

D.    General Application Requirements. All project applications must include property information including legal description and details of all existing development and uses of the site. All applications for new development must include a title report. Depending upon the proposed project, other information required at the discretion of the Community Development Director may include, but not be limited to, neighborhood location detail and neighbor notification list, property line survey, view impact analysis, setback and privacy analysis, site selection analysis, landscape analysis, geo-hazards analysis, storm water runoff analysis, engineering analyses and traffic impact analysis. These requirements are conceptual and are not intended to constitute or be a substitute for final, detailed engineering or technical documents. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as eliminating or reducing the requirements that must be met prior to any construction are identified in Articles 5 and 6 of this Municipal Code.

1.    A complete project description should be submitted that includes written detail of all components of the project including, but not limited to, what is to be built, what is to be removed or modified, what exists on the site, what alteration of the site is planned and a description of the detailed use of all components of development.

2.    Every application must include the site information that the Community Development Director determines is required to evaluate the project, which may include one or more of the following:

a.    A site description including an explanation of the reasons for selection of the particular development areas of the site as compared to other areas and the relative impacts of each;

b.    Topographic detail sufficient to evaluate the project;

c.    Identification of all existing storm water drainage channels on or across the site;

d.    Proof of property line locations where there is any reasonable possibility that the proposed development would be within thirty-five (35) feet of a property line;

e.    Identification of all existing development on the site;

f.    Identification of all existing legal non-conforming structures and uses on the site;

g.    Identification of the location of the project development with respect to neighboring development;

h.    Identification of all property owners to be notified regarding the project;

i.    Appropriate reports from licensed engineers and/or geologists if the project is located in any geo-hazards area including the Alquist-Priolo Zone, or on any site known to have existing faults, landslides or other identified adverse geologic conditions; and

j.    Information sufficient to establish that any required SUSMP mitigation or compliance can be accomplished.

3.    All planned development information must be presented to the Planning Division in the degree of detail prescribed in the specific application materials and as required by Article 7. The detail provided must be adequate to identify the impact of the project upon the neighbors’ views and privacy and upon community character. Typically this will require complete presentation of conceptual plans and elevation views of any structures or structural modifications, often including three-dimensional renderings from viewpoints of potentially affected neighbors and of the public.

Any alteration of existing topography should be thoroughly identified as to location limits of grading, depths of cuts and fills and height and length of retaining walls and provisions for maintenance of existing drainage characteristics. Any trees to be removed or drainage patterns to be altered must be identified. All applications for new residential construction or modifications of existing residential structures involving fifty (50) percent or more of the existing structure’s floor area must include information on the location limits of grading, depths of cuts and fills and height and length of retaining walls and provisions for maintenance of existing drainage characteristics and must identify any trees to be removed or drainage patterns which will be altered.

The final architectural and precise grading plans subsequently submitted to the Engineering Division must conform to the materials upon which the approval was based or the project will require resubmittal.

Article 7 of this Municipal Code provides all of the Development Standards that apply to the planned development. The applicant will certify that the project meets all of those standards except those for which a Standards Modification or Variance has been requested.

Development detail should also address the mitigation of any impacts of the project, either direct or cumulative. Typical mitigation detail includes conceptual landscape plans evidencing capability to screen the development without causing view impairment. Cumulative impacts include the impact of new development when added to the impacts of existing development on the site. Address of cumulative impacts may require mitigation of existing impacts.

4.    At the time of submittal, the Planning Division may require additional information to determine the environmental impact of the project or to assess feasible alternatives or mitigation measures for such impacts as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the La Habra Heights CEQA Guidelines.

5.    The Findings provided in Article 7 of this Municipal Code must be made for any approval to be granted. The application should include specific address of the methods employed to ensure that each of the required findings can be made.

E.    Application Fees. The City Council has established a schedule of fees and deposits for the processing of land use and development applications established by this Municipal Code. The processing fees are cumulative. For example, if an applicant requests two approvals, fees and deposits for both will be charged. Processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees or deposits have been paid and processing may be halted if fee deposit levels fall below specified amounts.

F.    Determination of Application Completeness. Land use and development applications submitted to the Planning Division will be reviewed to determine completeness, taking into account the Community Development Director’s discretion with regard to application submittal requirements as provided in this Chapter and Article 7 of this Municipal Code. This process generally includes review by a variety of individuals and agencies to determine whether additional information is necessary to process the application through the final decision.

The Planning Division shall make a written determination of application completeness within thirty (30) days of submittal of all required information. If the application is deemed complete, City staff shall continue to process the request. If the application is deemed incomplete, the applicant shall be informed in writing what additional information must be provided.

G.    Inspections. An applicant shall allow the City access to any premises or property that is the subject of, or used in connection with, the application under consideration. If the application approval is granted, the owner or applicant shall allow the City continued access to the premises to determine compliance with any Conditions of Approval.

H.    Discretionary Review Authorities. The reviewing authorities associated with the various land use and development applications are provided in Table 8-1.

 

Table 8-1

Discretionary Review and Approval Authorities 

Application

Staff

Planning Commission

City Council

General Plan Amendment

Analysis/Advice

Recommendation

Decision

Zone Change or Zone Text Amendment

Analysis/Advice

Recommendation

Decision

Variance

Analysis/Advice

Recommendation

Decision

Development Agreement

Analysis/Advice

Recommendation

Decision

Conditional Use Permit

Analysis/Advice

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Standards Modification

Analysis/Advice

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Standards Modification, Administrative

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Appeal/Call for Review

Minor Exception

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Appeal/Call for Review

(Ord. 2017-03 § 4; Ord. 2015-01 §§ 36 – 42; Ord. 2013-04 § 3)

8.2.40 Land Use and Development Applications Deemed Approved
Approvals issued pursuant to this Chapter become effective on the eleventh (11th) day following the date the application was approved provided that no Appeal of the action has been filed in compliance with this Article. Any land use and development application deemed approved shall nonetheless be subject to all applicable provisions of this Municipal Code which shall be satisfied by the applicant before any construction permit is issued, or a land use not requiring a construction permit is established.

8.2.50 Performance Guarantees
Where an applicant is required to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance, proper completion and /or maintenance of any approved work and/or compliance with Conditions of Approval, the following provisions apply:

A.    Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in the form of a cash or equivalent deposit to the City Treasurer. Where approved by the City Manager, and by the City Attorney as to form, a certificate of deposit, instrument or letter of credit, with the City named as beneficiary, may be used as security. The amount of security shall be determined by the City Manager as the amount necessary to insure proper completion and maintenance of the work and/or compliance with Conditions of Approval.

B.    Duration of Security. Required security shall be retained for the time period specified in the Conditions of Approval of the project. Where no such period is specified, required security shall be retained until either the City Manager determines the work, including ongoing maintenance obligations, has been completed or one (1) year after the date of final inspection, whichever is sooner. In certain cases, a longer duration of security may be required by conditions of the project.

C.    Release or Forfeit of Security. Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required time for security maintenance), the improvement and/or maintenance security shall be released. However, failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable approval or failure of the completed improvements to function properly shall entitle the City to recourse to the security. The City will collect from the applicant or security all costs incurred by the City, including the costs of completing any of the work and all administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 2015-01 § 43)

8.2.60 Time limits and Extensions of Entitlements
This section establishes time limits for approved land use and development implementation.

A.    Time Limits. Unless Conditions of Approval or other provisions of this Municipal Code establish a different time limit, any entitlement not exercised within one (1) year of approval shall expire and become void. The entitlement shall not be deemed exercised until the applicant has actually obtained a building permit and commenced construction or has actually commenced the permitted use in compliance with the Conditions of Approval.

B.    Extensions of Time by Community Development Director. Upon request by the applicant, the Community Development Director may extend the time for a land use or development approval for an additional period of up to one-year unless the terms of approval of the entitlement state otherwise. The applicant shall submit a written request and applicable fees for an extension at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the entitlement. The Community Development Director shall then determine whether the entitlement holder has made a good faith attempt to comply with the conditions of the entitlement. The burden of proof is on the entitlement holder to establish that the entitlement should not expire.

C.    Extensions of Time by Issuing Authority. Upon request by the applicant, the body that issued the approval may extend the time for a land use or development approval for an additional period of up to two-years. The applicant shall submit a written request and applicable fees for an extension at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the entitlement. The issuing authority shall then determine whether the entitlement holder has made a good faith attempt to comply with the conditions of the approval. The reviewing authority may also consider whether the findings upon which the original approval was based can still be made and whether the proposed extension is in furtherance of the goals and policies of the General Plan. The burden of proof is on the entitlement holder to establish that the entitlement should not expire.

D.    Appeal or Call for Review. Decisions of the Community Development Director pursuant to subsections B and C may be appealed or called for review.

8.2.70 Changes to an Approved Project
Changes to a project may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

A.    Changes by the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director may authorize changes to an approved site plan, architecture or the nature of the approved use if the changes meet all of the conditions listed below:

1.    The changes are consistent with all applicable provisions of this Chapter.

2.    The changes do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for Findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project.

3.    The changes do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for Conditions of Approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit.

4.    The changes do not result in a significant expansion of the use.

5.    The changes do not violate other provisions of the Code or allow other discretionary approvals.

6.    The project remains in substantial conformance to the project as originally approved.

B.    Project Amendment. The authority that issued an approval may, after receipt of a written application using the form provided by the City, approve an amendment to that approval upon a determination that the proposed amendment would not alter the findings that were required for that approval and that the goals and policies of the General Plan would be furthered by allowing the amendment. The same notice, hearing and processing requirements apply to a request for amendment as applied to the original approval.

C.    Other Changes. Other changes shall require a new application processed in compliance with this Code.

8.2.80 Land Use and Development Entitlement Runs with the Land
A land use and development entitlement granted in compliance with this Article shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use or structure that was the subject of the application. All terms and conditions of the entitlement shall be binding upon the new owners, whether or not recorded against title.

Chapter 8.3 Other Permit Applications
8.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to prescribe procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and processing of permit applications or approvals provided for in this Municipal Code other than land use and development applications. This Chapter shall also govern the processing of permits required pursuant to Articles 5 and 6.

8.3.20 Permit Application Process and Procedures
Applications for permits shall comply with the following submittal and processing procedures:

A.    Application Submittal. Applications shall be filed with the individual or department specified in the Municipal Code or, if none is specified, with the Building Division. Applications must be submitted on the official City of La Habra Heights application form, where provided.

1.    The completed application form, all required fees and any other information required for the processing of the permit application must be submitted for the application to be considered complete. Applicants are encouraged to contact the appropriate City Department before submitting an application to verify which materials are necessary.

2.    Whenever more than one permit or approval is required for a proposed project or activity, all applications shall be filed and processed concurrently.

3.    Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied with prejudice, or revoked, and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new application for the same or substantially similar request may be accepted within one (1) year of the date of the denial.

B.    Eligibility for Filing. Applications must be completed by the owner, or designated agent, of the property or business for which the permit is requested, or by the responsible party for permits not related to a specific property or business.

C.    Pre-Application Conference. A permit applicant is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the appropriate City Department prior to completion of project design and submittal of a permit application. The purpose of this conference is to inform the applicant of pertinent City requirements.

D.    Application Fees. The schedule of fees required for each permit will be as established by the City Council.

E.    Inspections. An applicant seeking a permit required by this Municipal Code shall allow the City access to any premises or property that is the subject of, or used in connection with, the permit. If the permit is granted, the owner or applicant shall allow City continued access to the premises to determine compliance with any permit Conditions of Approval.

8.3.30 Effective Date of Permits
The permits regulated by this Municipal Code become effective on the eleventh (11th) day following the date the application was approved provided that no Appeal of the action has been filed in compliance with this Article.

8.3.40 Performance Guarantees
An applicant may be required, depending on the permit, to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance, proper completion and/or maintenance of any approved work and/or compliance with the permit requirements.

A.    Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in the form of a cash or equivalent deposit to the City Treasurer. Where approved by the City Manager, and by the City Attorney as to form, a certificate of deposit, instrument or letter of credit, with the City named as beneficiary, may be used as security. The amount of security shall be determined by the City Manager as the amount necessary to insure proper completion of the work and/or compliance with Conditions of Approval.

B.    Security for Maintenance. The City Manager may determine and require adequate security for the maintenance of the work.

C.    Duration of Security. Required security shall be retained for the time period specified in the Conditions of Approval of the permit. Where no such period is specified, required security shall be retained until either the City Manager determines the work, including ongoing maintenance obligations, has been completed or one (1) year after the date of final inspection, whichever is sooner. In certain cases, a longer duration of security may be required by conditions of the project.

D.    Release or Forfeit of Security. Upon satisfactory completion of the work, or completion of the activity, and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required duration of maintenance security), the maintenance security shall be released. However, failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable permit or failure of the completed improvements to properly function shall entitle the City to recourse to the security. The City will collect from the permittee or security all costs incurred by the City, including the costs of completing any of the work and all administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. (Ord. 2015-01 § 44)

8.3.50 Time Limits and Extension of Permits
This Section establishes time limits for permits and the process for extension thereof.

A.    Time Limits. Unless conditions of approval or other provisions of this Municipal Code establish a shorter or longer time limit, any permit not exercised within two (2) years of approval shall expire and become void.

B.    Extensions of Time. Upon written request by the applicant, the City Manager or the Community Development Director may extend the time for an approved permit for an additional period of up to one (1) year unless the terms of approval of the permit state otherwise. The Planning Commission may grant an additional one (1) year extension. The applicant shall submit a written request and applicable fees for any extension prior to the expiration of the permit. The reviewing entity (City Manager, Community Development Director or the Planning Commission) shall then determine whether the permittee has made a good faith attempt to comply with the conditions of the permit. The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish that the permit should not expire. (Ord. 2009-08 § 6; Ord. 2008-07 § 5)

Chapter 8.4 Public Hearing and Notice Procedures
8.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for providing public notice of Public Hearings before the Community Development Director, Planning Commission or City Council. Public notice shall be as provided herein and in applicable provisions of state law.

8.4.20 Notice of Hearing
A.    Notice. The public shall be provided notice of hearings, land use and development applications to be decided administratively, decisions or other meetings concerning a permit or application that require notice in compliance with State law and as provided herein:

1.    At least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date and place of the hearing including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. If a proposed Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report has been prepared for the project, the hearing notice shall include a statement whether the hearing body will be considering only the environmental document or approval of the project as well.

2.    Notice shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to a public hearing in at least the three (3) public places in the City identified by resolution of the council for posting of notices.

3.    In the event that the application is for a project or activity to take place on a particular property, notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within five hundred (500) feet of the subject of the proposed application.

4.    In the event that the application is for a project or activity to take place on a particular property and has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the City shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

5.    In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the Secretary of the Planning Commission for notice. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The City may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting the notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of the mailing.

6.    Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in the article.

B.    Additional Notice. Where the City determines that the notice required by Subsection A of this section will not be sufficient, it may also require that notice of the hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place with a notice/sign of conspicuous size, at least ten days prior to the hearing. The City may also provide any additional notice that it determines is necessary or desirable to inform interested persons of the application under consideration.

C.    Responsibility for and Cost of Providing Notice. The property owner or applicant shall bear the costs of providing notice and shall be responsible for ensuring that adequate notice is provided.

D.    Story Poles and On-Site Noticing. In order to provide a visual representation of a proposed structure’s height, size, massing, scope, location, view impact, and privacy impact, the following procedure shall be followed:

Required Posting and Time Period.

1.    The notice of the pending application shall be erected at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the meeting date. If the project does not require a meeting date and is processed administratively, no application shall be approved administratively until the notice has been erected for twenty (20) calendar days. The notice of the pending application shall be visible from each public or private right-of-way adjacent to the property, which shall be supported by a four (4) foot by four (4) foot or longer sheet of plywood. The notice shall contain the project file number, general description of the project, application information, and city contact information and address.

2.    Story poles shall be required for projects that involve new structures, additions greater than fifty (50) percent of the original floor area, a second story addition, and any addition which in the estimation of the Planning Department may cause concerns about bulk and mass, view blockage, or privacy. A waiver or exemption may be granted if the Community Development Director determines there is no possibility that the proposed project will create or contribute to adverse impacts upon protected view or privacy.

A five hundred ($500.00) dollar deposit for the removal of story poles shall be submitted at the time of application filing. Upon timely removal of the story poles, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant’s failure to remove the story poles shall result in the automatic forfeiture of the deposit and the City retains the right to remove the poles from the site.

3.    Story poles shall be erected at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the meeting date. If the project does not require a meeting date and is processed administratively, no application shall be approved administratively until the poles have been erected for twenty (20) calendar days.

4.    The poles shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days after the City’s appeal process has been exhausted (ten (10) business days following the date of the decision) and a final decision has been rendered.

Posted Notice Certification.

5.    The certification of notification sign posting shall be submitted to the Planning Department within two (2) business days from the date that the sign was erected.

Story Pole Certification.

6.    The certification of story poles shall be submitted to the Planning Department within two (2) business days from the date the poles were erected.

7.    The certification of story poles shall be certified by either the project architect or project engineer.

Story Pole Markings.

8.    The top one (1) foot of the story poles shall be brightly painted with a visible color to better identify the height of the proposed structure.

9.    A similar mark shall be placed using a different but equally visible color on the poles at the height of sixteen (16) feet measured from the finished grade.

10.    Brightly colored material such as ribbon, twine, cable rope, attachment of flags, etc., shall be required to be strung between the poles to show the rooflines and an accurate viewing of the outline of the proposed structure.

Story Pole Location.

11.    Story poles shall be erected at the most distant corners of the proposed structure and highest roof peak(s). A plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department within two (2) business days from the date that the poles were erected showing the location of the poles.

12.    The primary purpose is to show the outline of the proposed structure, rooflines, and height elevation along with the top of the pole elevation, the finished grade elevation at the base of the pole, and the existing grade elevation at the base of the pole.

Story Pole Materials.

13.    Standard two (2) inch by four (4) inch lumber or other sturdy material such as heavy walled PVC shall be used for the story poles. The poles shall be supported laterally to reduce sway (guy wires).

14.    The poles must be able to withstand all types of weather conditions. (Ord. 2015-05 § 1)

Chapter 8.5 Reserved
Chapter 8.6 Appeals Procedures/Calls for Review
8.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to specify procedures for appeal of certain discretionary determinations or actions of the city staff or the Planning Commission.

8.6.20 Appeals/Calls for Review Procedures
With respect to Planning Commission, or Community Development Director as allowed, decisions on Conditional Use Permits, Standards Modifications, Variances or other discretionary land use and development matters or any other decision for which an Appeal is expressly provided under this Code, a decision shall become final at five p.m. on the 11th business day next succeeding the date of the decision unless, prior to that hour, an Appeal to or Call for Review by the City Council or Planning Commission, as appropriate, is filed in writing in the office of the City Clerk.

A.    Appeals. Appeals may be initiated by:

1.    The applicant;

2.    An owner of real property, any part of which is located within five hundred (500) feet of the external boundaries of the subject property;

3.    An individual or organization that presented objections or testimony to the reviewing authority in writing or at a Public Hearing for the subject approval.

B.    Calls for Review. As an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this code, any discretionary order, requirement, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling of the Planning Commission or Community Development Director may be called up for review to the City Council or Planning Commission, respectively, upon the written request of any two (2) City Council members or Planning Commissioners, respectively. A decision on an Appeal to the Planning Commission may be appealed or Called for Review to or by the City Council.

C.    Filing of Appeals. A Notice of Appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in duplicate in the office of the City Clerk upon forms provided by the City. An Appeal from any order, requirement, decision, determination or interpretation by the Planning Commission or Community Development Director in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Code must set forth specifically where there was an error or abuse of discretion or where an application did meet or failed to meet, as the case may be, those qualifications or standards set forth in this Code as prerequisite to the granting of any application.

D.    Filing of Calls for Review. A Call for Review shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk and shall not state that the Planning Commission or Community Development Director has committed error or otherwise suggest that the member(s) seeking review have predetermined the matter to be heard.

E.    Effect on Decisions. Decisions that are timely appealed or called up for review shall not become effective until the Appeal or review is resolved.

F.    Action and Findings of Appeal Body. The appeal body may adopt additional Conditions of Approval that may address other issues or concerns than the subject of the Appeal.

G.    Judicial Review. Judicial review of any final decision must be sought within the time prescribed by the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

H.    Withdrawal of Appeal. Once an Appeal has been filed, it shall not be withdrawn except with the consent of the body to consider the Appeal (i.e., the City Council or Planning Commission).

I.    Time for Filing Appeals. Appeals shall be filed within 10 business days after decision.

J.    Time for Filing Calls for Review. Calls for Review shall be filed within 10 business days after decision.

K.    Filing Fees for Appeals. A filing fee as set by the City Council shall be submitted with the application for Appeal.

L.    Filing Fees for Calls for Review. No fee shall be required for a Call for Review.

M.    Procedures for Appeals and Calls for Review. The following scheduling and noticing procedures apply to Appeals and Calls for Review.

1.    Within ten (10) days after the decision to be appealed, the City Council or Planning Commission shall schedule the Appeal or Call for Review for hearing and decision and give notice of the date, time and place thereof to the applicant, the Planning Commission and the appellant, if any. Prior to the hearing, the Community Development Director shall transmit to the City Clerk a report of the Findings of the Planning Commission, or to the Planning Commission a report of the Findings of the Community Development Director, and the Community Development Director shall present at the hearing all exhibits, notices, petitions and other papers and documents on file. The hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the decision to be appealed.

2.    An Appeal or Call for Review shall be a Public Hearing if the decision being appealed or reviewed required a Public Hearing. Notice shall be given in the manner required for the decision being appealed or reviewed.

a.    The hearing shall be de novo. At the Public Hearing, all pertinent material shall be considered, including all documents constituting the administrative record.

b.    At the Public Hearing, any party or person may appear in person or by agent or attorney to provide testimony.

3.    Following an appeal or review hearing, the hearing body may remand the matter for further consideration or may affirm (in whole or in part), modify, or reverse the decision appealed or reviewed. If the hearing body does not remand the matter, it shall make the Findings prescribed by this Municipal Code for the matter at issue. The decision shall be made within thirty (30) days of the hearing date. The City Clerk shall mail notice of the City Council decision, or the Secretary of the Planning Commission notice of the Planning Commission decision, to the applicant and to the appellant, if any, within five (5) working days after the date of the decision. (Ord. 2015-01 § 45)

Chapter 8.7 Enforcement Procedures
8.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish enforcement procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Municipal Code and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

8.7.20 Violations
In addition to the violations noted elsewhere in this Municipal Code, the following are also considered to be violations:

A.    Any structure or use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged or maintained, contrary to the provisions of this Municipal Code or any applicable condition of approval, is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties specified in this Article.

B.    Except where otherwise provided by this Municipal Code, any person, partnership, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with any provision(s) of this Municipal Code or any condition imposed on any entitlement, development approval, permit, map or license, shall be guilty of an infraction on each separate day the violation or failure to comply exists. Further, any person responsible for these violations and who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve-month period for any other violation(s) of this Municipal Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.    Any construction in violation of this Municipal Code or of any condition(s) imposed by a permit shall be subject to the issuance of a Stop Work Order. Any violation of a Stop Work Order shall constitute a misdemeanor.

8.7.30 Remedies are Cumulative
All remedies of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this Municipal Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of City, county or state law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction for the violation of any provision of this Municipal Code, the conviction shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violation.

8.7.40 Legal Remedies
The City may choose to undertake any applicable legal action under law to correct and/or abate nuisances or violations of this Municipal Code, including the following:

A.    Revocations. After a noticed hearing, an approval or permit may be revoked by the authority that issued it under the following conditions:

1.    There has been a material violation of the terms or conditions of any approval or permit granted under this Municipal Code.

2.    The approval or permit was obtained by deception or fraud.

3.    The use represents a public nuisance.

4.    The use subject to the approval no longer exists.

5.    The permit or approval has not been activated in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.

B.    Civil Actions. The following civil actions may be undertaken:

1.    At the request of the Community Development Director, the District Attorney or City Attorney may apply to the Superior Court for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of this Municipal Code.

2.    Where any person, firm or corporation fails to abate a violation after being provided a notice of violation and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the Community Development Director may request the City Attorney or District Attorney to apply to the Superior Court for an order authorizing the City to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and requiring the violator to pay for the cost of the actions.

3.    The City may pursue nuisance abatement in compliance with this Municipal Code.

C.    Civil Remedies and Penalties. The following Civil remedies and imposition of penalties may be initiated:

1.    Any person who willfully violates the provisions of this Municipal Code or any permit issued in compliance with this Municipal Code shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that the violation continues to exist.

2.    Any person violating any provisions of this Municipal Code or permits or other discretionary entitlements issued in compliance with this Municipal Code shall be liable to the City for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the City, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations.

3.    In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the City shall provide the court all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant.

D.    Criminal Actions and Penalties. The following criminal action and penalties may apply:

1.    Any person who violates any provision of this Municipal Code, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this Municipal Code, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided, or unless the offense is charged as an infraction by a prosecuting attorney.

2.    Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Municipal Code, or of any law or regulation referenced in this Municipal Code, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

8.7.50 Recovery of Costs
This Section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff time, expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this Municipal Code.

A.    Record of Costs. The Community Development Department shall maintain records of all administrative costs incurred by responsible city departments associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this Municipal Code. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the City Council.

B.    Notice. Upon investigation and determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this Municipal Code exists, the Community Development Director shall notify the record owner or any person responsible for the violation, by mail, of the existence of the violation, the City’s intent to charge for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the violator’s right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.

C.    Summary of Costs and Notice. At the conclusion of the case, the Community Development Director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the responsible party by mail. The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the City Attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges within ten (10) days of the date of the notice and that, if no such request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be held liable for the charges. In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed, or after a hearing, the responsible party shall be liable to the City in the amount stated in the summary. These costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction.

D.    Request for Hearing on Costs. Any person who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing of their objections to the proposed costs.

1.    A request for hearing shall be filed with the Community Development Department within ten (10) days of the service by mail of the summary of costs.

2.    Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request, and on ten (10) days written notice to the defendant, the Community Development Director shall hold a hearing on the defendant’s objections to determine validity of the costs.

3.    In determining the validity of the costs, the Community Development Director shall consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, whether the defendant created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the defendant moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the defendant; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists.

4.    The Community Development Director’s decision can be appealed to the City Council per this Article

E.    Additional Permit Processing Fees. Any person who establishes a land use or erects, constructs, alters, enlarges, moves or maintains any structure, or engages in any activity without first obtaining any permit or other entitlement required by this Municipal Code, shall pay the additional application or permit fees established by the City Council for the correction of the violations, before being granted the required approval.

F.    Recovery of Costs Related to Disturbance of the Peace. If it is established that there was reasonable cause for law enforcement personnel to have issued a notice and warning as set forth below to any person or persons for actions in violation of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407, that such person or persons received such a notice and warning, that within six months of the time set forth in the notice and warning such person or persons were found in violation of such sections and arrested or given a citation therefore for further such acts at or near the location set forth in the notice and warning, and that the person or persons were found guilty of one or more of the violations of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407 for which they were arrested or given a citation, or found guilty of one or more violations of Penal Code Section 272 wherein an act or omission caused, encouraged, persuaded or induced a minor to commit an offense as defined in Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407; then

1.    The court imposing sentence on such person may, as a condition of probation, order such person to pay the reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the City for law enforcement officers’ return to the location of the incident which led to the conviction. In doing so the court shall follow the procedures set forth in Penal Code Section 1203.11, treating such costs as if they are the costs of an emergency response; or

2.    The reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the City for law enforcement officers’ return to the location of the incident that led to a conviction shall be a charge against the person or persons convicted. The charge constitutes a debt of such person or persons and is collectible by the City in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract. Prior to initiating an action to collect any such debt the City shall provide such person or persons a bill itemizing the charges and afford them at least 60 days to pay the bill.

3.    At the time of the initial contact at the location, the law enforcement officer shall take any such actions and give such direction as necessary to abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible person in writing that, if additional law enforcement personnel are required to return to abate a continued or subsequent condition, the responsible person and owner or occupant of the property shall be held liable for the cost of providing such services. If personnel do return to the location following the warning and a conviction does result, then the cost of the services, shall be reimbursed to the county as provided in this section.

4.    The form of the written notice and warning shall be in English and in Spanish and shall be substantially as follows:

NOTICE AND WARNING

On __________ (date) at __________ (time) a.m./p.m. at __________ (address) you were warned by __________ (name of enforcement officer) that your actions were in violation of Penal Code Section 415 and/or Section 407 and that if, within six (6) months of the time set forth above, you were found in violation of such sections and arrested or given a citation for further such acts at or near the location set forth above you may be required to pay the reasonable costs necessarily incurred by the City of La Habra Heights for law enforcement officers’ return to the location which led to your arrest or citation.

Chapter 8.8 Abatement Procedures
8.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use and safety of all structures and premises in the City.

This Chapter shall not be applied, construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the City, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the City or outside of the City that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law.

8.8.20 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this Code, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this Code, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided, or unless the offense is charged as an infraction by a prosecuting attorney. Further, each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Code, or of any law or regulation referenced in this Code, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

8.8.30 Abatement of Public Nuisances
All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in Article 4 of this Code, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or requirement of this Municipal Code, or of any applicable county or state law, or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal or termination. The procedures for abatement in this part shall not be exclusive and shall not limit or restrict the City from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether civil, equitable or criminal, or from enforcing City codes and adopted ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law.

8.8.40 Continuing Obligation of Responsible Persons to Abatement a Public Nuisance
Responsible persons shall not allow, cause, create, maintain or permit a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal or termination with all required City approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable.

The City may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance.

8.8.50 Procedures for the City to Establish the Right to Enter Private Real Property to Abate a Public Nuisance
A.    Notice of Abatement. Whenever a code enforcement officer or other public official determines that City employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "City Personnel") may need to abate a public nuisance, he or she shall give a written "Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel" (hereafter in this section and in subsequent sections of this Chapter, the "Notice of Abatement") to the responsible person(s). Such notice shall contain the following provisions:

1.    The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s) exist(s).

2.    A description of the nuisance condition(s).

3.    A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition(s).

4.    A brief description of the required corrective action(s).

5.    A time period and/or schedule in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required City approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable).

6.    The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the Notice of Abatement pursuant to this Chapter. No such right shall exist when the City is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with City Personnel.

7.    Omission of any of these provisions, whether in whole or in part, excepting the required information in this Section, or the failure of a responsible person to receive a Notice of Abatement, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this Chapter invalid.

8.    A statement that the City may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, within a thirty (30) day period after service of the Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely Appeal there from has not been made.

B.    Imminent Hazards Exception. The procedure in Subsection A shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in this Chapter shall be followed.

C.    Consequence of Issue Notice. The City’s election to issue a Notice of Abatement pursuant to this section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of this notice shall obligate the City to abate a public nuisance.

8.8.60 Additional Requirements For Demolition of Buildings or Structures
The City shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of demolition or repair, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete either option, before City Personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to this Chapter.

The City shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, serve a Notice of Abatement on all secured lien holders of record with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure.

8.8.70 Service of Notice of Abatement
Notices of Abatement may be personally given to any responsible person or they may be served by mail. The date a Notice of Abatement is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. Failure of any responsible person to receive a Notice of Abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.

The official issuing a Notice of Abatement to an owner of real property may rely on that person’s mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office in determining a service address for the Notice of Abatement. Failure of any owner to receive a Notice of Abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.

8.8.80 Right of Appeal From a Notice of Abatement
A responsible person may contest a Notice of Abatement by filing an Appeal in the manner required by this Municipal Code. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely Appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a Notice of Abatement. In this event, the Notice of Abatement is final and binding.

8.8.90 Sample Notice of Abatement
The Notice of Abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following:

Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate with City Personnel

[Date]

____________________ [Responsible Person(s)]

____________________ [Mailing Address]

____________________ [City, State and Zip Code]

Re:    Real Property at _________________________________, __________

    L.A. County A.P.N.:

    Legal description [Optional]:

Notice is hereby given that the following public nuisance conditions or activities exist on the premises described above:

(1)    [Describe condition or activities]

    in violation of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code [as well as county and state laws, if applicable], Section(s) __________________________.

(a)    Required Corrective Action(s):

    (with all required permits, approvals and inspections).

(b)    Required Completion Date: __________________________________.

[Repeat (1 a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in this notice]

The foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal or termination.

Please Take Further Notice that City Personnel may abate these public nuisance conditions or activities in the manner contained in this document if you do not perform the required corrective or preventative actions in a timely or proper manner with all required approvals, permits and inspections of the City and other appropriate public agencies. In such instances, the City shall seek recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses as allowed by this Chapter, or by applicable state laws, in any manner allowed by law.

Please Take Further Notice that you may Appeal this Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel by filing an Appeal on a City approved form with the City Clerk’s office (located at _________________, La Habra Heights, California) within ten (10) calendar days of service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filing of an Appeal. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely Appeal constitutes a waiver of your right to any further administrative Appeal and renders the Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel final and binding.

Please Take Further Notice that, if the violations are not abated within the time specified and a timely Appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by City employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "City Personnel"), in the manner stated in this notice. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement, including, but not limited to, those stated in Section _________ of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code, shall be assessed against the responsible person(s) and/or the subject property, as a lien, or as a special assessment.

Please Take Further Notice that the City may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, within a thirty (30) day period after service of the Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely Appeal therefrom has not been made.

Please Take Further Notice that, in the event of abatement by City Personnel, all personal property constituting a public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage value.

Dated: This ___________ day of _______________, 20__.

____________________________________

Public Official [Name and Title]

[End of Form]

The provisions in this section only apply to instances to where the City has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with City Personnel. In no event does this Chapter limit the right of City officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from the City’s exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights in court.

8.8.100 Consequence of an Untimely Appeal
If a timely Appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the right to Appeal is waived and the Notice of Abatement is final and binding. In such instances the City may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement, with City forces, of any or all of the nuisance conditions or activities stated in the Notice of Abatement. Entry on improved private real property shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be with an abatement warrant from the superior court. The City shall follow the procedures stated in this Chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses.

Nothing contained in this Chapter shall obligate the City to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a Notice of Abatement, whether or not there is a timely Appeal.

8.8.110 Abatement by Responsible Person Prior to Hearing
Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the Notice of Abatement at his or her own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required City permits, approvals and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing.

A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the City, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto.

8.8.120 Review by Hearing Officer
A.    Any responsible person who contests a Notice of Abatement shall, subject to filing a timely Appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer.

B.    At the place and time set forth in the notification of Appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear the testimony of the appealing person(s), the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s).

C.    Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The City bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The appellant, and the enforcement officer issuing the Notice, as well as all other interested persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The appellant, or other interested persons, may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/ her/their sole expense.

D.    If the appellant fails, or other interested persons fail, to appear, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the Appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to Appeal. In such instances the Notice of Abatement is final and binding.

8.8.130 Decision and Notice by Hearing Officer
A.    Determinations After Hearing. Within a reasonable time, not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make any one or more of the following determinations in a written decision:

1.    A finding and description of each nuisance condition at the subject property, or the non-existence thereof. In the latter instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the Notice.

2.    The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition, or conditions, at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who lacks responsibility therefore.

3.    The required corrective action and completion date for each unabated nuisance condition. Such provisions in the decision may be referred to as an "Order of Abatement."

4.    Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the Appeal.

B.    Decision is Final. The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The decision shall also contain the following statement: Judicial review of the Hearing Officer’s decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6."

C.    Service of Decision. A copy of the decision shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the Notice of Abatement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the Appeal form. Failure of a responsible person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this chapter.

8.8.140 Abatement of Nuisance by Responsible Persons Prior to City Abatement Actions
Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance in accordance with the Hearing Officer’s decision prior to the date of entry of City forces or agents upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective actions are completed prior to that date. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled.

However, once the City enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action. No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with City Personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out in complying with an Order of Abatement pursuant to this article. All personal property that is removed by City Personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value.

8.8.150 Emergency Action to Abate an Imminent Hazard
A.    Declaration of Imminent Hazard. Notwithstanding any provision of this Municipal Code to the contrary, the Sheriff, the Fire Chief, or the Building Official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property. Prior to abating the nuisance, the City Manager may attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person. A public official may, in his or her discretion, dispense with an attempt of prior notification of a responsible person if the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction.

B.    City Abatement of Hazard. If, in the sole discretion of the public official declaring an imminent hazard, the responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the City may abate the nuisance with City Personnel, and charge the costs and fees thereof to the responsible person(s).

C.    Notice of Emergency Abatement. Within ten (10) business days following emergency actions of City Personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the City shall serve any responsible person with a Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard by first class mail. The City may, if a responsible person is a property owner, rely on that person’s mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office in determining a service address for this notice. Failure of any responsible person to receive a Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.

D.    Content of Notice. A Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard shall contain the following provisions:

1.    The name of a known responsible person who is being served with the Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present.

2.    A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it constitutes an imminent hazard.

3.    A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard.

4.    A brief description of the actions City Personnel took to abate the imminent hazard.

E.    Omissions in Notice not Consequential. Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a Notice of Emergency Abatement by City Personnel of an Imminent Hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this Chapter invalid.

F.    Notice of Substandard Property. Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by City Personnel shall not preclude the City from recording a Notice of Substandard Property in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance.

G.    Cost Recovery by City. The City shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the City shall follow the procedures set forth in this Chapter.

8.8.160 Combination of Notices
The notices that are authorized by this Chapter may be combined in the discretion of the City.

8.8.170 Establishment of Costs of Abatement
The following procedures will be followed in establishing and collecting costs of abating a public nuisance.

A.    The City shall keep an accounting of the costs, fees and expenses (collectively hereafter, the "Costs") of abating a public nuisance.

B.    The City shall serve a Statement of Abatement Costs on the responsible persons within twenty (20) calendar days of the City’s completion of nuisance abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided for in this Chapter.

C.    A responsible person shall tender the Costs in U.S. currency to the City within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the Statement of Abatement Costs. Alternatively, a responsible person may contest the statement in the manner provided for in Subsection D.

D.    A responsible person has the right to contest a Statement of Abatement Costs by filing an Appeal on a City approved form with the City Clerk’s office within ten (10) calendar days of service of the Notice of Abatement. No fee shall be due for the filing of an Appeal. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely Appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a Statement of Abatement Costs. In this event, the Statement of Abatement Costs is final and binding.

E.    The City may proceed to collect its Costs as contained in a final Statement of Abatement Costs in any manner allowed by law.

F.    If a timely Appeal is received by the City Clerk, a hearing shall be set before the City Council. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the Statement of Abatement Costs by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the Appeal form at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter.

G.    At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the Statement of Abatement Costs, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by City Personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Thereupon, the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

H.    The decision of the City Council is final.

I.    The City Clerk shall cause a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs to be served upon all responsible persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the Appeal form. This document shall also contain the following statement: Judicial review of the City’s Council’s decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6." Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City pursuant to this Chapter.

J.    A responsible person shall tender the Costs in U.S. Currency to the City within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs. The City may thereafter proceed to collect its Costs as contained in the confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs in any manner allowed by law.

8.8.180 Collection of Costs of Abatement by Special Assessment
The City may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5, and future amendments thereto, in the event a Statement of Abatement Costs or a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs is not paid in a timely manner.

A Notice of Special Assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is the imposed which shall contain the following recitals: The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

The City Attorney or City Prosecutor shall establish the Notice of Special Assessment form for use, or consideration by, the Tax Collector in collecting a special assessment. The Notice of Special Assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office. The amount of a Special Assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated.

8.8.190 Collection of Costs of Abatement by Nuisance Abatement Lien
A.    As an alternative procedure for recovery of costs, the City may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a Statement of Abatement Costs or a confirmed Statement of Abatement Costs is not paid in a timely manner.

B.    A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 01000&file=415.10-415.95" target="_top">415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code.

C.    The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County Recorder’s office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.

D.    A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the City of La Habra Heights, the name of the City department on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

E.    In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified above shall be recorded by the City. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

F.    A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the City for a money judgment.

G.    The City may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

H.    The amount of a Nuisance Abatement Lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated.

8.8.200 Treble the Costs of Abatement
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance pursuant to this Chapter, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement.

8.8.210 Recordation of Substandard Notice
The following provisions describe the process for recordation of a Substandard Property Notice.

A.    Notwithstanding any provision of this Municipal Code to the contrary, if the City determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of this Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the City, within a thirty (30) day period after written notice to a responsible person, then the City, in its sole discretion, may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office against said premises. As used herein, "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required City approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all City required inspections.

B.    The City may record a Notice of Substandard Property without the issuance of a Notice of Abatement pursuant to this Chapter, provided that a notice of correction or a notice of violation to a responsible person previously disclosed that a Substandard Notice may be recorded against a property if a violation is not fully abated or corrected in a period of thirty (30) days.

C.    A Notice of Substandard Property may be recorded thirty days after service of a Notice of Abatement provided that: (i) the notice contained this disclosure, (ii) the public nuisance was not fully abated or corrected within that period, and (iii) a timely and proper Appeal to the Notice of Abatement was not made.

D.    The form that constitutes a Notice of Substandard Property shall be approved by the City Attorney or the City Prosecutor.

E.    The City shall record a Notice of Rescission of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office within ten (10) business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected.

F.    The City shall cause copies of recorded Notices of Substandard Property and Notices of Rescission of Substandard Property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter.

8.8.220 Code Enforcement Fees
Fees levied pursuant to code enforcement activities are established and collected as described following.

A.    Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17951, and any successor statute thereto, responsible persons, who cause, allow or maintain a violation in, or upon, residential properties, shall be charged fees (hereafter Code Enforcement Fees) by the City to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, as hereafter defined. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the City’s code enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings.

B.    The amount(s) or rate(s) of Code Enforcement Fees for City Personnel time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be established, and may thereafter be amended, by the City Council.

C.    The City Manager is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of Code Enforcement Fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees.

D.    The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of this Municipal Code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations.

E.    Code Enforcement Fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement, or cessation of, or otherwise remove a violation or a public nuisance.

F.    Failure to pay Code Enforcement Fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law.

8.8.230 Recovery of Attorney’s Fees
A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement of a public nuisance, or in any Appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney’s fees in accordance with the following:

A.    Attorney’s fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the City Manager, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the City, elects in writing to seek recovery of the City’s attorney’s fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney’s fees in favor of any person or the City.

B.    The City is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and non-responsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the City being the prevailing party.

Provided that the City has made an election to seek attorney’s fees, an award of attorney’s fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the City in that action or proceeding.

8.8.240 Applicability of Other Laws.
This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction.

The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances.

8.8.250 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

Chapter 8.9 Administrative Citations
8.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This chapter prescribes an alternate Code Enforcement procedure.

8.9.20 General Enforcement Authority.
The City Manager has the power under this Administrative Citation Ordinance to issue notices of violation and citations, inspect public and private property as authorized under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and other law, and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code and other law.

8.9.30 Notice of Violation.
The City Manager may issue a notice of violation to any responsible persons when it is determined that a violation that a violation of this code exists. The notice of violation will include the following:

A.    The Code section(s) violated.

B.    A description of the condition creating the violation(s).

C.    The address where the violation(s) occurs.

D.    The name of the responsible person and any other involved persons.

E.    The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed.

F.    If applicable, a list of any corrections to bring the property into compliance.

G.    A deadline or specific date to correct the violations.

H.    The signature of the enforcement officer issuing the notice of violation.

I.    The date of issuance of the notice of violation.

8.9.40 Issuance of Notice of Violation.
A notice of violation may be issued as follows:

A.    An enforcement officer may personally serve the notice of violation on the responsible person.

B.    An enforcement officer may mail the notice of violation to the responsible person by first-class mail.

C.    An enforcement officer may post a copy of the notice of violation on the subject property in a conspicuous place for a property related code violation and, in which case, the enforcement officer shall also mail a copy of the notice of violation to the responsible person at the address where the violation occurred.

8.9.50 Authority to Inspect.
Enforcement officers may enter upon any property or premises within the City as allowed by law to ascertain whether the provisions of the Municipal Code are being obeyed, and to make any examination and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence.

8.9.60 Notice of Pending Administrative Enforcement.
The City Manager may record with the Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk a notice against a property that is the subject of enforcement. A notice of pending administration action shall be on a form approved by the City Manager and shall describe the nature of the administrative action and refer to the Code provision governing the pending administrative action.

8.9.70 Administrative Fines and Penalties.
Any violation of a provision of this Code, any code it adopts by reference, or other applicable law, may be subject to an administrative fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter. This also includes any violation of any condition imposed upon the issuance of any permit, license, or other approval (e.g., subdivision map, special use permit, variance, zoning clearance) pursuant to this Code.

A.    Each and every responsible person regarding a code violation(s) is joint and severally liable for all fines or penalties imposed for the violation(s).

B.    A violation that exists for more than one day shall be considered a separate and distinct violation for each day that it exists. Each daily violation may be subject to the maximum fine or penalty permitted under this chapter.

C.    An Administrative Citation may charge a code violation for one or more days on which a violation exists and for violation of one or more code sections.

D.    The administrative fines and penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and do not preclude imposition of, any other remedies, criminal, civil, or administrative, available to the City. Imposition of administrative fines or penalties shall be at the sole discretion of the City.

8.9.80 Administrative Citations.
If a responsible person(s) already received a notice of violation or some comparable notice, and failed to correct the violation within the time prescribed in the notice, an enforcement officer may issue an Administrative Citation to each and every responsible party previously notified. The Administrative Citation provides notice of the administrative fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter.

8.9.90 Contents of Administrative Citation.
An Administrative Citation shall include the following:

A.    A description of the condition creating the violation(s).

B.    The address where the violation(s) occurs.

C.    The name of the responsible person(s) and any other involved persons.

D.    The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed.

E.    The amount and due date of the fine or penalty.

F.    A description of the procedure to pay the fine.

G.    A description of the procedure for requesting the preliminary review, waiver of fine deposit, and hearing to contest the Administrative Citation.

H.    If applicable, a list of any corrections to bring the property into compliance.

I.    A statement that any unpaid fines or penalties may be placed as a special assessment or lien against the property where a violation occurs.

J.    Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the Administrative Citation.

K.    The date of issuance.

L.    Any other information deemed necessary for enforcement or collection of the administrative fines.

8.9.100 Consideration in Other Proceedings.
The City Council, Planning Commission or other similar body, or City staff may consider the fact that a person has been issued an Administrative Citation when determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke, or deny any permit, license, or other approval, regarding a matter related to the condition causing the code violation, to that person, and may consider that such Administrative Citation to be evidence that the person has committed acts that threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.

8.9.110 Issuance of Administrative Citations.
An Administrative Citation may be issued in one or more of the following ways:

A.    An enforcement officer may personally serve the citation on the responsible person. The responsible person is required to sign a copy of the Administrative Citation showing his or her receipt, but his or her failure to do so shall have no effect on the enforcement of the citation.

B.    An enforcement officer may mail the Administrative Citation to the responsible person by mail.

C.    An enforcement officer may post a copy of the Administrative Citation on the subject property in a conspicuous place for a property related code violation and, in which case, the enforcement officer shall also mail a copy of the administrative violation to the responsible person at the address where the violation occurred.

8.9.120 Amount of Administrative Fines and Penalties.
The administrative fines for violations of this Code, as specified in this chapter, are established by the City Council. The schedule of fines may include escalating fine amounts for repeated code violations within specific periods of time. Administrative fines not paid prior to their due date shall result in the imposition of a penalty and interest for every day of delinquency, as set forth in resolution.

8.9.130 Payment of Fines.
All fines are due on the day specified in the Administrative Citation and shall be paid to the City.

A.    Payment may be made by mailing the fine amount paid by check or money order. Cash payments may be made only in person at City Hall.

B.    Payment of a fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated violation of this Code.

C.    Pending a hearing by the hearing authority, payment of a fine may be stayed if the preliminary reviewing authority determines, pursuant to Section 8.9.140, that a responsible person is unable to pay the fine.

8.9.140 Preliminary Review.
A cited person may request a preliminary review. Such request must be made within ten (10) calendar days of the date that an Administrative Citation is issued. Failure to request a preliminary review before the deadline constitutes a waiver to any preliminary review. A request for a preliminary review shall be made in writing and filed with the City and shall include all information that the responsible person desires the preliminary reviewing authority to consider in his or her preliminary review of the citation. A request for preliminary review may include a request for waiver of the fine deposit. A responsible person requesting a waiver of fine deposit bears the burden to establish by substantial evidence, including a sworn affidavit, that he or she is unable to deposit the fine imposed by the Administrative Citation.

The preliminary review shall be conducted by the preliminary reviewing authority. The preliminary review shall include a review of the Administrative Citation, the written request for a preliminary review, and any evidence the responsible person may submit with the written request. The cited person shall be notified of the results of the preliminary review within ten (10) working days of filing a written request for preliminary review. The decision on a preliminary review is not a final disposition of an Administrative Citation and therefore is not subject to judicial review.

A request for preliminary review shall not extend any time period for compliance, the due date of any fine imposed, or the time to request an administrative hearing. If the preliminary reviewing authority concludes that no code violation occurred or that the responsible person was not responsible for the code violation, then he or she shall dismiss the Administrative Citation, without prejudice to the issuance of a further Administrative Citation should additional evidence be developed. The preliminary reviewing authority shall also rule whether the responsible person qualifies for waiver of the fine deposit, if such a request has been made.

8.9.150 Administrative Hearing.
A cited person may request an administrative hearing. Such request must be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of the Administrative Citation. Failure to request a hearing before the deadline, or failure to comply with all the terms for requesting a hearing, constitutes an abandonment of a request and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. A request for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the City, and shall include any grounds that the responsible person wishes the City to consider. Unless waived upon preliminary review, the request shall be accompanied by a deposit of the fine imposed by the Administrative Citation, in the event the fine has not yet been paid.

A cited person may request one continuance of a hearing provided he or she does so in writing before the date of the hearing and states a reasonable basis for the request. Unless the City issues a written notice of continuance, the hearing shall take place on the date, time and location specified in the notice of hearing transmitted to the cited person. A cited person’s failure to attend a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for the hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

8.9.160 Hearing Procedures.
The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing authority on the date, time, and location specified in the notice of hearing transmitted to the cited person. An Administrative Citation and other reports prepared by an enforcement officer concerning a code violation shall be accepted by the hearing authority as prima facie evidence of the facts stated in such documents. The hearing authority shall allow the cited person an opportunity to testify at the hearing and to present evidence about any code violation specified in the Administrative Citation. The enforcement officer or other representatives of the City may, but is not required to, attend the hearing.

The hearing authority may continue a hearing from time to time and allow a responsible person additional time to remedy a violation. In addition, the hearing authority may request additional information or evidence from the cited person.

All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device, unless the City elects to use a court reporter. If a court reporter is not used, the City need not provide transcriptions of any hearings but, within fifteen (15) calendar days after payment of reasonable duplication fee, shall make the video and audio recordings available to the responsible person. If a court reporter is used, a recipient of the Administrative Citation may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable fees or costs.

A hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule that might consider such admission improper in a civil action. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing authority shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify or dismiss the Administrative Citation. The decision shall include the hearing authority’s findings, as well as information regarding the cited person’s right to seek judicial review of the decision and the time in which to do so. The City shall issue the cited person a copy of the hearing authority’s written decision (the "notice of decision"). The decision of the hearing authority shall be final. If the hearing authority determines that the Administrative Citation should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City.

8.9.170 Judicial Review.
A cited person may seek judicial review of the hearing authority’s decision by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court, pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4, within twenty (20) calendar days after he or she receives a copy of the notice of decision.

8.9.180 Collection of Delinquent Fines and Penalties and Other Remedies.
Failure to pay a fine or penalty before the time set forth in the Administrative Citation shall result in imposition of interest and penalties as established by the City Council. The City may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of fines, including interest and penalties.

Delinquent fines, interest and penalties may be recorded as a lien or special assessment against the property on which the code violation occurred. Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the City shall prepare a cost report itemizing the amount owed by the responsible person. The City shall comply with the State Franchise Tax Board or any other state or county law pertaining to the recording of any delinquent fines, interest, and penalties as a lien on the property, or as a special assessment.

The Administrative Citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the City from recovering any code violation abatement costs incurred by the City in performing its code enforcement efforts.

Article 9
Subdivisions
Contents of Article

Chapter 9.1    Introduction to Article 9

9.1.10    Purpose of this Article

9.1.20    Conformity with the La Habra Heights General Plan

9.1.30    General Requirements Based upon Number of Lots

Chapter 9.2    Subdivision Ordinance Application and Responsibilities

9.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.2.20    General Requirements

9.2.30    Application

9.2.40    Modification of Requirements of this Chapter

9.2.50    Responsibilities

9.2.60    Map Required

9.2.70    Recording

9.2.80    Lot Line Adjustments

9.2.90    Subdivision Process Responsibility Summary

9.2.100    Fees and Deposits

Chapter 9.3    Subdivision of Four or Fewer Parcels (Parcel Maps)

9.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.3.20    Reserved

9.3.30    Waiver of Submittal Requirements for a Parcel Map

Chapter 9.4    Tentative Maps

9.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.4.20    General Requirements

9.4.30    Preparation, Processing, Review, and Approval of Tentative Maps

9.4.40    Expirations and Extensions

9.4.50    Minor Changes to Approved Tentative Maps

Chapter 9.5    Vesting Tentative Maps

9.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.5.20    Consistency

9.5.30    Definitions

9.5.40    Application

9.5.50    Filing and Processing

9.5.60    Expiration

9.5.70    Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map

9.5.80    Development Inconsistent with Zoning - Conditional Approval

9.5.90    Applications Inconsistent with Current Policies

Chapter 9.6    Final Maps

9.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.6.20    General Requirements for Final Maps

9.6.30    Requirements for the Submittal of Final Maps for City Approval

9.6.40    Review and Approval of Final Maps

Chapter 9.7    Dedications and Reservations

9.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.7.20    Dedication of Streets, Alleys and Other Public Rights-of-Way or Easements

Chapter 9.8    Subdivision Improvements

9.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.8.20    Improvements Required

9.8.30    Design

9.8.40    Preparation of Improvement Plans

9.8.50    Revisions to Approved Plans

9.8.60    Improvement Agreement

9.8.70    Improvement Security Agreements

9.8.80    Construction of Improvements

9.8.90    Inspection of Constructed Improvements

9.8.100    Completion of Improvements

9.8.110    Acceptance of Improvements

9.8.120    Supplemental Improvement Capacity

Chapter 9.9    Reversions to Acreage

9.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.9.20    Initiation of Proceedings

9.9.30    Contents of Petition

9.9.40    Submittal of Petition

9.9.50    City Council Approval

9.9.60    Filing with County Recorder

Chapter 9.10    Parcel Mergers

9.10.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.10.20    Mergers Not Required

9.10.30    Mergers Required

9.10.40    Notice of Intention to Determine Status

9.10.50    Hearing on Determination of Status

9.10.60    Determination of Merger

9.10.70    Determination When No Hearing is Requested

9.10.80    Request to Merge by Property Owner

9.10.90    Unmerged Parcels

9.10.100    Request for Determination by Owner

9.10.110    Fee for Mergers and Unmergers

Chapter 9.11    Corrections and Amendments to Filed Maps

9.11.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.11.20    Requirements

9.11.30    Form and Contents

9.11.40    Submittal and Approval by the Community Development Director

9.11.50    Filing with the County Recorder

9.11.60    Fee

Chapter 9.12    Enforcement of Subdivision Article Provisions

9.12.10    Purpose of this Chapter

9.12.20    Prohibitions

9.12.30    Remedies

9.12.40    Certificate of Compliance

9.12.50    Notice of Violation

9.12.60    Penalties

9.12.70    Judicial Action

Chapter 9.1 Introduction to Article 9
9.1.10 Purpose of this Article
This Article is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act of the Government Code and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights. The purpose of this Article is to regulate and control the division of land within the City of La Habra Heights.

9.1.20 Conformity with La Habra Heights General Plan
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose that is not in conformance with the City of La Habra Heights General Plan or an adopted specific plan. The type and intensity of land use as shown on the City of La Habra Heights General Plan shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided.

9.1.30 General Requirements Based upon Number of Lots
A.    Ten (10) or More Lots. A Specific Plan is required for any subdivision that contains sufficient acreage to be divided into ten (10) or more legal lots and any other properties for which a specific plan is required pursuant to Article 7.

B.    Five (5) or More Lots. Subdivisions containing five (5) or more legal lots require a Tentative Map and a Final Map. The applicant may also wish to obtain a Vesting Tentative Map. For procedures, see corresponding Chapters with identical names.

C.    Four (4) or Fewer Lots. Subdivisions containing four (4) or fewer legal lots require a Parcel Map. The applicant may also wish to obtain a Tentative Map and/or a Vesting Tentative Map. See corresponding Chapters for procedures.

Chapter 9.2 Subdivision Ordinance Application and Responsibilities
9.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter establishes the applicability of, and procedural responsibilities for, the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights.

9.2.20 General Requirements
All new Subdivisions and Lot Line Adjustments must adhere to the following performance standards related to the maintenance of community and neighborhood character, privacy, and views:

A.    Maintenance of Community and Neighborhood Character. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall maintain community and neighborhood character, views and neighbor privacy.

B.    Minimizing Environmental Impact. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall have a minimal impact on natural terrain, hydrologic character and natural surroundings including ridgelines.

C.    Natural Setting. Future development that may occur as part of the Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall blend in with, and conform to, the natural setting.

D.    Conformance with the General Plan and any Applicable Specific Plan. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall conform to the City of La Habra Heights General Plan and any applicable specific plan requirements.

E.    Infrastructure. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall consider the required infrastructure including, but not limited to, access roads, driveways, sewers and wastewater treatment facilities, storm water drainage, and other utilities and must demonstrate that the infrastructure needs can be met consistent with existing community and neighborhood character.

F.    Avoidance of Impacts. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall be designed to avoid significant impacts pursuant to the local and State environmental requirements.

G.    Drainage. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall not adversely alter nor interrupt existing drainage patterns and/or watercourses.

H.    Multiple Lot Design. The Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall be planned and configured to conform to multiple lot development standards provided in Article 7 so as to avoid the uniformity typically seen in conventional tract development.

I.    No Variances or Modifications Allowed. The parcels resulting from Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment shall be planned and configured to conform with La Habra Heights Development Code without recourse to a Standards Modification or Variance as prescribed Article 7.

9.2.30 Application
The regulations of this chapter apply to all subdivisions within the City of La Habra Heights and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps required by the Subdivision Map Act. Each subdivision in the City shall be made and each map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required by this Chapter. This Chapter does not apply to:

A.    Mineral, oil or gas leases.

B.    Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code.

C.    A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the City.

D.    Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue & Taxation Code for community apartment or cooperative housing projects.

E.    The leasing of land for agricultural purposes, cultivation or pasturing of livestock.

F.    The leasing of, or grant of easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions of land, for financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device which is subject to discretionary action by the City.

9.2.40 Modification of Requirements of this Chapter
Whenever, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the land in any subdivision is of a size or shape or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or conditions or is to be devoted to a use such that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to fully conform to the regulations of this Chapter, the Planning Commission may make modifications that are reasonably necessary or expedient in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. For subdivisions of four (4) or fewer units the authority to modify resides with the Community Development Director.

9.2.50 Responsibilities
This Section designates responsibilities for implementing and approving a Subdivision.

A.    Community Development Director. The Community Development Director is responsible for:

1.    Processing all maps and collecting all required deposits and fees.

2.    Managing the Community Development Department in carrying out the responsibilities imposed upon it by this Article, including, but not limited to, direction to and review of City Landscape Architect analysis of plans and/or directing review of any portion of the proposed project by other appropriate professionals to verify conformance to this Code or to address specific health and safety concerns.

3.    Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformance with the General Plan, Specific Plans and Zoning Ordinance of the City, and reporting findings and recommendations for approval or conditional approval where required.

4.    Stating, as Secretary of the Planning Commission, that the Planning Commission has approved, conditionally approved or denied any Tentative Map.

5.    Approving Parcel Maps for subdivisions resulting in fewer than five (5) parcels, unless such subdivision is sent to the Planning Commission.

6.    The discretionary waiver of required contents of the map and application materials.

B.    City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for:

1.    Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications.

2.    Determining if the proposed subdivision improvements comply with the development provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map Act.

3.    Reporting findings and recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the Tentative Map to the Community Development Director for any subdivision.

4.    Processing Final Maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps; processing and approving subdivision improvement plans, lot line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance.

5.    Examining and determining that Final Maps are in substantial conformance with the approved Tentative Map.

6.    Inspecting and approving subdivision improvements.

7.    Accepting dedications and improvements for any subdivision and offsite dedications located outside a subdivision boundary that require a separate grant deed.

8.    Recording any notice of completion of private subdivision improvements when such are not to be maintained by the City.

C.    City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be responsible for approving, as to form, all Subdivision Improvement Agreements.

D.    Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving, or denying the Tentative Map for all subdivisions not adjudicated by the Community Development Director and reporting its action to the City Council, and for hearing appeals of map decisions made by the Community Development Director.

E.    City Council. The City Council shall have final jurisdiction over the approval of Final Maps, of any Subdivision Improvement Agreements and the acceptance by the City of lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the City. The City Council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of Planning Commission decisions on Tentative Maps.

9.2.60 Map Required
A Tentative or Vesting Tentative, and Final Map shall be required for all divisions of land unless expressly provided otherwise. The land before division must contain a minimum of two acres or more pursuant to Article 7.

9.2.70 Recording
Whenever a Tentative, Vesting Tentative or Final Map or any other document regarding the division of land pursuant to this Article is recorded with the County Recorder, the resolution or other writing issued by the City evidencing the approval of such document, including any conditions, shall also be recorded.

9.2.80 Lot Line Adjustments
Lot line adjustments are permitted so long as the following conditions are met:

A.    No additional parcels or building sites have been created, and the parcels can be developed without requiring a Variance or Standards Modification as described in Article 7.

B.    The adjustment does not create the potential to further divide either of the two parcels into more parcels than would have been otherwise possible.

C.    The adjustment conforms to Article 7 including provisions therein regarding minimum lot size, lot dimension or lot design, or any other applicable provision of this Code, and

D.    There is no resulting violation of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code.

9.2.90 Subdivision Process Responsibility Summary
The reviewing authority for subdivision applications shall be: the Community Development Director for lot line adjustments and for subdivisions that do not require a Tentative Map, the Planning Commission for Tentative and Vesting Tentative Maps, and the City Council, after a recommendation by the Planning Commission, for all other subdivisions.

9.2.100 Fees and Deposits
All persons submitting maps as required by this Article shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the City’s resolution establishing fees and charges. The processing fees shall not exceed the actual cost to the City to administer the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. A deposit that is to be applied towards this fee shall be required.

Chapter 9.3 Subdivision of Four or Fewer Parcels
9.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
Subdivisions of four or fewer parcels follow the same procedures as Chapter 9.4 (Tentative Maps) related to the form, content, submittal and filing, and employ the same standards and findings for approval as subdivisions of more than four parcels. The limited exceptions to the Tentative Map procedures for processing subdivisions of four or fewer parcels are provided in this Chapter.

9.3.20 Reserved
9.3.30 Waiver of Submittal Requirements for a Parcel Map
The Community Development Department may waive any of the submittal requirements for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrate that a waiver is justified. The Community Development Department may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary.

Chapter 9.4 Tentative Maps
9.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for the preparation, review and approval of Tentative Maps.

9.4.20 General Requirements
The preparation, processing, review and approval of Tentative Maps follow the provisions of this Chapter.

9.4.30 Preparation, Processing, Review, and Approval of Tentative Maps
The preparation, processing, review, and approval of Tentative Maps must conform to the requirements of this section, unless expressly provided otherwise in this Article or the Subdivision Map Act.

A.    General. The form, contents, submittal and approval of a Tentative Map shall be governed by the provisions of this Chapter. Any application for a Tentative Map shall be subject to the provisions of Article 7 in addition to those of this Article.

B.    Form and Contents. The Tentative Map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Department and shall be prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer or licensed land surveyor. The Community Development Department may require additional information or the Planning Commission may waive any of these requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrates that additional requirements or a waiver is justified.

The Tentative Map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on a single twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") sheet and contain the following:

1.    A title showing the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision.

2.    The name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map, including registration or license number. Applications by other than the legal owner shall be accompanied by a notarized document signed by the owner stating that the applicant is authorized to act on the owner’s behalf.

3.    A legal description sufficient to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision.

4.    Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours.

5.    The existing and proposed land uses, General Plan designation, and Zoning designation.

6.    A vicinity map showing streets, highways, adjacent jurisdictions, adjoining subdivisions, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community.

7.    The existing topography and existing and proposed development features of the proposed site and areas to at least one hundred (100) feet beyond proposed subdivision boundary, including but not limited to:

a.    Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals in areas proposed for disturbance by grading and at not less than five (5) foot intervals for previously disturbed areas or areas remaining in their natural, undisturbed state. Contour intervals shall not be more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines;

b.    Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees as defined in Article 7. Any trees proposed to be removed must be indicated;

c.    The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures that are to be removed shall be so marked;

d.    The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse;

e.    The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets and the widths, location and identity of all existing easements;

f.    The location and size of existing public or private sanitary waste system (including septic systems), water mains and storm drains and the location of fire hydrants. The approximate slope of existing sanitary waste system and the location of storm drains, existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, fire hydrants, and street lights (if provided) shall be indicated;

g.    The approximate location of the 60, 65 and 70 CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level) contours, if any;

h.    Information and analyses showing that the resultant parcels can be developed without recourse to Standards Modifications or Variances as specified in Article 7.

8.    The proposed improvements, including, but not be limited to, the following:

a.    The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be indicated;

b.    The location, width and purpose of all easements;

c.    The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four (4) degrees;

d.    The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grade of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut-and-fill slopes to scale, and the number of each lot;

e.    The proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals in areas proposed for disturbance and not at less than five (5) foot intervals for previously disturbed areas and areas remaining in their natural, undisturbed state. A separate grading plan may be submitted;

f.    Any proposed trails for private or public use and public access areas;

g.    Any proposed common areas and areas that are proposed to be dedicated as public open space;

h.    The location and size of sanitary waste systems (including septic systems and percolation fields), water mains and storm drains and the location of fire hydrants. The proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated.

i.    The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer or hydrologist whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the Tentative Map.

j.    Information and analyses showing that the resultant parcels can be developed without recourse to Standards Modifications or Variances as specified in Article 7.

9.    Markings to show existing and proposed parcels. Lots shall also be surveyed and staked to show the existing and proposed parcels.

C.    Waiver. The Planning Commission may waive any of the Tentative Map requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing documentation demonstrate that a waiver is justified. The Community Development Department may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary.

D.    Accompanying Data and Reports. The Tentative Map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports:

1.    A list of potential street names for any unnamed street.

2.    A preliminary soils report that indicates the presence of expansive soils or other soil conditions which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects. The soils report accompanying the Final Map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. The City Engineer may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate or unsatisfactory. The preliminary soils report may be waived if the City Engineer determines that, due to knowledge of the soils and geology of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

3.    A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the Tentative Map.

4.    If the subdivision lies within a geologic hazard area, as shown on maps on file in the Community Development Department or elsewhere, a preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report shall be prepared. If the preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report indicates the presence of geologic hazards or seismic hazards which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects, an engineering geology and/or seismic safety report shall accompany the Final Map and shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. For parcels within a geologic hazard area as defined by the Alquist-Priolo Act, prior to approval of any subdivision, the subdivider shall demonstrate compliance with the Act. For any parcel where a fault line is known to exist, no subdivision shall be approved unless the map to be recorded includes a notation identifying the location of the fault and the location of any area around the fault where building is restricted Further, if local information indicates need for additional geologic or geotechnical investigations, such may be required.

5.    The subdivider shall provide additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents.

6.    If applicable, the subdivider shall submit any information required under Chapter 9.5.

7.    Information sufficient to refute the findings in subsection K.

8.    Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the Community Development Director.

E.    Submittal to Community Development Department. The Tentative Map shall be considered for filing only when all required data and reports have been submitted and accepted by the Community Development Department. The applicant shall file with the Community Development Department the number of Tentative Maps the Director may deem necessary.

F.    Determination of Complete Application. The Community Development Department shall determine whether the application is complete within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application and shall notify the applicant of its determination in writing. The application shall be determined as complete on the date a written "Certificate of Application Status", showing a complete application, is prepared by the Community Development Department and mailed to the applicant.

G.    Community Development Department and Public Agency Review. The Community Development Department shall forward copies of the Tentative Map to any affected public agencies to obtain their findings and recommendations. The following requirements must be met:

1.    Public agencies and utilities shall state that the subdivision can be adequately served.

2.    Within five (5) days after the Tentative Map application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Department shall send a notice of the filing of the Tentative Map to any requesting local agency or the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. The notice shall contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information that would be relevant to the affected agency or school district. The agency or school district may review the notice and may send a written report to the Planning Commission. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the agency or affected school district and shall make recommendations as the agency or district deems appropriate. In the event the agency or school district fails to respond within a fifteen (15) day period from receipt of notice of the Tentative Map, the failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the agency or school district. The Planning Commission shall consider the report from the agency or school district in approving, conditionally approving or denying the Tentative Map.

3.    Upon completion of review and preparation of any proposed conditions of approval by the Community Development Department and prior to the date the Tentative Map is scheduled for Planning Commission action, the Community Development Department may hold a subdivision conference on its own initiative. A subdivision conference shall be held if requested by the subdivider. Advance written notice of the subdivision conference shall be given to the subdivider or agent. The results of the subdivision conference and other relevant information and recommendations shall be reported to the Planning Commission and provided to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the map by the Planning Commission.

4.    Any requests for exceptions to the various conditions to be considered by the Planning Commission shall be filed, in writing, with the Community Development Director not later than the first working day following the subdivision conference.

H.    Notice of Hearing. Upon the determination of a complete application, completion of any subdivision conference and receipt of the Community Development Department’s report and recommendations, the matter shall be set for public hearing pursuant to the following requirements:

1.    At least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date and place of the hearing including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved.

2.    The notice shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in at least the three (3) public places in the City, specified by City Council resolution as the locations for posting of notices.

3.    In addition to notice by posting, the Community Development Department shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within five hundred (500) feet of the subject of the proposed application.

4.    In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the City shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

5.    In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the Secretary of the Planning Commission. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The City may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting the notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of the mailing.

6.    Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in the article.

7.    At least three (3) days prior to the public hearing, a copy of the Community Development Department report to the Planning Commission shall be delivered to the subdivider.

I.    Planning Commission Action. The following requirements govern the deliberation of a Tentative Map:

1.    The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the Tentative Map and shall report its decision to the City Council and the subdivider within fifty (50) days after certification of any required environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration or a determination by the City that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. If applicable, the Planning Commission shall also approve, conditionally approve or deny any other permits or approvals in accordance with Article 7 requested concurrently.

2.    The approval, conditional approval, or denial shall be based on the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of notification to the subdivider of the determination that the application is complete. If the City has initiated formal proceedings and published notice of an ordinance or resolution amending ordinances, policies, and standards applicable to the subdivider’s project prior to a complete application, the amended ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of Tentative Map approval shall apply. If the subdivider requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies, and standards, and if they are adopted, the changes shall apply.

3.    If no action is taken by the Planning Commission within the time limit specified, the Tentative Map application shall be deemed to be approved by the Planning Commission if it complies with other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this Chapter, other City ordinances and the General Plan, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify the approval. The appeal period shall begin on the date of such certification.

J.    Planning Commission Approval. The Planning Commission may approve or conditionally approve the Tentative Map if it finds that:

1.    The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plans adopted by the City of La Habra Heights and all applicable provisions of this Municipal Code and if the Tentative Map provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities;

2.    The subdivision design, plan and site conform to Article 7 including provisions therein regarding minimum lot size, lot dimension and lot design; and

3.    The parcels created can be developed without a Variance or Standards Modification as specified in Article 7.

The Planning Commission may add to, modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the Community Development Department’s report, except conditions required by City ordinance or by the City Engineer, related to public health and safety or to standards approved by the City Engineer.

Whether or not such a condition is explicitly listed as a condition of approval, every approved Tentative Map shall be deemed to include a condition requiring the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, void or annul an approval of the City Council, Planning Commission, or City Staff concerning a subdivision.

K.    Planning Commission Findings for Denial. The Tentative Map may be denied by the Planning Commission on any of the grounds provided by this code or the Subdivision Map Act. The Planning Commission shall deny approval of the Tentative Map if it makes any of the following findings:

1.    That the proposed map is not consistent with the La Habra Heights General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, or any applicable provision of this Code;

2.    That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the La Habra Heights General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan or any applicable provision of this Code, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 7.14;

3.    That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

4.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

5.    There is an insufficient water supply available pursuant to the requirements of Government Code Section 66473.7;

6.    That the land is subject to a contract under the Williamson Act, and the resulting parcels following subdivision would be too small to sustain their agricultural use, except if one of the findings provided in Government Code Section 66474.4(c) can be made;

7.    The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. The Planning Commission may approve such a Tentative Map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding is made pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21081(a) that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures and project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

8.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

9.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. The Planning Commission may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the Planning Commission to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

L.    Call for Review by City Council. A member of the City Council may Call for Review of the Planning Commission decision concerning the Tentative Map application pursuant to the procedure set forth in Article 8.

M.    Extension of Time for Planning Commission or City Council Action. The time limits set forth above for acting on the Tentative Map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission or the City Council, for a time period not to exceed an additional twelve (12) months or as otherwise provided in the Government Code Section 66452.6.

N.    Appeals of Planning Commission Action. Any action by the Planning Commission with respect to the tentative map may be appealed to the City Council, by the subdivider, any tenant of the subject property or any other interested person. The appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within the (10) days after the action. City Council shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days unless the subdivider consents to a continuance. This appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given pursuant to 9.4.30.H. In addition, notice shall be given to the subdivider, the appellant and the Planning Commission as appropriate. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall, within seven (7) days, render its decision. The City Council’s review on appeal shall not be limited to the issues stated in the appeal. The City Council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the Planning Commission and may make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter or the Subdivision Map Act.

O.    Other Permits or Approvals. No tree removal, grading, or other activity requiring a permit or approval under this Code may be conducted without applying for and obtaining such approval.

9.4.40 Expirations and Extensions
This section governs the procedures and requirements governing the expiration or extension of a Tentative Map.

A.    Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after the date of approval. However, the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and if the subdivider is required to provide off-site improvements in the amounts as specified in Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may be approved as provided in Section 9.4.30.M.

1.    The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act.

2.    The period of time specified above shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the City Council. The subdivider may request a stay in the time period of the Tentative Map. Such a request shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director within ten (10) days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the Community Development Director, request a stay in the time period of the Tentative Map. Within forty (40) days after receiving the request, the City Council shall either stay the time period for up to five (5) years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be via hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall, within ten (10) days, declare its findings.

3.    Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved Tentative or Vesting Tentative Map shall terminate all proceedings and no Final or Parcel Map of all or any portion of the real property included within the Tentative Map shall be filed without first processing a new Tentative Map. If the signed Final Map and Subdivision Agreement between the applicant and the City have been delivered to the Community Development Director prior to the expiration of the Tentative Map, processing, approval and recording may occur after the expiration date of the Tentative Map.

B.    Request by Subdivider for an Extension. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map by written application to the Community Development Department prior to expiration of the map. The map shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first.

C.    Community Development Director or Planning Commission Action. The Community Development Director shall review and act upon the request for extension or submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the Planning Commission for approval, conditional approval or denial at the next scheduled Planning Commission meeting. A copy of the Community Development Director’s report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the Planning Commission meeting on the extension. The resolution adopted by the Planning Commission approving or conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of the Tentative Map.

D.    Time Limit of Extension. The expiration date may be extended pursuant to this section for a period or periods totaling no more than an additional twelve (12) months for a total of three (3) years.

E.    Conditions of Approval. As a condition of the extension of a Tentative Map, the Community Development Director or Planning Commission may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved Tentative Map as recommended by the Community Development Department in its report or as it may find necessary.

F.    Appeal. If the subdivider’s application for an extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal to the Planning Commission or City Council as appropriate within fifteen (15) days after the Planning Commission has denied the extension.

G.    Fee. The fee for processing an extension application shall be the actual cost to the City to administer the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. A deposit that is to be applied towards this fee shall be required.

9.4.50 Minor Changes to Approved Tentative Maps
Minor changes to the Tentative Map may be approved by the Community Development Director and the City Engineer upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided:

A.    No lots, units or building sites are added.

B.    Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original Tentative Map approval.

C.    There are no resulting violations of the La Habra Heights Municipal Code.

D.    The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and signed by the Community Development Director and the City Engineer.

E.    Amendments of the Tentative Map that the Community Development Director determines are not minor shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with Section 9.4.30. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the Tentative Map.

Chapter 9.5 Vesting Tentative Maps
9.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map statutes, pursuant to Government Code Section 66498.1, et seq.

9.5.20 Consistency
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a Vesting Tentative Map for any purpose that is inconsistent with the La Habra Heights General Plan, any applicable specific plan or not permitted by this Article, or other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.

9.5.30 Definitions
A Vesting Tentative Map shall mean a Tentative Map as defined in this Article that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 9.5.50, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. Except as otherwise set forth in this Article, the provisions of this Article relating to Tentative Maps shall also apply to Vesting Tentative Maps.

9.5.40 Application
Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this Article, requires the filing of a Tentative Map or Tentative Parcel Map, a Vesting Tentative Map may instead be filed. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this Chapter, the filing of a Vesting Tentative Map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.

9.5.50 Filing and Processing
A Vesting Tentative Map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this Article for a Tentative Map except as hereinafter provided:

A.    At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map."

B.    At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information

1.    A statement that the Vesting Tentative Map is consistent with the current zoning of the land, or that an application has been filed for rezoning or prezoning the land which will be processed concurrently with the Vesting Tentative Map. If a use permit is required, the permit shall be processed prior to or concurrently with the Vesting Tentative Map.

2.    A tentative utility plan indicating the location of all public utilities and facilities including, but not limited to, facilities for water, sewer, electric, gas, cable, and street lighting to be installed to serve the subdivision and any facilities which currently exist within the boundary of the subdivision.

3.    The height, size, location, architectural plans and use of all buildings to be constructed within the subdivision.

4.    Grading plans based on actual field surveys.

5.    Wild fire prevention plan and/or noise analysis with suggested mitigation measures if required by the City’s General Plan or any specific plan.

6.    Required approval letters from other agencies where applicable and feasible.

7.    When required by the Community Development Department, feasibility studies, traffic studies, economic analyses, or other future impact studies.

8.    Landscaping plans.

9.    Any other studies required because of the peculiarities of the subdivision.

All Vesting Tentative Map submittals must be accurate and complete, and must satisfy all requirements of the Community Development Department.

9.5.60 Expiration
The approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions established by this Article for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map.

9.5.70 Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map
The approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Government Code Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the application for the Vesting Tentative Map was deemed complete. The applicant shall obtain a copy of the applicable land use ordinances and policies in effect at the time the application was complete, and provide such copy to the City. Notwithstanding the preceding, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

A.    A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision, or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

B.    The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

C.    The rights referred to herein shall expire if a Final Map is not approved prior to the expiration of the Vesting Tentative Map as provided in Section 9.5.60. If the Final Map is approved and recorded, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1.    An initial time period of one (1) year after recording. Where several Final Maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single Vesting Tentative Map, this initial period shall begin for each phase when the Final Map for that phase is recorded. All such Final Maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 9.5.60 or the Vesting Tentative Map approval shall expire for those parcels for which Final Maps are not timely recorded.

2.    The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed.

3.    A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. The request for extension shall be submitted in writing to the Secretary of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review any request for extension and an extension may be granted for a maximum period of one (1) year. An appeal from a denial of extension must be made in writing to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days. The City Council shall schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice to appeal. The City Council shall deny a request for extension unless it finds that changes to any City ordinances, policies, or standards that were adopted subsequent to the time of filing the Vesting Tentative Map are not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare or if the City Council finds that the extension is not beneficial to the public health, safety or welfare.

D.    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsection C of this section and the building permit is approved, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any granted extension of that permit.

9.5.80 Development Inconsistent with Zoning - Conditional Approval
Whenever a subdivider files a Vesting Tentative Map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The City shall deny such a Vesting Tentative Map if the City finds the Vesting Tentative Map to be inconsistent with the zoning of the property, or proposed zoning ordinance which is being processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If a change in the zoning or use permit is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved Vesting Tentative Map shall, notwithstanding Section 9.5.70, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning, and the map as approved. The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 9.5.70.

9.5.90 Applications Inconsistent with Current Policies
Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in 9.5.70 and 9.5.80, and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law.

Chapter 9.6 Final Maps
9.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for the preparation, review, and approval of Final Maps.

9.6.20 General Requirements for Final Maps
The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this section.

A.    Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a Registered Civil Engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the Final Map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures. At the time of making the survey for the Final Map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform to the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall have monuments set prior to recording the Final Map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the City Engineer.

B.    Form. The form of the Final Map shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act which includes the following:

1.    The Final Map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-base film.

2.    Statements, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

3.    The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26)] inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch.

4.    The scale of the map shall be not less than 1" = 100’ or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.

5.    The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the Final Map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.

6.    When four (4) or more sheets including the statement sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be of a height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings.

7.    The final form of the Final Map shall be as approved by the City Engineer.

C.    Contents. The contents of the Final Map shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and to the following:

1.    The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

2.    Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps that have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title, "City of La Habra Heights, Los Angeles County."

3.    The following statements shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

a.    A statement, signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication to the public certain specific parcels of land or easements. Exceptions are those parties having rights of way, easements or interests that cannot ripen into a fee, or as provided in the Subdivision Map Act.

b.    A statement, signed and acknowledged by any trustee of record at the time of City Council approval of the Final Map, consenting to the recording of the map and any offers of dedications.

c.    The notary acknowledgment for the owner’s and trustee’s statements shall be deemed complete for filing without the official seal of the notary, so long as the name of the notary, the county of the notary’s principal place of business, and the notary’s commission expiration date are typed or printed below or immediately adjacent to the notary’s signature in the acknowledgment.

d.    A statement by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and Final Map shall appear on the map. The statement shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and Final Map were made by or under the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. The statement shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The statement shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. The statement shall state that the Final Map complies with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this Chapter and that the map substantially conforms to the conditionally approved map.

e.    When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the Final Map, together with the date of such report or reports, and the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report.

f.    A statement by the City Engineer stating the map has been examined and that it is in accord with the Tentative Map and any approved alterations thereof, complies with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this Chapter and is technically correct.

g.    A statement by the Secretary of the Planning Commission stating that the Tentative Map was approved by resolution of the Planning Commission. The date and number of the resolution shall appear in the statement.

h.    A statement for execution by the City Clerk stating the date and number of the resolution adopted by the City Council approving the Final Map and stating that the City Council accepted, subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.

i.    A statement to be executed by the County Clerk stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond assuring the payment of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the County.

j.    A statement to be executed by the County Recorder stating that the map has been accepted for recording, that the map has been examined and that it complies with the provisions of State laws and local ordinances governing the recording of Final Maps. The statement shall show who requested the recording of the map, the time and date the map was recorded and the book and page where the map was recorded.

4.    There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point, the basis of bearings based on Zone III of the California Coordinates and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the City Engineer.

5.    Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.

6.    The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard City monuments shall be set at or on City Engineer approved offsets from the following locations:

a.    The intersection of street centerlines.

b.    Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines.

c.    Boundary, lot line and easement monuments shall be set at locations determined by the City Engineer.

D.    Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one (1) in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands under the same ownership are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the Final Map, unless approved by the City Engineer.

E.    Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision, and if no such subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner, and reference to the recorded deed by book page number for the last recorded owner of such adjacent property.

F.    City Boundaries. City boundaries that cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

G.    Street Names. The names of all streets, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

H.    Easements. Easements for roads or streets, equestrian trails, storm water drainage, sanitary waste systems, or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the City or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and page of official records. Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the County Recorder but found by the surveyor or engineer, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the Final Map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the City Engineer.

I.    Additional Information. The City may require additional information to be recorded simultaneously with the Final Map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of the recording, and is not intended to affect record title interest. The document or additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional information is derived from public records, or reports, and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet. Whenever additional information is made by separate document, there shall appear on the Final Map a reference to the separately recorded document completed by the Los Angeles County recorder according to the Subdivision Map Act.

9.6.30 Requirements for the Submittal of Final Maps for City Approval
The subdivider shall submit prints of the Final Map to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the City Engineer.

A.    Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Chapter 9.7;

B.    Geotechnical Hazards Report. A Geotechnical Hazards report prepared in accordance with the La Habra Heights Municipal Code;

C.    Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the Final Map;

D.    Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving, or other improvements required pursuant to Section 9.7 have not been completed prior to the presentation of the Final Map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9.7 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9.7.

E.    Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes that have not been dedicated on the Final Map must be provided.

F.    Rights of Entry. Written evidence acceptable to the City in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of any improvements to be constructed.

G.    Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines.

H.    Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrologic and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains;

I.    Governing Documents. If required by the City, the submittal of the Final Map or Parcel Map for a common interest development within the meaning of Section 1350 et seq. of the California Civil Code shall include the proposed Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code and all other governing documents for the subdivision. The submittal of the Final Map or Parcel Map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer and approval as to form by the City Attorney.

J.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the City and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the Final Map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary.

K.    Other Information. Any additional data, reports or information as required by the City Engineer.

9.6.40 Review and Approval of Final Maps
The following requirements shall be applicable in the review and approval of Final Maps.

A.    Review by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the Final Map and the subdivider’s engineer or surveyor shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the City Engineer.

B.    Acceptance by City. The subdivider’s engineer or surveyor shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the statements on the map, to the City Engineer. The City Engineer and Community Development Director shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall transmit the Final Map to the City Council at its next meeting.

C.    Approval by City Council. The following requirements apply to the approval of a Final Map by the City Council.

1.    The City Council shall approve or disapprove the Final Map at the meeting at which it receives the map or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map.

2.    The City Council shall approve or disapprove the Subdivision Improvement Agreement prior to approving or disapproving the Final Map.

3.    The City Council shall approve the Subdivision Improvement Agreement and the Final Map if they conform to the approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map, the provisions of this code which were applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Map and the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

4.    If the City Council approves the Final Map, it shall at the same time accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the final map the action by the City Council. If at the time the Final Map is approved, any offer of dedication, including but not limited to streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the City Council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may, by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open or use the streets, equestrian trails, storm drainage easements, or other dedications, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

5.    The City Council may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary that require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county Recorder. If the Subdivision Improvement Agreement and Final Map are approved by the City Council, it shall instruct the Mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the City. If the Subdivision Improvement Agreement and/or Final Map are unacceptable, the Council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the City Engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the Final Map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or Final Map have been resubmitted.

6.    The City Council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a Final Map because the subdivider has failed to meet a Tentative Map condition requiring construction of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider or the City has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In this case the City shall follow procedure set forth in Chapter 9.7.

D.    Denial by City Council. The City Council shall deny the Final Map if it finds that the final map is not in substantial compliance with the previously approved Tentative Map

E.    Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the Final Map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate statement on the map and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the County Recorder. If the subdivider dedicates property in fee for public purposes to the City, the City Clerk shall also prepare and forward for recording a certificate concerning the dedication as provided in the Subdivision Map Act.

Chapter 9.7 Dedications and Reservations
9.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for the preparation, review, and acceptance of Subdivision Map dedications and reservations.

9.7.20 Dedication of Streets, Alleys and Other Public Rights-of-Way or Easements
As a condition of approval of a Tentative or Parcel Map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public greenways, scenic easements, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. Improvements shall be in accordance with Chapter 9.8.

Chapter 9.8 Subdivision Improvements
9.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for all required on and off-site subdivision improvements.

9.8.20 Improvements Required
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on and off site according to standards approved by the City including, but not limited to, the Street Standards and Standard Specifications and Plans. No Final Map shall be presented to the Council or Parcel Map to the Community Development Director or Planning Commission for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the City agreeing to do the work.

Required improvements may include:

A.    Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, driveway approaches, transitions and, if required, curbs and sidewalks.

B.    Storm Drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. On- or off-site storm drain improvements or impoundments may be required to satisfy this requirement.

C.    Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by a community sewer collection system or an individual septic system.

D.    Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system.

E.    Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cable television facilities. All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along either side of peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission Regulations.

F.    Off-Site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the City or the subdivider have sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the City shall, within 120 days of recording the Final Map acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the City fails to meet the 120-day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the Final Map, the City may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the City acquires title or interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements.

9.8.30 Design
The design and layout of all required improvements both on and off site, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards, to the City’s Street Standards and Standard Plans and Specifications, and to such standards as approved by the City Engineer. The following requirements will be applicable to the design of any required improvements:

A.    Energy Conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a Tentative Map is required pursuant to Chapter 9.3 shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. For the purposes of this section, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

B.    Cable Service. The design of a subdivision for which a Tentative Map or Parcel Map is required shall provide appropriate cable systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. For the purposes of this section, "appropriate cable systems" means those systems franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located.

C.    Access. The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street. Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision. Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the City when required.

9.8.40 Preparation of Improvement Plans
The following requirement shall apply to the preparation of improvement plans.

A.    General Requirements. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a Registered Civil Engineer licensed by the State of California. Improvement plans shall be processed according to the time limits set in the Subdivision Map Act. Improvement plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities.

B.    Form and Content. Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced on 24" x 36" sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet providing 1/2" at top, bottom and right side and 1-1/2" on the left side. A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the City Engineer and for approval of plan revisions. Plan and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of 1" = 40’ or larger unless approved by the City Engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet. Additional content and form requirements include the following:

1.    A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans.

2.    A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable.

3.    Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or left edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the City Engineer.

4.    All lettering shall be 1/8" minimum or typed print of legible size.

5.    If the plans include three or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be included.

6.    The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be established by the City Engineer.

7.    The final form of all plans shall be approved by the City Engineer.

C.    Contents. The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private, including common areas. Reference may be made to City of La Habra Heights, Los Angeles County or State Standard Plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings.

D.    Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates, and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the City Engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a Registered Civil Engineer licensed by the State of California and in a form approved by the City Engineer.

E.    Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans and all computations to the City Engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer.

F.    Approval by the City Engineer. After completing all required revisions, the subdivider’s engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the City Engineer for signature. Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable City ordinances, design review requirements and conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, the City Engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer. Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the sanitary waste system, water, or gas and electric construction plans. Approval by the City Engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design thereof or from any required conditions of approval for the Tentative Map.

9.8.50 Revisions to Approved Plans
The following requirements are applicable to the revision of approved improvement plans.

A.    By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the City Engineer and shall be accompanied by drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the originals shall be submitted to the City Engineer’s office for initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider’s engineer and prints of the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the City Engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until the revised plans are received by the Community Development Department.

B.    By City Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and engineer. The subdivider’s engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the City Engineer for initialing within the time specified by the City Engineer. Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider’s engineer shall immediately transmit prints of the revised drawings to the City Engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be halted by order of the City Engineer until prints of the revised drawings have been submitted. The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the City Engineer to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within two working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

C.    Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Cost incurred by the City for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised prints and applied toward the actual costs.

9.8.60 Improvement Agreement
The Improvement Agreement shall be prepared and signed by the City Engineer and approved as to form by the City Attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

A.    Construction of all improvements according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the City Engineer;

B.    Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 9.8.100;

C.    Right by City to modify plans and specifications and to require the subdivider to pay for modifications;

D.    Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

E.    Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the City’s resolution establishing fees and charges;

F.    Payment of in-lieu fees for the undergrounding of utilities where, in the determination of the City, the undergrounding of utilities on the site is impossible or impracticable;

G.    Payment of in-lieu fees for park land dedication;

H.    Payment of drainage district or area fees;

I.    Improvement security as required by this article;

J.    Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes thereof;

K.    Release and indemnification of the City from all liability incurred by the development and payment of all reasonable attorney’s fees that the City may incur because of any legal action arising from the development;

L.    Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by City ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the City Engineer; and

M.    Any other provisions required by the City as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this code.

9.8.70 Improvement Security Agreements
This Section governs the requirements regarding Improvement Security Agreements.

A.    General. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in this Section. No Final Map or Parcel Map shall be signed by the City Engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B.    Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the City.

1.    Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The provisions of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

2.    An instrument of credit or certificate of deposit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment.

3.    A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust Company, at the option of the City, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money.

C.    Amount of Security. A performance bond or security in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of fifty percent (50%) of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee the payment to the subdivider’s contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. The foregoing shall not apply to a California nonprofit corporation when funded by a government agency if the corporation complies with Section 66499.3(c) of the Subdivision Map Act. The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall provide for:

1.    Not less than five (5) percent nor more than ten (10) percent of the total construction cost for contingencies;

2.    Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction;

3.    All utility installation costs or a statement acceptable to the City Engineer from the utility company or companies that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation; and

4.    In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included estimated costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney’s fees, which may be incurred in enforcing the obligation secured.

D.    Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the City not less than Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) cash for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, and Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for other subdivisions, or an additional amount as required by the City Engineer, not to exceed one (1) percent of the construction cost.

E.    Warranty Security. Upon agreement for the subdivision improvements by the City, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the construction period until completion and acceptance of the improvements pursuant to Government Code section 66499.7 and Civil Code section 3114 et seq. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond that shall be retained as permitted pursuant to applicable state law. In hillside areas, the warranty security shall be not less than fifty (50) percent of the construction cost of improvements.

F.    Reduction in Performance Security. The City Engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than ten (10) percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the City Engineer; however, in no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this ordinance, the Subdivision Map Act, or the Improvement Agreement.

G.    Release of Performance Security. Performance security shall be released after acceptance of the improvement by the City Council or City Engineer and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer. If warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

H.    Release of Labor and Materials Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the City Council or City Engineer, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the City Council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given.

I.    Release of Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided that all deficiencies appearing on the final deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected and not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the City Council, or as otherwise permitted by applicable state law.

9.8.80 Construction of Improvements
The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard specifications of the City as adopted by Council Resolution. The general provisions of the City’s Standard Specifications shall apply to the developer where applicable. Construction shall not commence until approved by the City Engineer.

9.8.90 Inspection of Constructed Improvements
The following requirements apply to the inspection of improvements constructed as part of a subdivision.

A.    General. All improvements are subject to inspection by the City Engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the City’s Standard Specifications.

B.    Pre-construction Conference. Prior to commencing any construction, the developer shall arrange for a pre-construction conference with the City Engineer.

C.    Final Inspection and Deficiency List. Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer shall apply in writing to the City Engineer for final inspection. The City Engineer shall schedule a preliminary final inspection. A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items is excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final inspection may be halted and rescheduled to a date determined by the City Engineer. When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the subdivider for correction. Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as outlined in the deficiency list, the developer shall state in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The City Engineer shall then make a final inspection. Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been corrected and receipt of as-built improvement plans, the subdivision improvements shall be placed on the City Council agenda for acceptance or accepted by the City Engineer in the manner provided by this Chapter. The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered.

9.8.100 Completion of Improvements
This Section indicates the requirements that govern the completion of improvements.

A.    Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels. Improvements shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months, or such time as approved by the City Engineer, not to exceed a period of thirty-six (36) months, from the date of approval of the Final Map, unless an extension is granted by the City Council or City Engineer. Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the City Council may, by resolution, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the surety or sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B.    Subdivisions of Four (4) or Fewer Parcels. Completion of improvements will not be required until such time as a permit or other grant approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required prior to a specified date when the City Engineer finds completion of such improvements to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the Subdivision Improvement Agreement and shall not exceed thirty-six (36) months after a permit or other approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is approved. The City Engineer shall determine if all improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy of any specified unit within the subdivision.

C.    Extensions. The completion date may be extended by the City Council for subdivision of five (5) or more parcels and by the Planning Commission for subdivision of four (4) or fewer parcels, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the Subdivision Improvement Agreement. The subdivider shall enter into a Subdivision Improvement Agreement extension with the City. For subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels, the agreement shall be prepared and signed by the City Engineer, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the City Council for its consideration. If approved by the City Council, the Mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the City. For subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels, the agreement shall be prepared by the City Engineer, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by the subdivider and the provider of the surety and executed by the Community Development Director on behalf of the City. In consideration of a Subdivision Improvement Agreement extension, the following may be required:

1.    Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the City Engineer;

2.    Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the City Engineer;

3.    Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; and/or

4.    Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. The City Council, or the City Engineer for subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels, may impose additional requirements as recommended by the City Engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition of approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. The costs incurred by the City in processing the agreement shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost.

9.8.110 Acceptance of Improvements
This Section provides the requirements that govern the acceptance of construction improvements for a subdivision.

A.    General. When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans submitted, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the City for acceptance Improvements for subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels may be accepted by the City Council. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the acceptance of improvements for subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. If there are no improvements dedicated to the public, the City Engineer shall record a notice of completion of subdivision improvements with the County Recorder.

B.    Acceptance. After all improvements are accepted and public improvements dedicated on the Final Map, the City Clerk shall record an acceptance of public improvements with the County Recorder. The City Engineer shall file the acceptance of improvements dedicated on Parcel Maps with the County Recorder.

C.    Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the City may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements. Acceptance will only occur if the City finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. The City Engineer shall file the acceptance of improvements dedicated on Parcel Maps with the County Recorder.

9.8.120 Supplemental Improvement Capacity
As a condition of approval of a Tentative Map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the City shall, subject to the provisions of Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. The City Council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

A.    The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use.

B.    The contribution to the subdivider of that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse the City for such costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider.

C.    The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited.

D.    No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.4.30.H and the City Council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

E.    In addition to the notice required by subsection D of this section, written notice of the hearing shall be given to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Notice shall be served by mail by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date established for the hearing.

Chapter 9.9 Reversions to Acreage
9.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures by which subdivided property may be reverted to acreage. Any such reversion is subject and pursuant to the provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map Act. This Chapter shall apply to Final and Parcel Maps.

9.9.20 Initiation of Proceedings
Reversions to acreage may be initiated by the following:

A.    By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the City Engineer. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 9.8.30 and such other information as required by the City Engineer.

B.    By City Council. The City Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the City Engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings and to file a Notice of Intent to Revert to Acreage with the County Recorder for recording.

9.9.30 Contents of Petition
The petition shall contain but not be limited to the following:

A.    Evidence of title to the real property;

B.    Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

C.    Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the Final Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

D.    Evidence that no lots shown on the Final or Parcel Map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such Final or Parcel Map was filed for record;

E.    A Tentative Map in the form prescribed by Chapter 9.4 of this Article;

F.    A Final or Parcel Map in the form prescribed in Chapter 9.3 or 9.6 of this Article, which delineates dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or Parcel Maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage";

G.    A deposit as required by the City Engineer toward processing and plan checking costs in accordance with the City’s resolution establishing fees and charges.

9.9.40 Submittal of Petition
The Final or Parcel Map for the reversion together with all other data as required by this article shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act, the City Engineer shall submit the Final or Parcel Map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the City Council for its consideration.

9.9.50 City Council Approval
A.    A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 9.4.30.H. The Community Development Director may give other notice that he or she deems necessary or advisable. The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds that:

1.    Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

2.    Any of the following:

a.    All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion or

b.    None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the Final or Parcel Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later or

c.    No lots shown on the Final or Parcel Map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record.

B.    As conditions of the reversion, the City Council shall require:

1.    The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements;

2.    The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this Chapter or the Subdivision Map Act.

3.    Any other conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

9.9.60 Filing with County Recorder
Upon approving the reversion to acreage, the City Engineer shall transmit the Final or Parcel Map, together with the City Council resolution approving the reversion, to the County Recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the Final Map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the Final or Parcel Map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect.

Chapter 9.10 Parcel Mergers
9.10.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for parcel mergers.

9.10.20 Mergers Not Required
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of this Article or the Subdivision Map Act shall not merge solely by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels are held by the same owner. No further proceedings under this chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing.

9.10.30 Mergers Required
Two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner shall be considered as merged if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to the standards for minimum parcel size, under Article 7, and if all the following requirements are satisfied:

A.    At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

B.    With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

1.    Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.

2.    Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

3.    Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.

4.    Does not meet slope stability standards.

5.    Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

6.    Its development would create health or safety hazards.

7.    Is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

To determine whether contiguous parcels have the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. Subsection B of this section shall not apply if one or more of the contiguous parcels or units complies with Section 9.10.90.

9.10.40 Notice of Intention to Determine Status
Prior to recording a notice of merger the Community Development Director shall mail, by first class mail, a notice of intention to determine status to the current record owner of the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged and the owner may request a hearing before the Community Development Director to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record at the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner.

9.10.50 Hearing on Determination of Status
The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing with the Community Development Director within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the Community Development Director shall set a time, date and place for a hearing and notify the owner by first class mail. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the owner’s request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the Community Development Director and the property owner. At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements of Section 9.10.30. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Community Development Director shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of the determination.

9.10.60 Determination of Merger
If the Community Development Director makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a determination of merger shall be recorded within ninety (90) days of the mailing of the notice of the hearing to the owner. The determination of merger shall specify the name of the record owners and a description of the property. If the Community Development Director makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be recorded and a clearance letter mailed to the owner.

9.10.70 Determination When No Hearing is Requested
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the Community Development Director may, at any time, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a determination of merger shall be recorded within ninety (90) days of the mailing of the notice of intent to determine status.

9.10.80 Request to Merge by Property Owner
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by the record owner(s), the owner(s) may waive the right to a hearing before the Community Development Director and to all notices required by this Chapter. Upon receipt of the waiver, the Community Development Director shall record a notice of intention to determine status, a waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a notice of merger simultaneously.

9.10.90 Unmerged Parcels
Any parcel which has merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984, and for which a notice of merger has not been recorded prior to January 1, 1984, shall be unmerged if on that date:

A.    The parcel meets each of the following criteria:

1.    Contains at least 5,000 square feet in area.

2.    Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

3.    Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.

4.    Meets slope density standards.

5.    Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

6.    Its unmerger and development would create no health or safety hazards.

7.    The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

B.    And, with respect to the parcel, none of the following conditions existed on or before July 1, 1981:

1.    One or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is enforceably restricted open-space land by a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement.

2.    One or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is timberland or is land devoted to an agricultural use.

3.    One or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made with a use permit issued by the City.

4.    One or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral extraction has been issued by the City.

9.10.100 Request for Determination by Owner
Upon written application made by the owner, the Community Development Director shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or are to be unmerged. If the Community Development Director determines that the parcels have not merged, the owner shall be so notified. If the Community Development Director determines that the parcels have merged and that they meet the requirements for unmerger in Section 9.10.90, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and recorded which shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged. If the Community Development Director determines that the parcels have merged and do not meet the requirements in Section 9.10.90, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and a description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and recorded.

9.10.110 Fee for Mergers and Unmergers
The fee for processing by the City shall be in accordance with the City’s resolution establishing fees and charges.

Chapter 9.11 Corrections and Amendments to Filed Maps
9.11.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the procedures for corrections and amendments to filed Final or Parcel Maps.

9.11.20 Requirements
A recorded Final or Parcel Map may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map for the following purposes:

A.    To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

B.    To show any course or distance that was omitted there from;

C.    To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

D.    To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, replacement or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; or

E.    To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed with respect to location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character.

F.    To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the Community Development Director, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the Final or Parcel Map.

G.    To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that such modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if such modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the Community Development Director or Planning Commission according to Section 9.4.30.H. The Community Development Director or Planning Commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification.

9.11.30 Form and Contents
The form and contents of an amending map shall be prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer or Licensed Land Surveyor and conform to the requirements of Section 9.6.20 if a Final Map, or Section 9.3.20 if a Parcel Map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction.

9.11.40 Submittal and Approval by the Community Development Director
The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to Final form, shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for review and approval. The Community Development Director shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those in Section 9.11.20, above, this fact shall be certified on the amending map or certificate of correction.

9.11.50 Filing with the County Recorder
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the Community Development Director shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the County Recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively. The original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and shall impart constructive notice of all the corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map.

9.11.60 Fee
The fee for checking, processing and recording the amended map or certificate of correction shall be in accordance with the City’s resolution establishing fees and charges. A deposit to be applied toward this fee may be required by the Community Development Director upon submittal of the amended map or certificate of correction for his or her review.

Chapter 9.12 Enforcement of Subdivision Article Provisions
9.12.10 Purpose of this Chapter
This Chapter sets forth the procedures for enforcing the provisions of this Article.

9.12.20 Prohibitions
The following prohibitions shall apply to this Article:

A.    No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property, or commence grading or construction of any building for sale, lease or financing except for model homes, or allow occupancy, for which a Final Map is required by this Article or the Subdivision Map Act, until a map, in full compliance with the provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the County Recorder for record.

B.    No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing except for model homes, or allow occupancy, for which a Parcel Map is required by this Article or the Subdivision Map Act, until a map, in full compliance with the provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the Recorder.

C.    Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a Final or Parcel Map is required shall not be made by parcel number, letter or other designation, unless and until the Final or Parcel Map has been filed for record with the County Recorder.

D.    Subsections A through C of this section do not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

E.    Nothing in Subsections A and B of this section shall prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements where the sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a Final or Parcel Map.

9.12.30 Remedies
A.    Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this Article or the Subdivision Map Act, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heir, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his assignee, heir or devisee.

B.    Any grantee, or successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this Article or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the Superior Court to recover any damages suffered by reason of the division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 9.13.40 or identified in a recorded Final or Parcel Map, from and after the date of recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

D.    This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the City or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of Los Angeles County, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or financing in violation of this Article.

E.    The City shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this Article or the Subdivision Map Act if it finds that development of the real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of the real property at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is the current owner of the real property, with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of interest in the real property. The City, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, may impose those additional conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the City may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record, only those conditions stipulated therein shall be applicable.

9.12.40 Certificate of Compliance
A.    Any person owning real property may request the Community Development Director to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of this Article and the Subdivision Map Act.

B.    Upon making a determination that the real property complies with this Article and the Subdivision Map Act, the Community Development Director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with the Subdivision Map Act and this Article.

C.    If the Community Development Director determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code or Subdivision Map Act, the Community Development Director may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions according to Section 9.12.30(E). Upon making a determination and establishing conditions, the Community Development Director shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the County Recorder. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with the conditions shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property is issued.

D.    A recorded Final or Parcel Map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

E.    For the purposes of administration of this section, any parcel which conforms to the Zoning Ordinance and was shown on the County Assessor’s maps as a separate parcel prior to 1978 shall be considered as a conforming parcel.

F.    A fee to be charged at actual cost shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. A deposit may be required to be applied toward this fee.

9.12.50 Notice of Violation
If the Community Development Director or authorized representative has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this Article or the Subdivision Map Act, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by first class mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owner, describe the violation(s) and state that the owner will be given opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the Community Development Director why a notice of violation should not be recorded. The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than sixty (60) days from the date of mailing.

If, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to notify the Community Development Director of his or her objection to the recording of the notice of violation, the Community Development Director shall record it. If, after the owner presents evidence, the Community Development Director determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the Community Development Director shall record the notice of violation with the County Recorder. If, after the owner presents evidence, the Community Development Director determines that there has been no violation, the Community Development Director shall mail a clearance letter to the owner. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in the property.

9.12.60 Penalties
Each violation of this Article by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation of property involved in the violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment. The City may alternatively, in its discretion, charge such a violation as a misdemeanor. Every other violation of this Article is a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Article shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by both. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

9.12.70 Judicial Action
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the Community Development Director, Planning Commission or City Council concerning a subdivision, or of any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced and service of summons effected within 90 days after the date of the decision. Thereafter all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of the decision or of the proceedings, acts or determinations. Any such proceeding shall take precedence over all matters of the calendar of the court except criminal, probate, eminent domain and forcible entry and unlawful detainer proceedings.

Article 10
Regulation of Businesses and Franchises
Contents of Article

Chapter 10.1    Introduction to Article 10

10.1.10    Purpose of this Article

Chapter 10.2    Regulation and Business Licensing

10.2.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.2.20    Business License Requirements

10.2.30    Separate License Required for Each Location

10.2.40    Denial of Business Application

10.2.50    Exempt Activities

10.2.60    Transfer and Assignment

10.2.70    Display of Business License

10.2.80    Exhibition of Business License

10.2.90    Revocation or Suspension of Business License

10.2.100    No Authorization of Illegal Business

10.2.110    Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor

Chapter 10.3    Motion Picture, Television, and Photographic Production

10.3.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.3.20    Permit Required

10.3.30    Permit Exemptions

10.3.40    Permit Application Process

10.3.50    Permit Fees

10.3.60    Cost of Additional Services

10.3.70    Permit Issuance Conditions

10.3.80    Insurance

10.3.90    Hold Harmless Agreement

10.3.100    Conditions-Restrictions

10.3.110    Cleanup/Restoration

10.3.120    Violation

Chapter 10.4    Pipeline Franchises

10.4.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.4.20    General Conditions

10.4.30    Specific Conditions

10.4.40    Relocation

10.4.50    Damage Caused By Defective Facilities

10.4.60    Hazardous Substances

10.4.70    City Council Approval of Location of Facilities

10.4.80    Damage to Public Property

10.4.90    Costs of Litigation

Chapter 10.5    Compensation to the City

10.5.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.5.20    Compensation from Public Utilities Transmitting Oil or Products of Oil

10.5.30    Compensation from Public Utilities Transmitting Substances Other than Oil or Products of Oil

10.5.40    Compensation from Nonpublic Utilities

10.5.50    Pro-ration of Payments

10.5.60    Records and Inspections

Chapter 10.6    Construction of Pipelines

10.6.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.6.20    General Requirements

Chapter 10.7    Special Provision for Oil Pipeline Franchises

10.7.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.7.20    Rights Granted

10.7.30    Materials Used

10.7.40    Approvals

10.7.50    Reports

10.7.60    Payments Due

10.7.70    Non-applicability

Chapter 10.8    Special Provisions for Natural Gas and Other Public Utility Pipeline Franchises

10.8.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.8.20    Plan Approval

10.8.40    Condition of Approval

10.8.50    Gas Pipelines

10.8.60    Report of Gross Receipts

10.8.70    Report of Pipeline Footage

Chapter 10.9    Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance

10.9.10    Purpose of this Chapter

10.9.20    Cable Television Systems

10.9.30    Franchise Applications and Renewal

10.9.40    Contents of Cable Television Franchise Agreements

10.9.50    Open Video Systems

10.9.60    Other Multi-channel/Video Programming Distributors

10.9.70    Antennas for Telecommunications Services

10.9.80    Application Requirements

10.9.90    Violations; Enforcement

10.9.100    Severability

Chapter 10.10 State Video Franchises

10.10.10    Purpose and Application of this Chapter

10.10.20    State Video Franchise Fees and Fees for Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access

10.10.30    Audit Authority

10.10.40    Customer Service Penalties

10.10.50    Procedures for Appeal of Denial of an Encroachment Permit

Chapter 10.1 Introduction to Article 10
10.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to outline procedures related to the regulation of certain businesses and franchises in the City of La Habra Heights.

Chapter 10.2 Regulation and Business Licensing
10.2.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations that govern Business Licenses in the City of La Habra Heights.

10.2.20 Business License Requirements
The following Business License requirements are applicable in the City of La Habra Heights:

A.    No person as principal, agent, employee, officer or otherwise, shall commence or carry on any business within the City, without having first:

1.    Applied for and received a business license specifying such business;

2.    Paid all applicable application and license fees;

3.    Obtained any permit required by the City; and

4.    Paid any permit fee required.

B.    In particular, the following businesses are considered to be regulated businesses and must obtain a Business License from the City of La Habra Heights:

1.    Home security services (including alarm installation services).

2.    Animal grooming and other related activities that conduct on-site services.

3.    Landscaping contractors and maintenance services.

4.    Architects and designers, engineers, landscape architects or designers and other persons involved in design of development.

5.    Contractors including building, plumbing, electrical, heating, and other similar service providers.

6.    Handyman and household repair service providers.

7.    Any business that requires a Home Occupation Permit.

C.    It is unlawful for any person, other than an employee of a person possessing a valid Business License from the City, to engage in business in the City without having first procured a Business License from the City.

D.    It is unlawful for any person required to obtain a Business License from the City to retain the services of an independent contractor unless the independent contractor shall have first procured a Business License from the City.

E.    The City Manager shall approve or deny an Application for a Business License.

10.2.30 Separate License Required for Each Location
For each business operating from a fixed location, a separate license certificate shall be obtained for each separate branch, establishment or location of the business. Each license certificate shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed at the location and in the manner designated on the Business License.

10.2.40 Denial of Business Application
The City Manager shall deny an application for a license certificate for the calendar year in which the application is made if it is found that the person or business submitting the application has violated other sections of this Code in addition to having failed to obtain a license certificate prior to the start of the business activity. The Applicant has the right of appeal pursuant to Article 8 of this Municipal Code.

10.2.50 Exempt Activities
A.    The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require a Business License or the payment of a license fee for the following:

1.    Charitable Activities. The conducting, managing or carrying on of any business, occupation or activity for charitable or educational purposes by any organization that presents proof of its designation as a tax-exempt organization for charitable purposes in a form which is satisfactory to the City Manager.

2.    Minor Students. The conducting of a business, otherwise permitted by City ordinance, by youth, under the age of eighteen (18) years, and living in the City.

3.    Homeowners association. Any bona fide homeowners association.

B.    The following businesses and organizations shall be required to obtain a Business License and any necessary permits, but shall not be required to pay a Business License fee:

1.    Auctioneers. Any person arranging, managing, sponsoring or carrying out of an auction sale of goods, wares, merchandise or any real or personal property, provided that such person be licensed with the State of California.

2.    City Contractors. Any individual whose only business within the City is contracting with the City to perform personal services, including, but not limited to, teaching classes, providing temporary support services or maintenance services.

10.2.60 Transfer and Assignment
No Business License shall, in any manner, be transferred or assigned, nor shall it authorize any person other than the licensee or the licensee’s employees therein named to engage in business.

10.2.70 Display of Business License
Every person having a Business License but not having a fixed place of business in the City shall carry such license at all times when engaged in the business for which the license has been granted. In addition, the following requirements apply:

A.    Every person operating any wheeled vehicle in connection with activity requiring a Business License must procure a vehicle sticker. The vehicle sticker shall identify the license plate number of the vehicle to which it is assigned and a permit number to be assigned by the City.

B.    The vehicle sticker shall be attached in a conspicuous location on the rear of the vehicle to which it is assigned in such manner that the sticker shall be plainly visible at all times.

C.    Vehicle stickers shall not remain on a vehicle after the expiration date of said sticker.

D.    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the licensee, his/her authorized agent or an officer of the City, to remove any vehicle sticker required pursuant to this Section from a vehicle to which it has been attached.

E.    Delivery vehicles and vehicles associated with a legitimate, licensed business enterprise shall not be required to exhibit the City’s vehicle sticker when operating within the City, provided that each and every vehicle operating in the City shall bear the name of the responsible person or business in a location plainly visible to the public.

10.2.80 Exhibition of Business License
Every person having a City Business License shall present the license whenever, in the course of business, it is requested by any police officer, firefighter, or other authorized City official.

10.2.90 Revocation or Suspension of Business License
This Section provides for revocation or suspension of a Business License and the procedures that are to be followed thereto.

A.    Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. Any Business License issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager if any of the following circumstances occur:

1.    The licensee is conducting a business not permitted by the Business License.

2.    The licensee is engaged in an activity prohibited by State or Federal law.

3.    The licensee is conducting the business in a manner that threatens the health or public safety of City residents.

4.    The licensee has refused to comply with a legal requirement of the City.

B.    Grounds for Suspension or Revocation Provided to Licensee. The City Manager may revoke or suspend a license certificate or permit only after the grounds have been presented to the licensee and the licensee has been provided an opportunity to respond.

C.    Revocation or Suspension Subject to Appeal. The revocation or suspension of any license may be appealed or called for review pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 8.

D.    Surrender of License or Permit. In the event that a Business License is revoked or suspended, the certificate or vehicle sticker shall be surrendered to the City. No refund shall be provided for any fee or portion thereof paid for the license or sticker. The surrender of a license or sticker shall not constitute a waiver of any requirement for the licensee to pay any penalties due.

10.2.100 No Authorization of Illegal Business
No license issued hereunder shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business.

10.2.110 Violation Punishable as Misdemeanor
Any person or entity that violates any provision of this Chapter of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the provisions of Article 8.

Chapter 10.3 Motion Picture, Television, and Photographic Production
10.3.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations applicable to motion picture, video production and other forms and types of media production. This Chapter shall be known as the Motion Picture, Television and Photographic Production Ordinance. This Chapter applies to all activity that is attendant to the staging or shooting (videotaping or filming) commercial or noncommercial motion pictures, television shows, programs or commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or use for a commercial purpose.

10.3.20 Permit Required
No person shall use any public right-of-way or any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, taking or making any commercial or noncommercial motion picture, television or photographic production without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.

10.3.30 Permit Exemptions
The requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to current news productions which include reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events. Neither shall the requirements of this Chapter apply to productions that are created or conducted by the City.

10.3.40 Permit Application Process
Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the City. The following application requirements apply:

A.    The application form must be signed and accompanied by all fees and deposits, and any hold harmless agreement or insurance certificate required by this Chapter before it will be processed.

B.    The application shall be submitted at least five (5) working days prior to the date on which it is desired to conduct the activity for which a permit is required.

C.    If such activity can be expected to interfere with traffic, the application shall be submitted at least two (2) weeks in advance.

D.    If the application satisfies the criteria of this Chapter, the permit shall be issued within five (5) working days of submittal, or within seven (7) days of submittal if the activity requires traffic control in excess of fifteen (15) minutes or includes stunts or special effects, or within ten (10) days of submittal if activities require road closures.

10.3.50 Permit Fees and Deposits
Each permit application shall be accompanied by payment of the following fees and deposits:

A.    A permit processing fee in an amount established by the City Council. The processing fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations that qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code.

B.    A daily services fee in an amount established by the City Council. The daily services fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations that qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code.

C.    A deposit in the amount of the estimated cost of providing additional services as described in Section 10.3.60.

10.3.60 Additional Services
If deemed necessary by the City Manager, additional law enforcement, traffic control, code enforcement, fire, or other City services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting, and regulating the proposed activity. Any additional City services required will be provided and coordinated at the discretion of the City Manager. In the event the City’s actual cost for providing additional services exceeds the estimated cost, the Applicant will pay the difference to the City. Failure of the Applicant to pay the difference will constitute a basis for the City to revoke outstanding permits and to deny future permits. If the City’s actual cost for providing additional services is less than the estimated cost, the City will refund the difference to the Applicant.

10.3.70 Permit Issuance Conditions
The City Manager shall issue a permit as provided for in this Chapter when, from consideration of the application and such other information as may be otherwise obtained, it is found that:

A.    The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and no streets will be restricted or closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Seventy-two (72) hours’ notice of any street closure shall be given.

B.    The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations or previously scheduled City events or services, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the Applicant.

C.    The condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard to public property or public safety and all property safety precautions will be taken as determined by the City. The decision of the City Manager to issue, conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five (5) working days of the decision by requesting a hearing before the City Council.

10.3.80 Insurance
As a condition of issuing such a permit, the Applicant shall furnish insurance in the amount to be determined by the City Manager, but in no event less than one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars, to protect the City against claims for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the City for damage to City property arising out of the activities. An additional minimum of five million ($5,000,000.00) dollars of general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event aircraft are used in the activity. A copy of the insurance policy shall remain on file with the application. The City shall be named as an additional insured under a policy that shall not be subject to cancellation until after thirty (30) days’ written notice to the City. The Applicant shall also submit verification that adequate Worker’s Compensation insurance coverage is maintained.

10.3.90 Hold Harmless Agreement
The Applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement in a form provided by the City prior to the issuance of any permit to indemnify, defend and protect the City against any and all claims arising out of or relating to, activities conducted by the permittee or any damage to City property arising out of or relating to, activities conducted by the permittee.

10.3.100 Conditions-Restrictions
The Applicant shall maintain a copy of the permit on site at all times. No production may be conducted between the hours of ten o’clock p.m. and seven o’clock a.m. The Applicant shall also comply with any and all conditions or restrictions the City may impose in issuing a permit. No changes in conditions or restrictions shall be made without first obtaining the written approval of the City Manager. Changes to the permit may be approved by the City Manager prior to completion of filming in the form of a written attachment to the permit. (Ord. 2015-06 § 1)

10.3.110 Cleanup/Restoration
The Applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris to the City’s satisfaction within two (2) hours of the completion of the activity or within such other time established in the permit. The Applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the City’s satisfaction, the City Manager shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and Applicant shall reimburse City for such work within ten (10) days of completing filming. In the event Applicant fails to so reimburse City, City may secure its reimbursement from either a cash or surety bond that will be posted with the City to ensure faithful performance of such restoration. Such faithful performance bond shall be filed at the time of the application in an amount of five hundred ($500.00) dollars or in any higher amount determined by the City Manager to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The amount of the bond shall in no way limit the Applicant’s liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration in the event these costs exceed the bond amount.

10.3.120 Violation
Violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Article 8.

Chapter 10.4 Pipeline Franchises
10.4.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing pipeline franchises. This Chapter may be cited as the La Habra Heights Pipeline Franchise Ordinance.

10.4.20 General Conditions
Every pipeline franchise granted by the City is subject to the requirements of this Chapter provided, however, that if the agreement granting a franchise specifies provisions that augment, modify, or waive the requirements of this Chapter, then such provisions will control. A franchise granted under this Chapter also authorizes service connections required for the operation of pipes or pipelines, including power supply, conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and other appurtenances that are necessary or convenient for the exercise of the franchisee’s business.

10.4.30 Specific Conditions
This Section identifies specific requirements applicable to pipeline franchises. The provisions of this Chapter apply to every franchise to lay or construct pipes and pipelines, and to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove, or abandon in place pipes and pipelines in, under, along, or across streets or public or private property within the City. Pipes and pipelines may be authorized, together with manholes, valves and appurtenances, for the collection, transportation, or distribution of oil, gas, and other substances.

A.    Pole Lines. Nothing in this Chapter or in any agreement granting a franchise may be construed to permit the franchisee to install new poles or other facilities above ground.

B.    Term. The agreement granting the franchise may establish the term of the franchise, but no franchise may be for a term in excess of ten (10) years.

C.    Acceptance of Franchise. Within thirty (30) days after the City Council’s adoption of an agreement granting a franchise, the franchisee must file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of that agreement.

D.    Nonexclusive Franchise. The grant of a franchise does not preclude the City from granting an identical or similar franchise to another person.

E.    Change in Status. After being awarded a franchise, if a nonpublic utility franchisee qualifies with the California Public Utilities Commission as a public utility, that franchisee may not, unless otherwise authorized by State law, continue to operate under the franchise unless it obtains the consent of the City Council. If the franchisee is the operator of a non-public utility pipeline transmitting oil or products of oil, or other liquids or gases, that consent may be granted only upon the franchisee’s compliance with the provisions of this Code.

F.    Maps. Within ninety (90) days after the date on which any facilities or appurtenances have been laid, removed or abandoned under the franchise, the franchisee must file with the Community Development Department a map or maps accurately showing the "as built" location, depth, and size of those facilities or appurtenances.

G.    Insurance. On or before commencement of any franchise operations, the franchisee must provide satisfactory evidence of having obtained policies of comprehensive general liability and workers’ compensation insurance from companies authorized to transact business as insurers in the State of California. The following insurance requirements shall apply:

1.    The policy of comprehensive general liability insurance must be issued to the franchisee and name the City, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insured’s.

2.    The insurance policy must indemnify the City against all liability for personal and bodily injury, death, and damage to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to the franchise and provide for the following:

a.    Coverage for acts or omissions of the franchisee, its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations;

b.    A combined single-limit liability insurance coverage in the amount of ten million ($10,000,000.00) dollars.

c.    No cancellation or modification without thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the City.

3.    The policy of workers’ compensation insurance must:

a.    Be in a form and substance previously approved by the California Insurance Commissioner.

b.    Cover all employees of franchisee who will be employed or do work related to the franchise operations.

c.    Provide for benefits and payments as required by Division 4 of the California Labor Code, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits.

d.    Be non-cancelable and non-modifiable without thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the Community Development Director.

4.    Franchisee must file with the Community Development Director, prior to commencement of any franchise operations, either certified copies of the required insurance policies, or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies, executed by the insurer issuing the policy, and containing the following information with respect to each policy:

a.    The policy number.

b.    The effective date of the policy, and its expiration date.

c.    The name of the insured and of any additional insureds.

d.    The type and limits of coverage provided by the policy.

e.    A description of all endorsements that form a part of the policy.

5.    No franchise operations may commence until franchisee has complied with the provisions of this section. All franchise operations will be suspended during any period that franchisee fails to keep in effect the required insurance policies.

H.    Faithful Performance Bond. On or before the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, franchisee must file with the Community Development Director a corporate surety bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney, in the penal sum of one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars or such larger sum as may hereafter be established by the City Council. This bond must be issued by an admitted surety insurer approved by the Director and the City Attorney, and provide that franchisee will perform each condition of the franchise and that, upon any breach of condition of the bond, the whole amount of the penal sum will be deemed to be liquidated damages and will be recoverable from the principal and sureties on the bond. If this bond is not filed before the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the award of the franchise may be set aside and the ordinance granting the franchise may be repealed. If these actions are taken by the City Council, any money paid in consideration for the award of the franchise will be forfeited. After it has been filed, if the bond becomes insufficient at any time during the term of the franchise, the franchisee must obtain a new bond, in a form approved by the City Attorney, within ten (10) days after written notice is given by the Director.

I.    Alternate Security. In lieu of the bond required under Subsection H of this Section, the franchisee may provide alternate security in such form as approved by the Director and the City Attorney.

J.    Forfeiture. The franchisee must comply with all conditions contained in the ordinance granting the franchise, including those conditions contained in this Chapter that are not augmented, modified or waived by that ordinance. Any failure by the franchisee to comply with any conditions of the franchise will constitute grounds for its suspension or forfeiture. Before any suspension or forfeiture of the franchise, the City must give to the franchisee not less than thirty (30) days’ written notice of any default. Within the noticed period, if the franchisee does not commence the work of compliance or, after commencing, does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the City Council may hold a hearing. Notice of the hearing must be given to the franchisee by certified mail not less than five (5) days before the hearing. At that hearing the franchisee has the right to appear and be heard. The City Council may then determine whether the conditions are material to the operation of the franchise and whether the franchisee is in default of those conditions. The City Council may, in its discretion, declare the franchise suspended or forfeited.

K.    Value of Franchise. If a franchise is awarded to a grantee that is a public utility, the grantee, by accepting its terms and conditions, agrees that in any proceeding to adjust the rates of the grantee, no greater value may be placed upon the franchise than the actual amount paid for it by the grantee.

L.    State Highway. If any street or portion of a street becomes a State highway, the State will succeed to all rights reserved to the City by the franchise, except for the right to continue to collect franchise payments and such other rights as by law may remain with the City. This section applies to any street or portion of a street that becomes a State highway and in which the franchisee maintains its facilities under the authorization of the franchise at the time that street or portion of it becomes a State highway.

M.    Eminent Domain. No franchise granted by the City affects the right of the City or any successor in authority to acquire the property of the franchisee by purchase or condemnation, and nothing contained in the franchise may be construed to contract away, modify, or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City’s right of eminent domain in respect to any public or nonpublic utility.

N.    Publication Costs. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an itemized statement, the franchisee must pay to the City all advertising and publication costs that are incurred in granting the franchise.

O.    Assignment. The franchisee may not transfer or assign the franchise, or any part of it, except with the consent of the City Council. A transfer or assignment may be made only after filing with the City Council a copy of the executed instrument of transfer or assignment and a written request for the consent of the City Council to that transfer or assignment. If that executed instrument and written request are not filed with the City Council within thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the proposed transfer or assignment, then the franchise is subject to forfeiture and the City Council may, without notice, adopt an ordinance repealing the franchise. In consenting to the proposed transfer or assignment, the City Council may impose any additional terms and conditions upon the franchise, and upon the transferee or assignee, that the City Council deems to be in the public interest. The franchisee has no right to transfer or assign the franchise, in whole or in part, except in the manner specified by City Council terms and conditions. This section applies to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by voluntary act of the franchisee, or otherwise.

P.    Prior Franchises. All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated, or maintained by the franchisee in the streets or other areas described in the agreement granting the franchise, whether or not originally installed by the franchisee, and which are in existence prior to the effective date of the agreement, are subject to all terms and conditions of the agreement upon its effective date. This section does not apply to facilities that have been constructed, laid, operated, or maintained under a prior right that did not involve the issuance of a franchise.

Q.    Delegation of Duties. Wherever in this ordinance a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of that officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized by statute or by ordinance.

R.    Hold Harmless. The franchisee will indemnify, defend (with counsel acceptable to the City), and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, and employees, from and against all damages and liability arising from the use, operation, or possession of the franchise, and from the use, operation, and maintenance of all facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained under the franchise. This indemnification also applies to pipelines that are to be abandoned under the provisions of this Chapter.

S.    Standards. All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated, or maintained under the provisions of the franchise must comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations now existing or hereafter adopted by the City and consistent with the best practices in the industry.

T.    Conflicting Improvements. If the City or any other authorized public entity constructs or maintains any storm drain, sewer structure, reclaimed or potable water line, or other facility or improvement under or across any facility of the franchisee that is maintained in accordance with the ordinance, the franchisee must provide, at no expense to the City or other public entity, such support as is reasonably required for the support, maintenance and protection of that facility or improvement.

10.4.40 Relocation
In connection with any work of improvement specified in this Chapter, if the franchisee, after reasonable notice, fails or refuses to relocate, permanently or temporarily, its facilities that are located in, on, upon, along, under, over, across, or above any street, or to pave, surface, grade, repave, resurface or re-grade a street as required under any provision of the franchise, then the City may cause that work to be done. The City must keep an itemized account of the entire cost of that work, and the franchisee must reimburse the City for that cost within thirty (30) days after its receipt of an itemized account of that cost. The franchisee is obligated to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, and employees, from any liability that arises or is claimed to arise, from the moving, cutting, or alteration of any of the franchisee’s facilities, or the turning on or off of water, oil, or other liquid, or of gas or electricity.

10.4.50 Damage Caused By Defective Facilities
If any portion of a street is damaged as a result of defective facilities laid or constructed under the franchise, the franchisee must, at its sole expense, repair that damage and restore the street to the condition existing before the damage was incurred, all to the satisfaction of the City. If the franchisee, within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the City instructing it to repair the damage, fails to commence compliance with those instructions, or, after commencing compliance, fails to prosecute diligently the work to completion, then the City may immediately undertake whatever work is necessary to carry out those instructions. That work will be at the cost and expense of the franchisee. By the acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee agrees to pay that cost and expense upon demand. If the damage creates an immediate danger to the public health or safety requiring immediate repair, the City may repair that damage without notice, and the franchisee must pay the reasonable cost of that repair upon demand.

10.4.60 Hazardous Substances
Prior to the issuance of an excavation permit for the construction or installation of a new pipeline for the transportation of a hazardous substance in a gaseous state, or for the transportation of hazardous liquid substances or highly volatile liquid substances, the following conditions must be satisfied, as applicable:

A.    Approval must be first obtained from the Fire Chief for the installation of pipelines for the transportation of a hazardous substance in a gaseous state. This approval will be based upon a determination that no undue fire hazard will threaten life or property in any areas of the City where the proposed pipeline will be located. In making this determination, the Fire Chief must consider and report upon the following:

1.    The type of substance in a gaseous state that is to be transported in the pipeline.

2.    The density of population or structural development in the areas of the City where the pipeline will be located.

3.    The adequacy of water supplies for fire suppression purposes.

4.    The availability of public fire protection facilities.

5.    The number and location of shut-off valves in the pipeline.

B.    With regard to pipelines for the transportation of hazardous liquid substances or highly volatile substances, including hydrocarbon substances, the franchisee must, unless preempted by paramount State or Federal law, submit to the Community Development Director, copies of documents previously submitted to the State Fire Marshal that provides evidence for the following:

1.    That the new pipeline is designed to accommodate the passage of instrumented inspection devices and that the operator has leak mitigation and emergency response plans and equipment required by the State Fire Marshal, as provided for in the California Government Code.

2.    That the newly constructed pipeline will be tested in accordance with Subpart E (commencing with Section 195.300) of Part 195 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as provided for in the California Government Code.

3.    That the franchisee will notify the State Fire Marshal and the City Fire Department at least three (3) working days prior to conducting a hydrostatic test required by the Elder California Pipeline Safety Act of 1981 (Government Code Section 51010 et seq.), as provided for in the California Government Code.

4.    That the franchisee will provide to the City Fire Department a map or suitable diagram showing the location of the pipeline, a description of all products to be transported within the pipeline, and a contingency plan for pipeline emergencies that includes, without limitation, any reasonable information that the State Fire Marshal may require, as provided for in the California Government Code.

5.    That the franchisee will be available to meet with the City Fire Department at least once each calendar year to discuss and review contingency plans for pipeline emergencies, as provided for in the California Government Code.

6.    That, with regard to any portion of the proposed pipeline that is within five hundred (500) feet of any rail line in the City, the franchisee will be in compliance with all applicable regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal governing the construction, testing, operations, periodic inspection, and emergency operations of intrastate hazardous liquid pipelines, as provided for in the California Government Code.

7.    That the franchisee will comply with all applicable regulations of the State Fire Marshal that establish procedures for maintaining, testing, and inspecting mainline valves and check valves on the intrastate hazardous liquid pipeline, as provided for in the California Government Code.

8.    That the franchisee will be in compliance with all applicable guidelines and regulations of the State Fire Marshal relating to the spacing of valves on new pipelines so as to limit spillage as provided for in the California Government Code.

9.    That the franchisee will immediately report to the City Fire Department, as well as the Office of Emergency Services, every rupture, explosion, or fire involving the pipeline, including the testing of such pipeline, as provided for in the California Government Code.

10.4.70 City Council Approval of Location of Facilities
A franchisee may not install or operate any facilities in any public street, highway, road, alley or other public place without first obtaining the prior approval of the City Council. The City Council may approve the location of the facilities as requested by the franchisee in its application for a franchise, which approval may be adopted concurrently with the adoption of an agreement granting the franchise. The locations of additional facilities, if any, must be approved by subsequent approvals of the City Council.

10.4.80 Damage to Public Property
Any damage caused directly or indirectly to any public property by the franchisee, while exercising any right, power, or privilege under a franchise, or while performing any duty under the provisions of this section, must be promptly reported by franchisee to the Community Development Director. At the direction of the Community Development Director, such damage shall be promptly repaired at the franchisee’s sole cost and expense to specifications reasonably established by the Community Development Director or by the authorized representative of any non-City public entity which owns or controls the property in issue.

10.4.90 Costs of Litigation
If a legal action is instituted to enforce any terms and conditions of a franchise granted under Chapters 10.4 through 10.8, or to recover damages attributable to an alleged breach of the terms and conditions of that franchise, the prevailing party is entitled to recover from the losing party all reasonable costs and expenses incurred in that litigation and such amount as the court may determine to be reasonable attorney’s fees for the representation of the prevailing party in that action.

Chapter 10.5 Compensation to the City
10.5.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the pipeline franchise fees that must be paid to the City of La Habra Heights.

10.5.20 Compensation from Public Utilities Transmitting Oil or Products of Oil
As consideration for the award of any franchise to a public utility for a pipeline system transmitting oil or products of oil, including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, the franchisee must pay to the City the following fees:

A.    Base Annual Fee. During the term of the franchise, a base annual fee must be paid within thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar year, including the year in which the franchise is granted. The base annual fee is determined by multiplying the pipe length expressed in feet by the applicable base rate, as follows:

Pipe Size (Internal) Diameter

Base Rate Per Lineal Foot

0-4-inches

$0.088

6-inches

$0.132

8-inches

$0.176

10-inches

$0.220

12-inches

$0.264

14-inches

$0.308

16-inches

$0.352

18-inches

$0.396

20-inches

$0.440

22-inches

$0.484

24-inches

$0.528

26-inches

$0.572

28-inches

$0.616

30-inches

$0.660

For pipelines with an internal diameter not listed above, the fees will be in the same proportion to the fees for a twelve (12) inch-diameter pipe as the diameter of the unlisted pipe is to twelve (12) inches. The formula used in computing the annual fee also applies to any replacement, modification or extension of the pipeline.

B.    Adjustments. The base annual fee provided for in Subsection A of this section will be adjusted at the time payment is due by multiplying the base annual fee by the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Office of Information, for the month of September immediately preceding the month in which payment is due, and divided by the Consumer Price Index for June 30, 1989 (June 30, 1989 = 100.0). The multiplying factor may not be less than one (1). In no event will a base annual fee be charged that is less than the amount of the base annual fee established by Subsection A of this Chapter. The indices specified herein are calculated and published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau discontinues the calculation or publication of the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area, and no transposition table is available to convert to another index, then the amount of each annual adjustment in base fees will be computed by using a comparable governmental index.

C.    Conversion of Nonpublic Utility to Public Utility. Upon the expiration of a franchise issued to the operator of a nonpublic utility pipeline transmitting oil or products of oil, if that operator has converted or seeks to convert to public utility status, all of the following must be established to the satisfaction of the City Council in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6231.5(f):

1.    Its property is dedicated to the service of the public.

2.    Its rates for transportation are established in accordance with tariffs filed with the California Public Utilities Commission ("Commission").

3.    Its accounts and records are established in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Commission.

4.    It has filed an appropriate annual report with the Commission.

5.    Its rates for transportation are just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory, as evidenced either by an order of the Commission approving those rates, or an application for approval of its rates that is pending with the Commission.

10.5.30 Compensation from Public Utilities Transmitting Substances Other than Oil or Products of Oil
As consideration for the award of any franchise to a public utility for a pipeline system transmitting substances other than oil or products of oil, including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, the franchisee must pay to the City the following fees:

A.    Base Annual Fee. As provided in Section 6231(c) of the California Public Utilities Code, the franchisee must pay to the City during the term of the franchise two (2%) percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchisee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; but this annual payment may not be less than one (1%) percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchise derived from the sale within the boundaries of the City of the utility service for which the franchise is awarded.

B.    Adjustments. The City reserves the right to change the fees imposed by this section at three (3) year intervals from the effective date of the agreement granting the franchise, if, following a public hearing, that action is not in conflict with the law of the State of California.

10.5.40 Compensation from Nonpublic Utilities
The franchisee of any franchise awarded to any entity other than a public utility, as consideration for that franchise, including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, must pay to the City the following fees:

A.    Base Granting Fee. Upon the initial grant of a franchise, or a franchise that extends, renews, or continues a previously granted franchise, a base granting fee must be paid in accordance with the following provisions, whichever is applicable:

1.    For pipelines with a total length of one-quarter (1/4) mile or more, the base granting fee will be seven thousand five hundred ($7,500.00) dollars.

2.    For pipelines with a total length of less than one-quarter (1/4) mile, the base granting fee will be the sum of one thousand six hundred ($1,600.00) dollars. If, at any time during the first five (5) years following the grant of a franchise, additional pipeline is added that results in a total length of pipeline of one-quarter (1/4) mile or more, payment of the base granting fee as determined above will be required at the same time that footage is added.

The base granting fee must be paid within thirty (30) days the City Council adopts the agreement granting the franchise and before the franchisee files its written acceptance of the agreement.

B.    Base Franchise Fee. The franchisee must pay to the City a base franchise fee for the area occupied by the pipeline at an annual rate of one dollar and sixty-eight ($1.68) cents per cubic foot. The base franchise fee is payable annually during the term of the franchise, at the end of each "franchise payment period" as defined in this Code, including the year of granting the franchise. The base franchise fee accrues at the end of each franchise payment period for the area occupied by the greatest number of feet of pipeline during that period. For purposes of this paragraph, the area occupied by a pipeline or conduit, including protective covering, pipe connections, cathodic protection facilities, pipe casings, and other minor appurtenances, is equivalent to the volume occupied by a cylinder of equal length having a diameter that is one (1) inch (for metal pipe) or two (2) inches (for plastic pipe) greater than the nominal internal diameter of the pipe or conduit, but in no case with an equivalent cylinder diameter less than four (4) inches. The applicable payment rate must be computed to the nearest tenth of a cent per lineal foot of pipe. The area occupied by any appurtenances, such as manholes or vaults, must be computed from the outside dimensions of the structure. The annual base franchise fee must be paid no later than January 15 after the end of each calendar year. A penalty will be imposed at the rate of ten (10%) percent per month, or fraction thereof, for any delinquent payment that is made thirty (30) days or more after the payment due date. The City reserves the right to adjust the base franchise fee specified above at any time after the effective date of the agreement granting a franchise, but the base franchise fee applicable to anyone (1) franchise may be changed only three (3) times during the life of that particular franchise.

C.    Base Construction Charges. Upon commencement of the installation, relocation, or replacement of any pipeline or other facility covered by the franchise, the franchisee must pay a base construction charge of three thousand three hundred eighty-four ($3,384.00) dollars for each one-half (1/2) mile of trench or fractional part thereof that is installed on major streets, and two thousand two hundred thirty-two ($2,232.00) dollars for each one-half (1/2) mile of trench or fractional part thereof that is installed on minor streets. In either case, the actual costs of inspection may be charged if they exceed the base construction charge. The City reserves the right to change these base construction charges at any time after the effective date of the agreement granting a franchise, but the base construction charges applicable to anyone (1) franchise may be changed only three (3) times during the life of that particular franchise.

D.    Adjustments. Base fees specified in the Section will be adjusted as follows.

1.    At the time payment is due, the amount of each base fee will be adjusted by the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area (1982-84 = 100), for the period July 1, 1998, to the date that is sixty (60) days prior to the due date of the fee.

2.    No base fee will be charged that is less than the amount of the base fee specified in paragraphs B and C of this section.

3.    The indices specified above are calculated and published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau discontinues the calculation or publication of the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area (1982-84 = 100), and no transposition table is available to convert to another index, then the amount of each annual adjustment in base fees will be computed by using a comparable governmental index.

10.5.50 Proration of Payments
If facilities are abandoned by the franchisee with the approval of the City as elsewhere provided in this Article, or if facilities are removed by the franchisee, or if a franchise is granted that has an initial franchise payment period of less than six (6) months, the annual base franchise fee will be prorated for that calendar year, as of the end of the calendar month in which that abandonment, removal or grant occurs.

10.5.60 Records and Inspections
Franchisee must preserve for a period of five (5) years all records necessary to determine the amount of any fee that is payable to the City under the provisions of this Chapter. At all reasonable times, the franchisee must permit the City to inspect all property of the franchisee that is erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained under the franchise, and to examine and make copies of all books, accounts, papers, maps, and other records maintained by the franchisee, or under its control, that concern the operations, transactions, property, or financial condition of the franchisee. These records must be made available to the City at a location in either Los Angeles County or Orange County.

Chapter 10.6 Construction of Pipelines
10.6.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the construction of pipelines in the City of La Habra Heights.

10.6.20 General Requirements
Pipelines and appurtenances must be constructed and maintained in a good and workmanlike manner and in conformity with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and standards. The installation or replacement of pipelines, appurtenances, and all other facilities necessary for the operation, maintenance, and safety of pipelines and conduits must be in accordance with permits issued by the Community Development Department. All proposed installations or replacements must be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director as to their proposed location and depth. The Director’s decision will be final and binding on the franchisee.

A.    Permits. Where the provisions of any ordinance, rule, or regulation require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment or similar type of permit, the franchisee may not commence any excavation or encroachment work under the franchise until it has obtained that permit from the City. Excepted from this requirement are emergencies affecting the public health, safety or welfare, or the preservation of life or property, in which case the franchisee must apply for a permit not later than the next business day after work commenced. The franchisee’s application for the permit must include a map showing the length, depth, and proposed location of the pipeline or appurtenances and such other information as the Community Development Director may require. The franchisee must pay to the Community Development Director all permit inspection fees.

B.    Work on and Restoration of Streets. The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing or removing those pipelines and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this Article in, over, under, along or across any street must be conducted so as to cause the least possible interference with pedestrian and vehicular travel on the street. As soon as the work is completed, all portions of the street that have been excavated or otherwise damaged must be promptly repaired, replaced or restored and placed in substantially the condition that existed before the commencement of the work. The restoration, repair or replacement work may, as determined by the Community Development Director, require the resurfacing, slurry-sealing or other treatment of a street to a minimum of one (1) driving lane, and all work must be done to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director and at the expense of the franchisee. If a franchisee fails or neglects to undertake or complete the repair, replacement, or restoration work on any street, then ten (10) days after written notice has been given to franchisee by the Director, the City may repair, replace or restore that street at the expense of the franchisee; provided, however, that a shorter period of notice, as determined by the Director, will apply where there is an immediate threat to the public health, welfare, and safety. Franchisee must pay to the City all costs incurred in performing that work. The amount chargeable is the direct cost of that work, plus the current rate of overhead then charged by the City for reimbursable work.

C.    Failure to Timely Comply. If the franchisee fails to complete any work within the time specified in a permit, the City may require the franchisee to pay to the City not more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars per day as liquidated damages for each day that construction extends beyond the time specified in the permit. If the franchisee fails to complete any work required by the terms and conditions of the franchise, or any related permits, within the required time limits, the City may complete or cause to be completed that work at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee must pay to the City the cost of performing that work. The amount chargeable to franchisee is the direct cost of that work, plus the current rate of overhead then charged by the City for reimbursable work.

D.    Completion Statement. Upon the completion of the construction of any pipelines or appurtenances authorized by the franchise, the franchisee must submit to the Community Development Director a statement that identifies the permit or permits issued by the Community Development Department and by any other permitting authorities, the total length of pipeline authorized to be constructed under the permit or permits and the total length of pipelines or appurtenances actually laid. The franchisee must also file with the Community Development Director "as built" maps.

E.    Appurtenances. The franchisee has the right to construct, maintain and repair all manholes, conduits, valves, appliances, attachments and appurtenances (collectively referred to as "appurtenances") as may be necessary for the proper maintenance and operation of the pipelines. Appurtenances must conform to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the City, and to all permits issued by the Community Development Department and must not interfere with the use of the street for travel. The franchisee has the right, subject to the City’s ordinances, rules, and regulations, to make necessary excavations in the streets for the construction, maintenance and repair of those appurtenances, but the franchisee must first obtain an Encroachment Permit from the Department to undertake that work.

F.    Ordinary Repair. The franchisee may excavate in the street for pipeline repair for the number of days agreed upon by the franchisee and the Community Development Department but the franchisee must first obtain an Encroachment Permit from the Department to undertake that work.

G.    Relocation of Pipelines and Appurtenances. Pursuant to Section 6297 of the California Public Utilities Code, the City reserves the right to change the grade, alignment, or width of any public street, way, alley or place over which the franchise is granted, including the construction of any subway or viaduct. If any pipelines, facilities or appurtenances constructed, installed or maintained by the franchisee are located in a manner that prevents or interferes with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvements, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of a street, the franchisee must relocate that facility, at no expense to the City, upon receipt of a written request from the Director. The franchisee must commence that work on or before the date specified in the written request, which date may be not less than thirty (30) days from receipt of the written request. Franchisee must then diligently prosecute that work to completion. The City reserves the right for itself, and all other public entities that are now or may later be so authorized, to lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description within the streets over which the franchise is granted. If the City or other public entity determines that the location or relocation of those facilities or improvements conflicts with the facilities laid, constructed, or maintained under the franchise, whether those facilities were laid before or after the facilities of the City or other public entity were laid, the franchisee must relocate those facilities or improvements, at no expense to the City or other public entity. The franchisee must, on or before the date specified in a written request from the Director, which date may not be less than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice and request, commence work to relocate all facilities that conflict with those improvements to another location approved by the Director. Franchisee must then diligently prosecute the work to completion. If the street is later designated as a State highway, the rights of the State of California will be as provided in Section 680 of the Streets and Highways Code while it remains a State highway.

H.    Breaks or Leaks. If any portion of a street is damaged by reason of breaks or leaks in any pipeline, conduit, or appurtenance constructed or maintained under the franchise, the franchisee must, at its sole expense, promptly repair that damage and put the street in substantially the condition that existed before that damage or leak, all to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department. The franchisee must obtain an Encroachment Permit from the Community Development Department to undertake that work within 24-hours or by the end of the next business day.

I.    Emergency Equipment. At all times during the term of the franchise, the franchisee must maintain or arrange for an emergency telephone number on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Adequate emergency equipment, and a properly trained emergency crew, must be available within a radius of twenty-five (25) miles from any facilities installed or maintained under the franchise. The emergency crew must be capable of shutting off the pressure and the flow of substances in those facilities in the event of an emergency resulting from an earthquake, act of war, civil disturbance, fire, flood, or any other cause.

J.    Removal or Abandonment of Facilities. The following requirements apply to the abandonment and/or removal of facilities owned by a franchise:

1.    Upon the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise, or upon the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee must, within the following thirty (30) days, make written application to the Community Development Director for authority, as determined by the franchisee, either to abandon all or a portion of those facilities in place or to remove all or a portion of those facilities. The application must describe the proposed facilities to be abandoned or removed by reference to the map or maps required by this Chapter and must describe with reasonable accuracy the physical condition of those facilities.

2.    The Community Development Director must determine whether the abandonment or removal proposed by the franchisee may be effected without detriment to the public interest and under what conditions the proposed abandonment or removal may be safely effected. Those conditions may include, without limitation, a requirement that pipelines or mains be purged and filled with an inert gas prior to abandonment. The franchisee must be notified of the Community Development Director’s determination. The franchisee must pay to the City the cost of all tests and studies required to determine the disposition of the application for abandonment or removal.

3.    Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, the franchisee must apply for a permit from the Community Development Department to abandon or remove all or any portion of the facilities and must pay all applicable fees and costs. The permit must set forth any conditions of abandonment or removal that may be prescribed by the Community Development Director. Any abandonment of the facilities must be conditioned, in part, upon franchisee’s future compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

4.    Within ninety (90) days after obtaining the permit, the franchisee must commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work authorized by the permit.

5.    If the franchisee applies for authority to abandon in place all or a portion of its facilities, and the Community Development Director determines that abandonment in place may be effected without detriment to the public interest, the franchisee must pay to the City a fee to be computed as follows:

Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

Amount Per Lineal Foot

0-12 inches

$15.00

14-18 inches

$22.00

20-30 inches

$28.00

For pipelines with an internal diameter not listed above, the amount per lineal foot will be in the same proportion to the fees for a twelve (12) inch diameter pipe as the diameter of the unlisted pipe is to twelve (12) inches.

K.    Failure to Comply. If any facilities proposed to be abandoned "in place" and subject to prescribed conditions are not abandoned in accordance with those conditions, the Director may issue additional orders, including an order that the franchisee remove any or all of those facilities. The franchisee must comply with these additional orders. If the franchisee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment or removal as required by this Chapter and within the time prescribed by the Director, then the City may remove or cause to be removed those facilities at the franchisee’s expense. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. The franchisee must pay to the City the cost of that work, plus the current rate of overhead then charged by the City for reimbursable work. Upon the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise, or after the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, if the franchisee fails or refuses within thirty (30) days to make written application for the authority referenced above, the Director will make the determination as to whether the facilities are to be abandoned in place or removed. The Director must then notify the franchisee of that determination. The franchisee must then comply with the applicable provisions of Subsection J.

L.    Abandonment "In Place" Conditions. Facilities abandoned "in place" are subject to the condition that, if at any time after the effective date of the abandonment, the Community Development Director determines that any facility interferes with a public project, the franchisee or its successor-in-interest must remove that facility at its expense when requested to do so by the City, or pay the City for the cost of that removal.

Chapter 10.7 Special Provision for Oil Pipeline Franchises
10.7.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to indicate special regulations governing oil pipeline franchises.

10.7.20 Rights Granted
A franchisee that is granted an oil pipeline franchise has the right, during the term of that franchise, to transport oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud and other liquid substances through the pipelines maintained under the franchise.

10.7.30 Materials Used
All pipelines used for the transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, or other flammable liquids, must be of standard material and in conformity with American Petroleum Institute pipeline specifications.

10.7.40 Approvals
No permit for a pipeline to be constructed or installed in accordance with the franchise may be issued unless the franchisee has complied with all applicable provisions of this Article relating to pipelines for the transportation of hazardous liquid substances or highly volatile liquid substances. This requirement does not apply to emergency situations, such as those involving the mitigation of pipeline ruptures, spills, or leaks.

10.7.50 Required Reports
During the term of the franchise, and within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, the franchisee must file with the Community Development Director two (2) copies of a report, verified under penalty of perjury by a duly authorized representative of the franchisee, showing for the immediately preceding franchise payment period (i) the length of all lines in streets; (ii) the internal diameter of those lines; (iii) the rate per foot per year; and (iv) the total amount due the City. In addition, the franchisee must file a report in triplicate, showing the number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise payment period, together with the length and size of those mains. The franchisee must show on this report any change in pipeline footage since the last franchise payment period, segregating that footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in any territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period.

10.7.60 Payments Due
Except for pipelines lawfully constructed and maintained other than by the authority granted by a City franchise, the franchisee’s payments accrue from the date of installation, whether before or after the effective date of the agreement granting the franchise.

10.7.70 Non-applicability
Sections 10.7.50 and 10.7.60 of this Chapter do not apply to public utility pipelines that transmit oil or products of oil.

Chapter 10.8 Special Provisions for Natural Gas and Other Public Utility Pipeline Franchises
10.8.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing water, natural gas and other public utility pipeline franchises.

10.8.20 Rights Granted
The franchisee that provides water service or natural gas service has the right, during the term covered by the franchise and subject to its provisions, to make service connections with all property that adjoins public streets and to distribute water or gas for any purpose through its pipelines to all territory in the City adjacent to those pipelines.

10.8.30 Plan Approval
All new pipelines, replacements, and extensions for the transmission of water or gas must be constructed, laid, and designed according to plans approved by the Community Development Director and by all other regulatory agencies that have jurisdiction.

10.8.40 Condition of Approval
The Fire Chief must also approve the plans if pipelines for the transmission of water to be laid, extended or replaced are designed to operate in conjunction with related facilities, such as fire hydrants. The location of fire hydrants must take into consideration required domestic demand and meet water pressure standards specified by the Board of Fire Underwriters. As further consideration for the granting of a water pipeline franchise, the franchisee must, at the request of the City Fire Department, install fire hydrants at no cost to the City (except a reasonable monthly rental) designed to specifications reasonably established by the Fire Chief in consultation with the Director. Fire hydrants must be of a size and type acceptable to the Fire Chief and must be installed at those locations along the franchisee’s water mains that are designated by the Fire Chief.

10.8.50 Gas Pipelines
On all pipelines carrying gas heavier than air that are laid in accordance with the franchise, the Director must approve the placement and method of installation of flush-valve connections in the pipeline. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodities transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves will be considered when making that determination.

10.8.60 Report of Gross Receipts
The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a mutual water company, or to a public utility (other than a public utility operating a pipeline system transmitting oil or products thereof), must file a report with the Director for each franchise payment period. Within thirty (30) days after each franchise payment period, the franchisee must file two (2) copies of a report, verified by a responsible officer, showing the total gross receipts of the franchisee received or accrued during the franchise payment period in connection with the furnishing of the commodity or service and arising from the use or operation of the franchise. The franchisee must also submit any additional data that may be required by the Director to calculate or verify the calculation of the base annual fee required by this Chapter (or the pro rata portion of that fee for the first franchise payment period if less than six (6) months). Payment of the base annual fee is to be made concurrently with the filing of the statement. If the amount paid is incorrect, in the judgment of the City, it may order the payment of any additional sum that it may find due and, if not paid, or if paid under protest, the same may be determined by suit.

10.8.70 Report of Pipeline Footage
Within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each franchise report period, the franchisee must file with the Community Development Director a report in triplicate, showing the number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise report period, together with the length and size of those mains. The franchisee must also report any change in pipeline footage since the last franchise report period, segregating that footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period.

Chapter 10.9 Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance
10.9.10 Purpose of this Chapter
The purpose of this Chapter is to specify regulations governing telecommunications facilities. This Chapter is known and may be cited as the Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance of the City of La Habra Heights. This Chapter is intended to establish regulatory provisions that authorize the City to regulate cable television and telecommunications services and systems to the extent authorized by Federal and State law including, but not limited to, the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and applicable California statutes and regulations.

10.9.20 Cable Television Systems
In accordance with applicable Federal and State law, the City is authorized to grant one (1) or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the City limits.

A.    Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Chapter may authorize the grantee to do the following:

1.    To engage in the business of providing cable service and such other telecommunications services as may be authorized by law and which grantee elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area.

2.    To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated franchise service area.

3.    To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law.

B.    Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the City without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this Chapter.

C.    Term of the Franchise. A franchise granted under this Chapter will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of agreement adopted by the City Council that authorizes the franchise. A franchise granted under this Chapter may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of State and Federal law and of this Chapter.

D.    Franchise Territory. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the City and within any area added to the City during the term of the franchise unless otherwise specified.

E.    Federal or State Jurisdiction. This Chapter will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this Chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.

F.    Franchise Nontransferable. The Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the City Council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the City Council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this section.

The following requirements apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a partnership or a corporation, prior authorization of the City Council is required where ownership or control of twenty-five (25%) percent more of the partnership interests or the voting stock of grantee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, owns or controls those partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or of grantee’s upper tier controlling companies, as of the effective date of the franchise.

Grantee must notify the City in writing of any foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee’s franchise property, or upon the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial part of that franchise property. That notification will be considered by the City as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior consent of the City Council to that change in control of ownership will apply.

For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the City may inquire as to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee must assist the City in that inquiry. In seeking the City’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transfer or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the City not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements during the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the Applicant are determined to be satisfactory, then the City will consent to the transfer of the franchise.

Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee’s assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the City that it, or a designee satisfactory to the City, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon grantee’s default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety (90) days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen (18) months unless authorized by the City, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the City to transfer the franchise to another grantee.

Grantee must reimburse the City for the City’s reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses may include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be subject to maximum limits that are specified in the franchise agreement between the City and the grantee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the City during the term of the franchise.

G.    Geographical Coverage. The Grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system so as to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the franchise service area, subject to any service-area line extension requirements or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement. After service has been established within all or any part of the franchise service area by activating trunk or distribution cables, grantee must provide service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that thirty (30) day period.

H.    Nonexclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system, or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable State and Federal law. If addition of another franchisee is proposed, a noticed public hearing must first be held in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53066.3.

I.    Multiple Franchises. The City may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable State and Federal law. The City may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:

1.    The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage.

2.    The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.

3.    The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way.

J.    Undergrounding. The City may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the City’s opinion, the rights-of way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables.

10.9.30 Franchise Applications and Renewal
The application for franchises and renewals thereof must conform to the following provisions:

A.    Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the City. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee deposit in an amount established by the City Council must accompany the application. That application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If those costs exceed the application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference to the City within thirty (3) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.

B.    Application Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:

1.    A statement as to the proposed franchise service area.

2.    A resume of the Applicant’s prior history, including the experience and expertise of the Applicant in the cable television and telecommunications industry.

3.    A list of the partners, general and limited, of the Applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the Applicant is a publicly owned partnership or corporation, each owner of ten (10%) percent or more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified.

4.    A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the Applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person.

5.    The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the Applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling Applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the Applicant.

6.    A current financial statement of the Applicant verified by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.

7.    The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities, and equipment.

8.    Any additional information that the City deems to be reasonably necessary.

C.    Consideration of Initial Applications. Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the City Manager will prepare a report and make recommendations to the City Council concerning that application. A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the City Council. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the City Council will make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.

D.    Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. The City and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.

10.9.40 Contents of Cable Television Franchise Agreements
The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television or related telecommunications services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters:

A.    The nature, scope, geographical area, and duration of the franchise.

B.    The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the City, including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment.

C.    Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of State and Federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system.

D.    Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability, and parental control devices.

E.    Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the grantee’s obligations under the franchise agreement.

F.    Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, and indemnification.

G.    Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, including the resolution of subscriber complaints and disputes and the protection of subscribers’ privacy rights.

H.    Requirements relating to the grantee’s support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for the required access channels.

I.    Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the public rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the City, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards.

J.    Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and performance reviews, and the inspection of grantee’s books and records.

K.    Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.

L.    Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise.

M.    The grantee’s obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the City’s operation and management of the cable system.

N.    Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of City staff and the City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.

O.    If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control.

10.9.50 Open Video Systems
The provisions of this Chapter are applicable to an open video system operator that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the City over an open video system.

A.    Application Contents. The application for an Open Video System will include, but not be limited to, the following.

1.    Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the City over an open video system, the open video system operator must file an application with the City. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:

a.    The identity of the Applicant, including all affiliates of the Applicant.

b.    Copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of Intent" filed under 47 CFR § 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the Applicant to operate an open video system in accordance with Section 653 (a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC’s rules.

c.    The area or areas of the City that the Applicant desires to serve.

d.    A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the Applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.

e.    A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the Applicant to deliver the open video system services.

f.    Information in sufficient detail to establish the Applicant’s technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application.

g.    Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the Applicant’s financial ability to:

i.    Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the City.

ii.    Comply with the City’s public, educational, and governmental access requirements as specified below.

iii.    Comply with the City’s requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the sum of five (5%) percent, as specified below.

h.    An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the City that the Applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease.

i.    If the Applicant’s operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the City, the following additional information must be provided:

i.    A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.

ii.    Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the City, in sufficient detail to identify:

(A)    The location and route of all facilities requested.

(B)    The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.

(C)    The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the Applicant proposes to remove or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.

iii.    The Applicant’s statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the Applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees.

j.    The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the City by a video provider, as specified below.

k.    Such additional information as may be requested by the City Manager.

l.    A non-refundable filing fee in an amount established by the City Council.

2.    If any item of information specified above is determined under paramount Federal or State law to be unlawful, the City Manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application.

B.    Review of the Application. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application that is deemed complete, the City Manager will give written notice to the Applicant of the City’s intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the City. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the City and to the Applicant.

C.    Agreement Required. No video programming services may be provided in the City by an open video system operator unless the operator and the City have executed a written agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the City. The agreement between the City and the open video system operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters are not preempted by Federal statute or regulations:

1.    The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension.

2.    The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the City, at specified times, fees on the gross revenues received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR § 76.1511, in accordance with the following standards and procedures:

a.    The amount of the fees on the gross revenues will be five (5%) percent, and will be paid in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under Section 622 of the Communications Act.

b.    The term "gross revenues" means (1) all gross revenues received by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all revenues received from subscribers and all carriage revenues received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and (2) all advertising revenues received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenues are included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the City by the franchised cable operator. The term "gross revenues" does not include revenues, such as subscriber or advertising revenues, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.

3.    The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenues that are required to be paid as specified above in paragraph c.2.

4.    The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the City’s requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR § 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are applicable:

a.    The open video system operator is subject to the same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service area with which its system overlaps.

b.    The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the franchise service area in which the City’s subscribers are located.

c.    The open video system operator may negotiate with the City to establish the operator’s obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may include the City’s franchised cable operator if the City, the open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire.

d.    If the open video system operator and the City are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the City’s jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be imposed:

i.    The open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the City’s franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the City’s franchised cable operator’s annual financial contributions in support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and equipment that are actually used by the City. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the City’s franchised cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services to the City are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator must pay to the City the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator’s depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act.

ii.    The City will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator’s use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes.

e.    The City’s franchised cable operator is required under Federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the City has the right to decide. The City may require that the connection occur on City-owned property or on public rights-of-way.

f.    All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator’s public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator’s matching financial contributions set forth above.

g.    The City will not impose upon the open video system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable operator.

h.    If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR § 76.1505(d) (6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the open video system operator.

i.    The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed on the City’s franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.

5.    If the City and the open video system operator cannot agree as to the application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system operator’s obligations to provide public, educational and governmental access under the provisions of paragraph 4 set forth above, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR § 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the City until the dispute has been finally resolved.

6.    If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in Section 611 (f) of the Communications Act, the City will require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the City’s franchised cable operator.

7.    The authority of an open video system provider to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR § 76. 1505(f).

8.    The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all applicable Federal and State statutes and regulations relating to customer service standards, including the Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code §§ 53054, et seq.), and the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code §§ 53088, et seq.)

9.    If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the City, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the City upon other telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:

a.    Compliance with all applicable City building and zoning codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees.

b.    The coordination of construction requirements.

c.    Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property.

d.    Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification requirements.

e.    The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets.

f.    Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to telecommunications service providers using public property or public rights-of-way.

10.    Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the agreement.

11.    Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of the open video system.

12.    Requirements relating to the open video system operator’s compliance with and implementation of State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system.

13.    Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the City and the open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.

10.9.60 Other Multi-channel/Video Programming Distributors
The term "cable system," as defined in Federal law and as set forth in this Code does not include a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multi-channel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be "cable systems" and are therefore exempt from the City’s franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by Federal law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the City’s public rights-of-way.

A.    Multi-channel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS"), also known as "wireless cable," which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-sight technology.

B.    Local multipoint distribution service ("LMDS"), another form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking services.

C.    Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as "direct-to-home satellite services," which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local regulation of direct to home satellite services is proscribed by the following Federal statutory provisions:

1.    47 U.S.C. § 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.

2.    Section 602 of the Communications Act states that a provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by Federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction.

D.    Video Providers-Registration and Customer Service Standards must comply with all applicable provisions of the following State statutes unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the City:

1.    The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code §§ 53054, et seq.).

2.    The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code §§ 53088, et seq.).

E.    All video providers that are operating in the City on the effective date of this Chapter, or that intend to operate in the City after the effective date of this Chapter, must register with the City, provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the City. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:

1.    The video provider’s name, address, and local telephone numbers.

2.    The names of the officers of the video provider.

3.    A copy of the video provider’s written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as required by Government Code §§ 53054, et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:

a.    Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling.

b.    Customer telephone and office hours.

c.    Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.

d.    Procedures for termination of service.

e.    Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.

f.    Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution.

g.    The video provider’s written commitment to distribute annually to the City, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the customer service standards specified above. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Government Code § 53055.2.

4.    Unless a video provider is exempt under Federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the City in reviewing and processing the registration form.

5.    In addition to the registration fee specified above, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the City, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute resolution is mandated by Government Code § 53088.2(r) through (t).

6.    The City Council may establish a schedule of monetary penalties for the material breach by a video provider of its obligations under subparagraphs (a) through (p) of Government Code § 53088.2. As used herein, the term "material breach" means any substantial and repeated failure to comply with the consumer service standards set forth in Government Code § 53088.2. The provisions of that ordinance must be consistent with the provisions of Government Code § 53088.2. The schedule of monetary penalties may also impose a penalty, as authorized by Government Code § 53056(a), for the failure of a video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code § 53055.1, which penalty may not exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each year in which the notice is not distributed as required by State statute.

10.9.70 Antennas for Telecommunications Services
The City’s Zoning Code sets forth the regulatory requirements that apply to the siting and construction of various categories of antennas that are commonly used in transmitting or receiving telecommunications services.

A.    Telecommunications Service Provided By Telephone. The City Council finds and determines as follows:

1.    The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares invalid all State rules that restrict or limit competition in both local and long-distance telephone service.

2.    The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations.

3.    Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a "telephone corporation" as "every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this State."

4.    Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a telephone corporation "may condemn any property necessary for the construction and maintenance of its telephone line."

5.    The City maintains the power to supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under, or above any public streets, pursuant to CPUC section 2902.

6.    Telephone and telegraph corporations are authorized to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway and erect poles, posts, piers, or abatements for supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters, pursuant to CPUC section 7901.

7.    The City maintains its authority to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner, pursuant to CPUC section 7901.1. Section 7901.1 does not add to or subtract from any existing authority regarding the imposition of fees by the City.

8.    Any permit fee imposed by the City for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes, pursuant to Government Code section 50030.

B.    Local Requirements. A telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed within the City’s public rights-of-way must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, an excavation, encroachment or building permit.

10.9.80 Application Requirements
In addition to the information required by this Code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must submit to the City the following supplemental information:

A.    A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the Applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the Applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the City’s public rights-of-way.

B.    If the Applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience to operate as a "competitive local carrier," the following additional requirements are applicable:

1.    As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the Applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the City a quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the City during the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, which information is sufficient to enable the City to coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.

2.    If the Applicant’s proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way, the Applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.

3.    The Applicant must inform the City whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the Negative Declaration ["Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California"] or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The City’s issuance of a ministerial permit will be conditioned upon the Applicant’s compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as "competitive local carriers."

C.    In recognition of the fact that numerous excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface pavement, and for the purpose of mitigating the adverse impacts of numerous excavations on the quality and longevity of public street maintenance within the City, the following policies and procedures are adopted:

1.    The City Manager is directed to ensure that all public utilities, including telephone corporations, comply with all local design, construction, maintenance and safety standards that are contained within, or are related to, a ministerial permit that authorizes the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way.

2.    The City Manager is directed to coordinate the construction and installation of facilities by public utilities, including telephone corporations, in order to minimize the number of excavations in the public rights-of-way. In this regard, based upon projected plans for street construction or renovation projects, the City Manager is authorized to establish on a quarterly basis one (1) or more construction time periods or "windows" for the installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way. Telephone corporations and other public utilities that submit applications for ministerial permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be required to delay such construction until the next quarterly "window" that is established by the City.

D.    The City reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this Chapter, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with Federal and State law that is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations.

10.9.90 Violations; Enforcement
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in Article 8 of this Code. The misdemeanor penalty is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this Chapter for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the City and a multi-channel video programming distributor or other telecommunications service provider. The City may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this Article.

10.9.100 Severability
If any provision of this Article is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any Federal or State agency having jurisdiction over its subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount Federal or State law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Article, and such determination will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount Federal or State law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision of this Article determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the City and any affected telecommunications service provider; provided, however, that the City must give the affected telecommunications service provider thirty (30) days written notice of that change before requiring compliance with that provision, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the telecommunications service provider to comply with that provision.

Chapter 10.10 State Video Franchises
10.10.10 Purpose and Application of this Chapter
This Chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding State video franchises and operating within the City of La Habra Heights. On January 1, 2007, the State of California became the sole authority with power to grant State video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("DIVCA"). Pursuant to DIVCA, the City of La Habra Heights shall receive a franchise fee from all State franchisees. In addition, the City shall receive from all State franchisees fees to support public, educational, and government access channel facilities. DIVCA confirmed that the City may establish and enforce penalties, consistent with State law, against all State video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the City from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the State. DIVCA leaves unchanged the City’s authority to regulate the City’s current cable franchises and any City cable franchise(s) issued on or before January 1, 2008, until the expiration of any such franchise(s). (Ord. 2008-08 § 1 (Exh. A))

10.10.20 State Video Franchise Fees and Fees for Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access
A.    Any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall pay a fee to the City equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenues of that State video franchise holder.

B.    Effective the first date on which State franchisees begin operating within the boundaries of the City, each State franchisee shall pay a fee to the City equal to one (1) percent of gross revenues ("PEG access facilities fee") of that State video franchise holder to support public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access channel facilities within the City.

C.    The PEG access facilities fee shall be paid quarterly no later than the sixty (60) days following the quarter for which the payment is due. The PEG access facilities fee is in addition to the franchise fee to be paid to the City by the State video service franchise holders.

D.    "Gross revenue," for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 2017-04 § 2; Ord. 2008-08 § 1 (Exh. A))

10.10.30 Audit Authority
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a State video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 10.10.20. (Ord. 2008-08 § 1 (Exh. A))

10.10.40 Customer Service Penalties
A.    Any holder of a State video service franchise shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B.    The City will provide any holder of a State video franchise written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the State video franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the State video franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

1.    For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00) dollars for each occurrence of a material breach.

2.    For the second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand ($3,000.00) dollars for each occurrence of the material breach.

3.    For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred ($7,500.00) dollars for each occurrence of the material breach.

C.    Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required.

D.    The State video service franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt by the State video service franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on a City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements.

E.    The City and any State video service franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, and an authorized representative of the State video franchise holder.

F.    Any penalty imposed on the State video franchise holder shall be paid to the City. As provided for in Section 5900(g) of the California Public Utilities Code, the City shall submit one-half of all penalties received from a State video franchise holder to the Digital Divide Account established in Section 280.5 of the California Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 2008-08 § 1 (Exh. A))

10.10.50 Procedures for Appeal of Denial of an Encroachment Permit
A.    As provided for in Section 5885 of the California Public Utilities Code, the City shall either approve or deny an application from a State video service franchise holder for an encroachment permit within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application.

B.    An “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the City relating to construction or operation of facilities relating to the provision of video service under a State video service franchise.

C.    An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), of the Public Resources Code.

D.    Any City denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial.

E.    An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been denied may appeal the denial to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt by the State video service franchise holder of the denial, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on the City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the denial was inconsistent with statutory requirements. (Ord. 2008-08 § 1 (Exh. A))

Article 11
Reserved
Article 12
Definitions
Contents of Article

Chapter 12.1    Introduction to Article 12

12.1.10    Purpose of this Article

12.1.20    Rules of Convention

Chapter 12.2    Definitions

12.2.10    Defined Terms and Phrases

Chapter 12.1 Introduction to Article 12
12.1.10 Purpose of this Article
The purpose of this Article is to define certain terms used in the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code.

12.1.20 Rules of Convention
The following rules apply in the reading and interpretation of this Municipal Code.

A.    Time of Day. Whenever a certain hour or time of day is specified in this Municipal Code or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this Code, such hour shall be Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in current use in the City.

B.    Number of Days. Whenever a number of days are specified in this Code or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this Municipal Code, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days, unless the number of days is specifically identified as business days.

C.    Other Terms. Any term not specifically defined in this Article shall correspond to that provided in a dictionary.

Chapter 12.2 Definitions
12.2.10 Defined Terms and Phrases
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, the words in the singular include the plural number.

A

Access means the place, means or way by which vehicles, equestrians or pedestrians shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property and/or use.

Access Easement is any recorded access easement.

Accessory Building or Structure is a detached subordinate building or structure or anything constructed or erected, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, that is customarily incidental to the use of the primary or main building or structure located on the parcel. Accessory structures include permanently placed mechanical, electrical or plumbing equipment and fixtures, wells and well heads, detached garages, guest houses, pool houses, greenhouses, studios and workshops, storage sheds, barns, roofed pens or stables and any other open air enclosures having a roof such as gazebos and detached patio covers, when not the primary use on the site.

Accessory Use is a use that is incidental to, though related and clearly subordinate to, a principal use established and permitted on the same lot or parcel of land. The accessory use does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the lot or parcel on which the principal use is located. Accessory uses include the use of accessory structures.

Addition is any new improvement that is incorporated into an existing structure that would result in an increase in square footage.

Administrative Citation is a notice, issued by an enforcement officer, that there has been a violation of the Code and that an administrative fine is imposed.

Agricultural means grubbing, filling, tilling, terracing, trenching, excavation, installation of underground pipes, or any combination thereof for agricultural purposes, which does not require retaining walls or violate City, State, or Federal law.

Agricultural Grading means the movement or disturbance of soil on a parcel of land for agricultural purposes. For purposes of this definition, "movement or disturbance of soil" is limited to grubbing, filling, tilling, terracing, trenching, excavation, installation of underground pipes for irrigation systems, or any combination thereof which does not require retaining walls or violate City, State, or Federal law.

All-Weather means any portion of a driveway or road from every building to a public street which is suitable for use by fire apparatus.

All-Weather Surface is a specially engineered surface designed to provide maximum drainage. Such surfaces are typically constructed of asphalt, concrete, or other impervious surface materials.

Animal Keeping Permit is a permit required to house large animals or small animals (refer to definitions of Animal, Large and Animal, Small).

Animal, Large is a horse, donkey, mule, llama, alpaca, cow, and any other animal of similar size.

Animal Pens are fenced enclosures for the keeping of animals not including arenas or pens with roofs.

Animal, Small is a sheep, goat, pig, miniature horse or hog and any other animal of similar size. Separate restrictions apply to keeping of hogs or swine as compared to other small animals.

Antenna is a device used in communications which radiates and/or receives any radio or television signals for commercial purposes, including but not limited to commercial cellular, personal communication service, wireless model signals, and/or data radio signals. Antenna shall not include any non-commercial satellite dish antenna or any antenna utilized for amateur radio, citizens’ band radio, television, AM/FM or shortwave radio reception purposes.

Antenna, Building-Mounted is an antenna which is mounted to a building, or mounted upon or to the side of another facility or structure such as water tanks, church steeples, clock towers, or sports field lighting.

Antenna, Facade-Mounted is an antenna which is mounted to the facade of a building.

Antenna, Ground-Mounted is an antenna that is mounted to a pole, monopole, tower or other similar freestanding structure that is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna.

Antenna, Utility-Mounted is an antenna which is mounted upon or to the side of another facility, such as utility transmission towers or similar structures.

Appeal Period is the time period during which an appeal of a decision may be requested.

Applicant is any individual, firm, contractor, limited liability company, association, partnership, government agency, municipality, public or private corporation, or any other entity that applies to the City of La Habra Heights for permits to undertake any construction, demolition, renovation project or use or activity within the City that requires City approval.

Architectural Articulation is a physical characteristic of design that is designed to break the planar or linear appearance of a wall or building including breaks or offsets in the continuity of wall or roof surfaces.

Architectural Features are any physical element associated with a structure’s appearance. Architectural features may include but not be limited to wall surface materials, ornamental features, projections, window treatment and siding.

Automatically Self-Setting Alarm System is any alarm that is not monitored at a central station that either continues to sound for more than five (5) minutes or automatically resets to the ready state at a specified time after being activated allowing it to immediately restart the alarm sound. These types of alarms are prohibited in the City of la Habra Heights.

Average Slope is defined as the average slope over a parcel of land and is computed by the following formula:

S = 0.002296 x I x L /A

Where S = Average percent slope

I = Contour interval in feet

L = Summation of length of all contour lines in feet

A = Area in acres of parcel being considered.

B

Banner is any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to, appended on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle.

Barn is any building, structure, or enclosure having a roof designed or used for housing animals.

Bedroom is any habitable room with a closet whose principal purpose is for sleeping.

Best Management Practices (BMPs) are effective, feasible (including technological, economic, and institutional considerations) policies, practices, procedures, or structures implemented to avoid or minimize risks or adverse impacts to natural and cultural resources. For example, BMPs are commonly used to reduce water pollution.

Blue Line Stream is any permanent or intermittent stream so designated and delineated on the current Map prepared by the United States Geological Survey.

Borrow Pit is any quarry including any inactive quarry, active quarry, or quarry undergoing restoration used as a source of earth materials and not part of the grading operations required for site development.

Building is any enclosed structure having a fixed location on the ground and a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, recreation, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.

Building Design means the style, design, and architecture of any permanent construction and improvements including, but not limited to, primary structures, accessory structures, sheds and barns.

Building Height Envelope is the surface that defines the maximum height of any portion or appurtenance of a structure at any point on a parcel.

Building Height is the height of a structure as measured vertically at any point from the highest point of the structure to the finished grade or natural grade whichever is lower, or to the intersection of an adjacent retaining wall with the finished grade or natural grade, whichever is lower, wherever such wall is within ten (10) feet of such measurement.

Business is any profession, craft, trade, occupation or calling of any kind or nature that is carried on for profit or in which goods, materials, commodities, wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale to the public.

C

Cable Service shall mean the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purpose of this definition, Video Programming shall mean programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and Other Programming Service shall mean information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally.

Cable System or Cable Communications System or Cable Television System shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not include:

A.    A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations;

B.    A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;

C.    A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the 1984 Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

D.    An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title VI of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; or

E.    Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system.

Cable System Operator shall mean any person or group of persons:

A.    Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or

B.    Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.

Cell on Wheels (COW) is a mobile cell site that consists of a cellular antenna tower and electronic radio transceiver equipment on a truck or trailer, designed to be a part of a cellular network.

City is the City of La Habra Heights.

City Council is the elected body of decision-makers that serve the electorate of the City of La Habra Heights. The Mayor and the Mayor Pro-tem are members of the City Council.

City Manager is the City Manager of the City or his or her designee.

City Storm Water Management Program (CSWMP) is the local plan for controlling storm water runoff.

Classified Service refers to persons regularly employed in permanent budgeted positions hired for an indefinite term and regularly scheduled to work not less than one thousand (1,000) hours per fiscal year.

CNEL is the Community Noise Equivalent Level. This noise metric is a 24-hour average noise level that is weighted for the evening and morning periods.

Code Enforcement actions shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the time and other resources of public officials expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a residential structure. These include, but are not limited to, site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other evidence, engaging in meetings, conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the City at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the pendency of a judicial or administrative proceeding and other appearances at such judicial or administrative hearings. The time and resources that public officials further expend to confirm that a residential structure remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a residential structure remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action, shall also constitute code enforcement actions.

Code Violation shall mean and include a public nuisance as described or referred to in this Code, or any condition, activity or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, or inaction) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of this Code, any code it adopts by reference or any applicable county state or federal laws or regulations.

Colocation is the placement or installation of wireless telecommunication facilities on existing structures upon which wireless telecommunication facilities already exist.

Commission shall mean an official commission of the City.

Communications Act shall mean the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§ 153, et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

Community Character, is the overall perceived environmental setting of the City and includes the views of densely vegetated rolling hills, extensive natural terrain, foliage and open space, large lots, wide variety of home styles, roads conforming to the natural terrain, quiet and private residential character and dark skies.

Conditional Use is any use or activity that is subject to a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).

Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is a permit granted by the City that allows a non-entitled use within a specific zone district.

Conforming Use is a use permitted in the Zone District in which such use is carried out.

Consent Calendar is a listing of items and/or actions that may be considered and approved concurrently by the City Council. The items may be approved collectively or individual consent items may be removed and considered individually.

Construction is the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure. Construction also includes any site preparation activity, assembly, erection, substantial repair, and the alteration of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

Corrals are fenced uncovered areas used for the confinement of animals.

Cumulative Effect or Cumulative Impact is the combined impact of two or more activities, projects, features or conditions.

Cumulative Footprint is the sum total of all of the footprints located on a lot measured in square feet.

D

Dark Skies is a concept that calls for the preservation of the views of the dark night sky through the control of light and glare from artificial lighting.

Detached Living Quarters is any living space within a detached accessory building located on the same lot or parcel as a single-family residence. Such quarters may not have kitchen facilities.

Development Application is the City Application that must be filed by a prospective developer. The Development Application, in addition to containing information concerning the Applicant and potential development, serves as a guide to the Applicant as to the necessary information that must be provided for the City to initiate the review of a development request.

Development Standards are the specific requirements and regulations that must be met to allow ministerial approval of an application for development.

Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) Provider is a telephone corporation operating pursuant to a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the California Public Utilities Commission in the business of installing distributed antenna system equipment and connecting facilities including without limitation fiber optic cables, powering locations, and hub locations.

Drainage Channel, refer to Storm Water Drainage Channel.

Drilling refers to the drilling conducted to facilitate the location or extraction of subsurface oil or gas, including drilling conducted for maintenance of existing wells.

Dwelling, Dwelling Unit is a building, containing one (1) or more rooms, that is designed and intended to be used for the occupancy by one (1) family for living and sleeping quarters and containing only one (1) kitchen.

E

Earthwork is any earthmoving activity related to grading, excavation and embankment of earth.

Easement is an interest in land created by grant, agreement or other lawful means which confers a right upon the owner of the easement, including a public agency, to some profit, benefit, dominion or lawful use of or over the estate of another.

Enclosed building or structure is a building or structure having a roof and that is not open and free from walls on all sides.

Encroachment Agreement is an agreement between a permittee and the City regarding any excavations, encroachments, and/or obstructions, within the public right-of-way. The City Manager is authorized to execute encroachment agreements on behalf of the City in a form approved by the City Attorney wherever the city Manager determines that the issuance of an encroachment permit with respect to the proposed activity or use would not provide sufficient protection of the property rights of the City or the health, safety and welfare of its residents.

Encroachment Permit is a permit granted by the City that allows limited rights of encroachment into the public right-of-way or road easement.

Enforcement Officer is an individual designated by the City Manager to enforce the provisions of the Code or other applicable law.

Environmentally Sensitive Area is any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and development. These environmentally sensitive areas may include, but are not limited to, those identified by the Department of Fish and Game as supporting rare, threatened, or endangered species, by Los Angeles County as a Significant Ecological Area (SEA), or by the City of La Habra Heights General Plan as being environmentally sensitive.

F

Facilities or Appurtenances shall mean all property of the franchisee, including, but not limited to, pipelines, pump stations, and service connections to the franchisee’s facilities, whether or not installed by the franchisee, that are erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, alone or across any street in accordance with any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

FCC or Federal Communications Commission shall mean the Federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level.

Fence is a barrier composed of any material or combination of materials (including landscaping or man-made materials) placed in a manner so as to enclose or screen property.

Field Recreational Activity is any recreational activity including soccer, baseball or football that involves use of a large outdoor play field.

Fill Slope is an artificial incline of earth created by earth filling but does not include fills having no portion in excess of three (3) feet thick

Fire Resistant Vegetation is vegetation that the Fire Chief determines burns at a relatively low intensity, slow rate of spread, and with short flame lengths. Fire resistant vegetation generally exhibits some or all of the following characteristics: high water content; non-resinous; low volume of total vegetation; drought-tolerant; slow-growing and, when maintained, require little care; and woody stems and branches that require prolonged heating to ignite. Healthy avocado trees shall be considered fire resistant.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is the ratio of the area of the second level of a structure to the area of the first level and includes enclosed second level areas open to the level below.

Footprint is the area of all vertical projections, onto the ground surface, of a house, structure or building, not including decks and patios that are not enclosed, awnings, retaining walls and garden trellises. For purposes of this definition, enclosed means having walls and a roof.

Franchise shall mean an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, issued by the City Council, whether such authorization is designed as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction of operation of a cable system.

Franchise Fee shall mean any fee or assessment or any kind that is authorized by State or Federal law to be imposed by the City on a franchisee as compensation in the nature of rent for the franchisee’s rights under the franchise. The term franchise fee does not include:

A.    Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services);

B.    Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by the franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;

C.    Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

D.    Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

Franchise Payment Period or Franchise Report Period shall mean (i) the period between the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise and December 31 of the same calendar year; and (ii) each successive calendar year during the term of the franchise.

Franchise Service Area or Service Area shall mean the entire geographic area of the City as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.

Franchisee shall mean a person who is granted a franchise, and a person to whom a franchise is lawfully assigned.

Fuel Modification Zone is an area of a parcel of land where the volume of flammable vegetation is to be or has been reduced through specified degrees of thinning and/or removal of organic material.

G

Geotechnical Hazard Mitigation Program (GHMP) is the City procedure required to identify and mitigate land stability hazards that could adversely affect new or adjacent land or development.

Good Housekeeping Practices are all practices related to the storage, use or cleanup of materials performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants.

Grade, Finished is the exposed ground surface following grading and development.

Grade, Natural is the topography that existed as of the date of the City’s incorporation.

Grading is the movement or disturbance of soil on a parcel of land. For purposes of this Municipal Code, grading is any earth movement associated with a project that requires a Grading Permit (also refer to Grading Development Project) and includes the ground surface beneath any structure or paved or similarly covered area.

Grading, Contour (also Grading, Landform) is a type of grading that mimics natural terrain and landform. This type of grading creates artificial slopes that have curves and varying slope ratios in the horizontal and vertical planes designed to simulate the appearance of surrounding natural terrain.

Grading Development Project is any development, subdivision, construction, grading or other activity that requires the issuance of a grading permit by the City.

Grading, Permanent is the altered topography that will remain at the end of the project. This type of grading results in a Finished Grade and is the grading controlled by graded area limits.

Grading Permit is a City permit that must be obtained prior to any grading requiring a permit.

Grading, Rough is any excavation, disturbance or filling (or any combination thereof) of earth.

Graffiti Implement is any device or tool that is used to creating graffiti. Such devices may include, but not be limited to, markers, pens, paint, brushes and spray paint.

Grantee shall mean any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this Code and that person’s lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.

Gross Annual Cable Service Revenues shall mean the annual gross revenues derived from the grantee’s operations of its cable television system within the City, excluding uncollected bad debt, refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales, excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct pass-through to the local, State or Federal government. Revenues identified and collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a grantee’s gross annual cable service revenues.

Group Care, Licensed is the licensed use of a residence for care of more than six (6) persons for assisted or unassisted living as defined by the State of California.

H

Habitable is any structure or room that is suitable and fit for a person to live in and free of defects that endanger the health and safety of occupants.

Hardscape is any structure or other covering in contact with the ground and includes materials commonly used in building construction such as wood, asphalt and concrete, and also includes, but is not limited to, all structures, decks and patios, paving including gravel, pervious or impervious concrete and asphalt.

Hardscape Area is the total area of a lot or parcel that is covered by hardscape features and surfaces.

Haul Route is the specific street route trucks will use in the import or export of materials to and from a site.

Haul Route Permit is the permit that must be obtained from the City to identify the Haul Route and conditions ancillary to the activity.

Hearing Officer or Authority is the City Manager or other specified person or his or her designee, including any appointed non-employee hearing officer, except where otherwise specified.

High Water Line is the highest elevation surface water has or is projected to attain during maximum postulated flood conditions.

Home Occupation is an occupation conducted out of a private residence requiring a Home Occupation Permit as specified by the Home Occupation Ordinance.

I

Infraction(s) refers to the act or an instance of infringing or violating a State, Federal or local law in a manner that is not punishable by imprisonment.

Issuance Date of a Citation is the day an Administrative Citation is personally served on a responsible person, is mailed to a responsible person, or is posted on real property where a property related violation occurred.

Issue a Citation means to give, mail, or post an Administrative Citation or permit or other legal document.

J

K

Kitchen is any room or interior floor area space used, intended or designed for the cooking or preparation of food. This definition does not include outdoor cooking areas.

L

La Habra Heights Municipal Code refers to this Code as the codified portion of the Ordinances of the City of La Habra Heights.

Large Vehicles are those vehicles that do not fit in a typical enclosed garage attached to a residential structure. Large vehicles include motor homes, camping trailers and other types of recreational vehicles having maximum heights greater than seven (7) feet or lengths greater than twenty (20) feet.

Light Trespass is light that infringes on the privacy or draws the attention of residents of other properties through excessive light intensity, glare, or spillover.

Lot is a parcel, tract or area of land legally established by plot, subdivision, or otherwise, to be used, developed or built upon. The burden of proof to demonstrate that a unit of land is a "legal lot" is always upon the owner of the land, and not upon the City.

Lot Area is the total area of land measured in a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot.

Lot Coverage is the amount of land surface, usually quantified in terms of a percentage, that is covered by structures or other hardscape surfaces.

Lot Line Adjustment is the procedure for revising a parcel lot line.

Lot Line, Front is a line separating the front yard from any public road or Private Residential Access Road upon which the yard abuts.

M

Mail shall mean delivery via the U.S. Postal Service, first class.

Mains shall mean any pipelines or conduits laid in, along, or approximately parallel with any street for the collection, transmission or distribution of any substance or commodity.

Mass Grading is grading continuous between development or use areas on one or more lots.

Misdemeanor(s) is a violation of the City of La Habra Heights Municipal Code that may be subject to imprisonment of less than one year and/or fines.

Monopole is a structure composed of a single pole used to support antennas or related equipment.

Mounted means attached or supported.

Multi-Channel Video Programming Distributor or Video Programming Distributor shall mean a person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.

Multiple-Lot Development is any residential development involving the simultaneous development of two or more lots in close proximity and under the same ownership or control.

Municipal Code refers to the La Habra Heights Municipal Code.

N

Native Species refers to plants or animal that are native (indigenous) to the local habitat(s).

Natural Topography, refer to Grade, Natural.

Neighborhood Character is the local reflection of Community Character modified by the inclusion of unique qualities or features that distinguish one neighborhood from another.

Neighbor Privacy, refer to Privacy.

Net Area is that portion of a lot or parcel of land that is not subject to permanent grading or installation of permanent construction by anyone other than the parcel owner.

New Development is any activity that involves structural development, including construction or installation of any building or structure, the creation of hardscape surfaces and land subdivision.

Nonconformity, Nonconformities includes any element or characteristic of a use, lot or improvement that results in a corresponding nonconformity to the existing zoning or development ordinance.

Nonconforming Legal Building or Structure is a building or portion thereof or other structure which lawfully exists on the property and which does not comply with one or more of the property development standards of the Zone District in which it is located.

Non-Dangerous Wild Animals are animals that do not present a danger to health and/or property,

Nonresidential Structure is any building or structure that is not a primary or accessory structure within the Residential Zone District.

Notice of Decision is a notice that informs a responsible person of a decision made by a hearing authority pursuant to provisions of this Code.

Notice of Violation is any notice that informs a person that a violation of the Code, any code it adopts by reference, or other applicable law, occurred.

NPDES Permit is any waste discharge requirements issued by the Regional Board or the State Water Resources Control Board as an NPDES Permit.

O

Off Street Parking is the parking of motor vehicles not on a street or private residential access road.

On Street Parking is the parking of motor vehicles within a street or private residential access road.

Open Video System shall mean a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the City, provided that the FCC has certified that such system complies with 47 CFR § 1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems."

Open Video System Operator shall mean any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system.

Outside Storage is the storage of goods, equipment or materials outside of a building.

Overnight On-Street Parking is from two o’clock a.m. to six o’clock a.m. of any day.

 

P

Performance Standards are qualitative assessments that form the basis of findings required for the approval of proposed development that is not in conformance with Development Standards.

Permanent Position(s) are official City job functions that are not temporary in nature. Also refer to Classified Service.

Permit Applications are official City forms that must be completed by an Applicant to undertake a particular development activity such as grading, construction, plumbing, etc.

Planning Commission is a non-elected City body that is authorized under the State of California Planning, Zoning, and Development Law to consider land use and planning decisions

Planning Commission Secretary is the City staff person assigned to serve as the Secretary and record the proceedings of the Planning Commission meetings and be responsible for other tasks assigned to the secretary by this Code.

Plant Palette is a list of plant species.

Pollutant is any of the pollutants defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1362(6) and incorporated in California Water Code § 13373). Pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge);

B.    Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic;

C.    Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

D.    Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the State;

E.    Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); and

F.    Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six (6) or greater than nine (9), or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.

Preliminary Reviewing Authority is the Community Development Director or Fire Chief or his or her designee, as dependent upon the subject being reviewed.

Primary Use is the principal permitted use of a parcel or structure as defined by the Zone District in which the parcel is located.

Privacy (also Neighbor Privacy) is the quality of being secluded from the presence or view of others, including from sight, sound, smell, noise or other perception.

Private Residential Access Road is any private road or easement therefore that serves three (3) or more parcels.

Pro Shop is the incidental commercial use operated in conjunction with, upon the same premises as, and solely in support of, a golf course or club.

Project is any activity that requires a building, demolition, grading, or other City permit or approval.

Public, Educational or Government Access Facilities or PEG Access Facilities shall mean the total of the following:

A.    Channel capacity designed for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and

B.    Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.

Public Property is any property owned by a public agency or entity.

Pure Tones are those noise sources that are characterized by a uniform octave with little or no variation.

Q

R

Residential Structures shall mean and include all structures and premises that are regulated by the California State Housing Law and any future amendments thereto. These include residential buildings and structures accessory thereto.

Responsible Person, for the purposes of a violation, is any of the following:

A.    An individual or legal entity that, by action or inaction, causes or maintains a code violation or permits or allows a code violation.

B.    An individual or legal entity whose agent, employee, or independent contractor, by action or inaction, causes or maintains a code violation or permits or allows a code violation.

C.    An owner of, or a lessee or sublessee with the current right of possession of, real property on which a code violation occurs.

D.    An individual or legal entity that uses the property where the violation occurs.

E.    An on-site manager of a business normally working at the site when the business is open and responsible for the activities at such business.

F.    The owners, majority stockholders, controlling owners, corporate officers, trustees, and/or general partners of a legal entity that is a responsible person under subsections A through E of this section.

G.    If any of the above persons are minors, the parents or guardians of such minors shall be deemed responsible persons.

Retaining Walls means as defined in the Los Angeles County Building Code.

Ridgeline is the highest elevation contour extending along the crest of the hills as delineated on the ridgeline map adopted by the City (see Exhibit 7-9).

Right-of-Way, is the land area within a property in which other entities (other than the property owner) have a legal right to grade and/or improve and use the property for public works, roadway and traffic purposes.

Roof-Mounted means mounted above the eave line of a building.

Rules of Decorum are the collection of rules and regulations that govern the conduct of official City meetings. The City of La Habra Heights Rules of Decorum shall apply to all public meetings.

Runoff is rainfall or other water discharged onto the surface of a property not absorbed by soil.

Rural means the Community Character of La Habra Heights including agricultural uses and the general absence of commercial activity and developments as well as of visible city infrastructure including street curbs, gutters, lights and signage.

S

Safety Fences are protective fences or barriers constructed on top of a retaining wall. Safety Fences are constructed for the sole purpose of preventing persons, animals, and/or vehicles from falling from the surface created by the retaining wall.

Search Ring means the area of service deficiency within which a new facility is proposed to address the network deficiency.

Second Unit is a residential dwelling unit, attached or detached, that provides complete independent living and cooking facilities for one or more persons and is located on the same parcel on which a single-family dwelling is situated.

Sensitive Environmental Features, as defined in this Municipal Code, refers to any protected habitat, geological feature, plant or animal specie, or cultural resource. These Sensitive Environmental Features may be protected under Federal, State, or local (City of La Habra Heights) regulations.

Service Connection shall mean the wire, pipes, or conduits that connect the building or place where the service or commodity supplied by the franchisee is used or delivered, or is made available for use or delivery, with the supply line or supply main in the street or on private property.

Setback is the linear distance between a structure or improvement and a property line or other specified feature.

Sewer is any sanitary sewer and appurtenances thereto, lying within streets or easements dedicated to the public entity responsible for wastewater conveyance systems.

Shingle Sign, refer to Sign, Projecting

Sign is a display of a name, figure, message or symbol, or advertising, on a device, appliance or any other thing of similar nature designed to attract attention outdoors.

Sign Area is the sum of the surface areas of all faces of a sign.

Sign, Building Identification is a sign that contains no content other than the name and/or trademark and/or address of occupant located therein or of the building to which it is affixed.

Sign, Bulletin or Special Event is a sign on which changeable copy, bulletins, notices, messages, or displays are placed.

Sign, Civic Organization is a sign that contains the names of, or any other information regarding, civic, fraternal or religious organizations located within the City but which contains no other advertising matter.

Sign, Community Identification is a sign which contains the name of the City and appropriate travel directions but which contains no other advertising matter.

Sign, Construction is a temporary sign displayed on a project site denoting any architect, engineer, owner, lender, contractor, future tenant or others associated with a construction project.

Sign, Directional is a sign that indicates the route to, direction of, or location of a specific place.

Sign Face is that portion of a sign intended to be viewed from one direction at one time.

Sign, Flashing is any sign which, by methods or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off.

Sign, Freestanding (or Monument) is a sign that is placed on the ground or has its primary structural support placed in or upon the ground. Ground, monument and pole signs are included in this definition.

Sign, Lighted is a sign that is illuminated by any source whether internal, external or indirect.

Sign, Portable is a freestanding sign that is not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to the ground or a structure.

Sign, Projecting is a sign that projects out from a wall.

Sign, Real Estate is a temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of a property.

Significant Ecological Area is a geographic area within Los Angeles County that has been designated by the County of Los Angeles as containing significant habitat.

Significant Tree means a tree or trees that are at least twenty (20) inches in circumference measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the mean natural grade; or trees with more than one trunk whose combined circumference is at least thirty (30) inches as measured four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the mean natural grade; or indigenous species of trees on the list maintained by the Planning Division; or any tree that is visible from grounds or structures off-site and either screens structures from view of other properties or is required as part of a landscaping plan.

Single Family Residence is a building permitted to be used as a dwelling for a single family.

Single Story Structure means any structure wherein seventy-five (75) percent of the square footage is contained in a structure that is only one (1) story in height.

Slope is a measure of steepness and is typically presented as a ratio of the rise, for example, of land, over the distance over which that rise occurs. There are several different methods to represent slope, including as a ratio, percentage, or in degrees as shown in the following:

Slope Density is the relationship between the minimum area of land required for the creation of a new parcel and the average slope of that land area.

Solicit or Solicitation shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, patronage or other things of value, hawking, peddling, or vending for charitable or commercial purposes, or offering to perform services for payment, conducted door to door, in any place of public accommodation, in any place of business open to the public generally, on city streets and sidewalks, in the public parks, or in any public places. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing such money, patronage, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, when conducted in the following manner:

A.    Any oral or written request;

B.    The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication, unless such handbill or written advertisement has been placed within a business open to the public generally with the express permission of the owner or lessee of such business;

C.    The offer of, sale of or taking orders for any goods, services, merchandise, wares or other tangible items.

A solicitation, as defined in this subsection, shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this subsection.

Special Communications System is any device or system for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic signals, including but not limited to radio waves and microwaves for cellular technology, personal communication services, mobile services, paging systems and related technologies. Facilities include antennas, microwave dishes, parabolic antennas and all other types of equipment used in transmitting or receiving signals; antenna structures; associated buildings or cabinets which house support equipment; and other accessory development.

Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) is a plan that designates Best Management Practices (BMPs) that must be used in specified categories of development projects. The current version of the Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan approved by the Regional Board is on file in the office of the City Clerk and must be adhered to by the City.

Standing Water is water that remains open to the air for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours and is not treated or otherwise protected from use by breeding insects.

Stealth Facility is a wireless communication facility designed to closely blend into the surrounding environment and to be minimally visible. It may appear as a natural feature, such as a tree or rock or other natural feature, or may be incorporated into an architectural feature such as a steeple, parapet wall, or light standard, or be screened by an equipment screen, landscaping or other equally suitable method.

Storm Water Drainage Channel is any feature, man-made or natural, that regularly accumulates and conveys storm water runoff from off-site or from a large area of the site on which it sits such that erosion or significant material transport can occur.

Story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and lower surface of the next floor or roof above.

Street is a public area whose function is to carry vehicular traffic and/or provide vehicular access or private residential access road.

Street Frontage is that portion of a lot or parcel of land that borders a street.

Structural Size is the cumulative area of all usable floors or levels of a structure.

Structure is defined as anything constructed or erected, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include permanently placed mechanical, electrical or plumbing equipment and fixtures, wells and well heads, detached garages, guest houses, pool houses, greenhouses, studios and workshops, storage sheds, barns, roofed pens or stables and any other open air enclosures having a roof such as gazebos and detached patio covers.

Subdivision is the division of a property into multiple lots.

Subdivision Map is the legal document whereby the lots created by subdivision are legally defined.

Subscriber or Customer or Consumer shall mean any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services.

Swimming Pool is any permanent structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that has water depth over eighteen (18) inches and includes, but is not limited to, permanent in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, and permanent fixed-in-place wading pools.

T

Telecommunications shall mean the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

Telecommunications Equipment shall mean equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment.

Telecommunications Service shall mean the offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used.

Telecommunications Service Provider shall mean any provider of telecommunications service.

Temporary Use is a use or activity that is transitional or temporary in nature. Such uses are limited and subject to the requirements of the applicable Zone District.

Toe of Slope is that line delineating the bottom of a graded sloping surface.

Trellises are garden or outdoor frames or structures of latticework designed to provide an architectural feature or shade or plant support.

U

Unclassified Service are those City job positions that have no property right in their position and serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority and that may be terminated or demoted without cause or notice.

Use is the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained or the activity conducted thereon as defined by the applicable Zone District.

V

Vehicle has the meaning ascribed to that term by the California Vehicle Code.

Video Programming see Cable Service

Video Programming Provider shall mean any person or group of persons who has the right under the Federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on an open video system.

Video Provider shall mean any person, company, or service that provides one (1) or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. A "video provider" includes, without limitation, provides of cable television service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.

View Corridor is a physical feature that allows relatively unobstructed views over distances of at least several hundred yards.

View, Local is any view of densely vegetated rolling hills, extensive natural terrain or open space.

View, Primary means the most significant and impressive Distant View, as determined by the Community Development Director (CDD), from either the ground floor of the principal residence (or the primary living area, excluding bedrooms, if not located on the ground floor) or abutting outdoor deck or patio area at relatively the same elevation as the ground floor of the principal residence. The CDD shall determine the Primary View by balancing the nature of the view to be protected and the importance of the area within the structure where the view is taken. The affected property owner shall be entitled to one Primary View; and once determined for a particular application, the Primary View may not be changed for any subsequent application. In the event the CDD and the affected property owner cannot agree on the Primary View, the CDD’s decision shall control and the decision may be appealed or called for review in accordance with the procedures found in Article 8 of the Municipal Code. Where the determination of the CDD is reversed on appeal, the appellant shall be entitled to a refund of the fee associated with the view component of the appeal.

View, Protected means a Distant View or a Local View.

Views, Distant, means visually impressive scenes beyond immediately adjacent properties, including views of the lights of surrounding cities, Pacific Ocean, offshore islands, the San Gabriel Mountains, ridges, canyons, valleys, or ravines.

Violation shall mean and include a public nuisance as described or referred to in this Chapter, or any condition, activity or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, or inaction) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of this Municipal Code, or any applicable County, State or Federal laws or regulations.

Visible Section is that portion of a structure or wall that is visible from a street or private residential access road.

W

Wall is any structure or physical barrier constructed to prevent the passage of light, air and sight through its surface.

Wall Packs are self-contained lighting units that are attached to wall surfaces.

Walls, Retaining are walls designed to retain earth or other materials.

Weeds include any of the following:

A.    Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature.

B.    Sagebrush, chaparral, and any other brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent property.

C.    Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous.

D.    Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health.

E.    Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material which endangers public safety by creating a fire hazard.

Wireless Telecommunication Facility is a facility consisting of any commercial antenna and/or other related equipment, or combination thereof, necessary to the transmission and/or reception of any electromagnetic waves for commercial purposes, including but not limited to commercial cellular, personal communication service, wireless modem, and/or data radio communications, and that provides commercial wireless telecommunications services to the public. Wireless Telecommunication Facility does not include any radio or television facility that is exempt from local regulation pursuant to State or Federal law.

X

Y

Yard is the open space on a lot or parcel of land created by the application of required setbacks and unoccupied and unobstructed by specified development from the ground upward.

Yard, Front is defined as a yard extending across any portion of a lot or parcel of land that has a boundary on a public street or Private Residential Access Road.

Yard, Other is any yard area that is not the Front Yard.

Z

Zone (or Zone District) is a land area shown on the official Districting (Zoning) Map of the City of La Habra Heights. (Ord. 2017-01 § 3; Ord. 2010-06 § 4; Ord. 2010-03 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 2009-08 §§ 7, 8; Ord. 2008-07 § 6)