MERCED, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Merced, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 26, 1-09, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The Merced, California, Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1981, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. Commencing with Supplement No. 26, 1-09, Municipal Code Corporation has assumed supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 26, 1-09, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 2499, passed March 18, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, 1-09, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 26, 1-09, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, 1-09, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, 1-09, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Insertion Guide. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens and/or periods. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send one copy of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
MERCED OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Mike Murphy 
Mayor 
____________ 
Anthony Martinez, District 1 
Mayor Pro Tempore 
____________ 
Fernando Echevarria, District 2 
Jill McLeod, District 3 
Kevin Blake, District 4 
Matthew Serratto, District 5 
Delray Shelton, District 6 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven S. Carrigan 
City Manager/City Clerk 
____________ 
John Tresidder 
Assistant City Clerk  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.02 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.02.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code and Section 415 of the Charter of the City of Merced, there is hereby adopted the "Merced Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Merced Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 1420 § 1, 1981).  
1.02.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Merced Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Merced Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Merced Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Merced Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 1420 § 2, 1981).  
1.02.030 - Codification authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Merced, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Charter Section 415 and Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1420 § 3, 1981).  
1.02.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 1362, passed November 3,1980. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 1362, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 1363 through and including 1419. 
(Ord. 1420 § 4, 1981).  
1.02.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Merced Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Merced, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1420 § 6, 1981).  
1.02.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1420 § 7. 1981).  
1.02.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1420 § 8, 1981).  
1.02.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and. all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1420 § 9, 1981).  
1.02.090 - Effective date. 
This code becomes effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the "Merced Municipal Code" becomes effective. 
(Ord. 1420 § 10, 1981).  
1.02.100 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1420 § 11, 1981).  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words shall be interpreted as follows unless otherwise apparent from the context: 
1.  "Calendar year" means from January 1st of any given year through December 31st of the sane year. 
2.  "City" is the City of Merced. 
3.  "Council" is the city council of this city. 
4.  "County" is the county of Merced. 
5.  "Fiscal year" means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year. 
6.  "May" is permissive. 
7.  "Month" means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed. 
8.  "Officer," "employee," "office" or "ordinance" means such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this city, unless otherwise specified. 
9.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
10.  "Person" includes any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city (excepting, however, the City of Merced), county, district, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency thereof, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
11.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, evidences of debt, and every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
12.  "Property" includes both real and personal property. 
13.  "Quarterly," when used to designate a period of time, means the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months. 
14.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
15.  "Section" means a section of this code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. "Subsection" means a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned. 
16.  "Shall" is mandatory. 
17.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
18.  "State" is the State of California. 
19.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
20.  "Tenant or occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
21.  "Writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
22.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
23.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code §§ l.10, 1.13, 1.26).  
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.18).  
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply to the ordinances of the city. unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine, and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tenses include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.19).  
1.04.040 - Rules of construction. 
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise specify, these general provisions. rules of construction, and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect is objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.8).  
1.04.050 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee, or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.12).  
1.04.060 - Statute of limitations. 
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.17).  
1.04.070 - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of, this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.24).  
1.04.080 - Effect of headings. 
Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section hereof. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.9).  
1.04.090 - Notices—Service. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions in this chapter are otherwise specifically made in this code, such notice may be given, either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope postage prepaid addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.15).  
1.04.100 - Notice—Proof. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.16).  
1.04.110 - Severability of parts of code. 
It is the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section o this code is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shat not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this code. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.23).  
1.04.120 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.22).  
1.04.130 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.14).  
1.04.140 - Reference to acts or omissions within city. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.11).  
1.04.150 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.20).  
1.04.160 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 1302 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 1.21).  
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
 
1.08.010 - City seal. 
The common seal of the city is hereby adopted and described as follows: 
A palm tree, a fountain, and a waterfall, so arranged that the palm tree shall occupy the central space of the seal, the fountain on the right, and the waterfall on the left of the palm tree, surrounding which, in the margin of the seal shall appear the words, "City of Merced, California, Incorporated April 1, A. D. 1889." 
(Ord. 1302 § 2(part), 1980; prior code § 1.25). 
(Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 3-20-2017)  
1.08.020 - Custodian. 
As provided for in Section 602(D) of the charter, the city clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal. 
(Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 3-20-2017)  
1.08.030 - Use of city seal. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person or group to make or use the seal of the City of Merced, or any derivation, rendering, version, expression, logo, stamp or reproduction thereof, for any purpose other than for the official business of the City of Merced, its city council, officers or departments, except upon approval of the city council by resolution. 
B.  No person or group shall place any imitation of the city seal, nor any derivation, rendering, version, expression, logo, stamp or reproduction thereof, on any written, printed or electronic material that is designed, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public or cause the reader of such material to believe it to be an official city publication. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person or group to place the city seal, or any derivation, rendering, version, expression, logo, stamp or reproduction thereof, on any written, printed or electronic material in favor of or against any ballot measure, or in favor of or against any candidate for public office. 
(Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 3-20-2017)  
1.08.040 - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. At the discretion of the city, this chapter may also be enforced by use of civil or administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2473, § 1, 3-20-2017)  
Chapter 1.09 - CODE ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND POWERS 
Sections: 
 
1.09.010 - Declaration of purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that the enforcement of the Municipal Code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety, and quality of life. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain code compliance. Nothing in this code is intended to limit the duties and responsibilities of sworn peace officers. 
B.  In accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4, and its successor statutes, and consistent with its powers as a Charter City, the City of Merced adopts Chapter 1.10, Administrative Citations, and Chapter 1.11, Administrative Penalties, in order to achieve the following goals: 
1.  To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Merced; 
2.  To gain compliance with the Municipal Code and state codes, ordinances, and regulations in a timely and efficient manner; 
3.  To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines; 
4.  To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the city, and conditions on entitlements; and 
5.  To provide responsible parties a strong financial incentive to cure their violations through the use of administrative penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.020 - Code enforcement. 
It is unlawful for a person to violate a provision, or to fail to comply with a requirement of this code, or any code adopted by reference by this code, an ordinance of the city not included within this code, or any conditions on entitlements. The city may enforce any such violation of the provisions of this code by any one or more of the following methods, at the city's discretion: 
A.  Criminal penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.12; 
B.  Denial, forfeiture, or revocation of any permit granted by the city; 
C.  Administrative citations and penalties, to the extent authorized by this code; and 
D.  Any other remedy available to the city, including, but not limited to, civil penalties, injunctive relief, and abatement of public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.030 - References to this code. 
All references to this code are deemed to include this code, any code adopted by reference by this code, an ordinance of the city not included within this code, or any conditions on entitlements. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.040 - General enforcement authority. 
The city manager, or any of his or her designated nonsafety enforcement officers, (hereinafter referred to as "enforcement officers") shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this code for which they have a duty to enforce. These powers include, but are not limited to, the power to issue correction notices, administrative citations, inspect public and private property and use judicial and administrative remedies available under this code, or applicable state codes. The designation of enforcement officers shall be made by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.050 - Authority to issue notice to appear and release citations. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, designated enforcement officers are authorized to issue criminal citations, as misdemeanors or infractions, for violations of the provisions of this code, for which they have a duty to enforce. such authority is not extended to include all of the duties and responsibilities of a peace officer, but is limited as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.060 - Notice of violation. 
Chapters 1.10 and 1.11 provide the procedure for issuance and recordation of notices of violation where other sections of this code do not provide an alternative procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.070 - Power to arrest. 
Enforcement officers are authorized to arrest any person without a warrant whenever the enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of this code in his or her presence, for which the enforcement officer had the duty to enforce. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the enforcement officer may only arrest a person by issuing a misdemeanor field citation or by effecting a citizen's arrest with the assistance of a peace officer. 
An enforcement officer shall release the person to be issued a citation on his or her written promise to appear in court. An enforcement officer shall not, under any circumstance, take the person into custody. In the event that the person refuses to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, or demands to be taken before a magistrate, an enforcement officer shall summon a City of Merced police officer and request that such police officer take the person into custody pursuant to a citizen's arrest. This section shall in no way limit the authority of any sworn peace officer to effect an arrest. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
1.09.080 - Designation of administrative violations. 
A.  The following may be designated as administrative violations and shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.10 and 1.11: 
1.  All violations of the Merced Municipal Code, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance; 
2.  All violations of the City Charter, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance; 
3.  All violations of the California and International Model Codes and appendices and any successor model codes adopted by the City of Merced; 
4.  All violations of design standards adopted by the city council and/or the planning commission and on file with the city clerk; 
5.  All violations of conditions imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued or approved by the City of Merced; 
6.  All violations of state laws enforced by the City of Merced that have been designated for enforcement through this chapter or by ordinance. 
B.  A violation designated as an administrative violation may only be adjudicated pursuant to the administrative enforcement procedures established by Chapters 1.10 and 1.11. Each responsible person shall have the right to request an administrative hearing and subsequent judicial review as set forth in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 1.10 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.10.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter provides for administrative citations for enforcement of violations of this code, as defined in Section 1.09.080. The use of administrative citations shall be in addition to all other legal remedies, civil or criminal, which may be pursued to address violations of this code, including any other administrative remedies that are provided for in this code. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city and the enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Administrative citation" means a formal notice that is issued by an enforcement officer or other authorized agent to a person who has been determined to have committed a violation of this Municipal Code and/or other regulations and ordinances enforceable by the City of Merced. 
B.  "Correction notice" means an informal notice informing a responsible party about the existence of a certain condition or activity which constitutes a violation of this Municipal Code or a violation of any applicable statute, rule, regulation or other ordinance enforceable by the City of Merced. 
C.  "Enforcement officer" means an individual holding the position title designated by resolution of the city council in accordance with Section 1.09.040 of this code and who is authorized to enforce certain prescribed provisions of this Municipal Code and all applicable statutes, rules, regulations and other ordinances enforceable by the City of Merced. 
D.  "Hearing officer" means the individual who shall conduct administrative citation appeal hearings and other administrative hearings pursuant to this chapter and shall render decisions pursuant to the applicable administrative hearing procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall be designated by the city manager. 
E.  "Responsible party" means any person or persons in charge of the premises or location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and shall include any of the following: 
1.  The person or persons owning the property where the violation exists. 
2.  The person or persons in charge of the premises where the violation exists. 
3.  The person or persons using the premises where the violation exists. 
4.  If any of those persons are minors, the parent or guardian of such minor(s) shall be the responsible party. 
5.  If the person or persons is a business entity, the manager or on-site supervisor where the violation exists shall be a responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.030 - Correction notice and administrative citation issuance procedures. 
A.  A Correction notice may be issued to the responsible party as a warning the first time a violation of this code occurs. If the violation is not corrected by the compliance date, an administrative citation shall be issued for the violation(s). 
B.  Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of a building, plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this code or in any code adopted by reference, the enforcement officer must first issue a written correction notice to the responsible party for the violation. For violations that do not constitute an immediate danger to health or safety, a reasonable time, not less than ten (10) days, shall be provided to remedy or correct the violation prior to the issuance of an administration citation and imposition of fines or penalties. In determining what is a reasonable time, the enforcement officer may consider the estimate of local professionals, including licensed contractors. 
C.  When a correction notice or administrative citation is issued, service will be effected as follows: 
1.  The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible party and obtain the signature of the responsible party on the correction notice or administrative citation. 
2.  If the responsible party served refuses or fails to sign the correction notice or administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the correction notice or administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
3.  If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible party, the correction notice or administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party by regular mail and by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available or as known to the enforcement officer. 
4.  If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible party personally, or if certified mail and/or regular mail are unsuccessful, the enforcement officer shall post the correction notice or administrative citation on any real property within the city where the city has knowledge that the responsible party has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. 
D.  Service of a correction notice or an administrative citation which is personally served shall be deemed complete at the time of such personal service. service of a correction notice or an administrative citation which is served by regular mail shall be deemed complete on the date the correction notice or administrative citation is deposited in the mail. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.040 - Contents of notices. 
A.  Each correction notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
2.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
3.  An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified (compliance date), and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s) including the fine for the violation(s); and 
4.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
B.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
2.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
3.  An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified (compliance date), and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s) including the fine for the violation(s); 
4.  The amount of the administrative fine for the violation(s); 
5.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences for failure to pay the fine; 
6.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
7.  A description of appeal rights including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a Request for appeal hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
8.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.050 - Amount of fines. 
A.  The amounts of the fines for code violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within twelve (12) months from the date of an administrative citation. 
C.  The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any penalties and interest imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.060 - Compliance. 
A.  Upon receipt of a correction notice, the responsible party must do the following: 
1.  Remedy the violation(s). If the violation(s) is corrected on or before the compliance date provided, no administrative citation shall be issued. 
B.  Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible party must do the following: 
1.  Pay the fine to the city within thirty (30) days from the date the administrative citation was issued. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Merced and payment shall be made to the City of Merced Finance Department. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city; and 
2.  Remedy the violation(s). If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s) within the time specified, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in the schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The responsible party may appeal the administrative citation as set forth in Section 1.10.080 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.070 - Issuance of permits. 
In the event an administrative citation is issued because the responsible party lacks a required permit and the fine is delinquent, the city shall not issue a permit until the fine and all applicable penalties and interest are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.080 - Appeal hearing process. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation (appellant) may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by completing a request for appeal hearing form and returning it to the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 1.10.090. 
B.  A request for appeal hearing form may be obtained from the department specified on the administrative citation. 
C.  All appeals from any administrative citation shall be in writing on the request for appeal hearing form and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of each appellant; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant(s); 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the administrative citation should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside; and 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. 
Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete. 
D.  Not later than five (5) days from the date the request for appeal hearing is filed, the enforcement officer or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the enforcement officer or his or her designee shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing, which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete. If the thirty (30) day appeal period runs during the time the request for appeal hearing form is under review or during the time a notice of incomplete filing is to be sent to the appellant, the notice of incomplete filing shall specify an additional time period, not to exceed five (5) city business days, by which the request for appeal hearing form must be resubmitted and received by the city. 
E.  Appellant shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.090 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request an appeal hearing and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.10.080 may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. 
B.  The request shall be filed with the department specified on the administrative citation on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form available from the department specified on the administrative citation, within ten (10) days of the date of the administrative citation. 
C.  The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine shall be stayed unless or until the designee of the department specified on the administrative citation makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
D.  The finance officer, or designee of the department specified on the administrative citation, may issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the appellant submits a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the department designee the person's actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the appeal hearing. 
E.  If the determination is made not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the appellant shall remit the deposit to the city within ten (10) days of the date of that decision or thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
F.  The department designee shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her determination to not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the department designee shall be final. 
G.  The written determination shall be served upon the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the advance deposit hardship waiver application form. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.100 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until the following has been completed: 
1.  A request for appeal hearing form has been completed and submitted to the city; and 
2.  The fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.10.080; or 
3.  An advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.10.090. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for appeal hearing form is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The hearing date may be continued upon mutual agreement of the city and the appellant. 
C.  At the hearing, the appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
D.  The failure of the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing without a showing of good cause shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. 
E.  The administrative citation and any additional evidence submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of that report shall be served by mail on the appellant at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
F.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the appellant prior to issuing a written decision. 
G.  Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from an administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and adjudication of the administrative citation or any portion thereof. The determination that the violation occurred and that the responsible party was responsible for the violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the administrative citation is deemed completed pursuant to Section 1.10.030. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.110 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the administrative citation, establish a modified schedule for compliance, overturn some or all of the findings of the enforcement officer and/or rescind the citation in part or in its entirety, and/or reduce the amount or waive payment of the administrative fine. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision. 
B.  The decision shall state whether the administrative citation has been either upheld, in full or in part, or rescinded, in full or in part. In addition, the decision shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order, if applicable, which shall specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the code violation(s) indicated in the decision and shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
D.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a requirement to pay the applicable administrative fine(s) by a specified date or a payment schedule for the fine(s). 
E.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be cancelled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
F.  The hearing officer shall serve a copy of the decision on the appellant either by delivering a copy of the decision personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to appellant at the address shown on the appeal form. The decision shall be issued and served within twenty (20) days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. A copy of the decision shall also be provided to the enforcement officer. 
G.  The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld, imposed, awarded or assessed by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.120 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of that decision by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court of Merced County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.130 - Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs. 
A.  The failure of the responsible party to pay the administrative fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation or after an administrative appeal hearing will result in the collection of the fine by the city. The city may pursue any available legal remedy to collect civil fines. The city may also recover its collections costs according to proof. 
B.  Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest and/or late charges imposed on the delinquent obligation. Collection costs imposed under this section shall be added to and become a part of the underlying obligation. 
C.  In addition to any administrative fines and costs assessed, the responsible party shall also be liable for all costs, expenses, or disbursements paid or incurred by the city or any of its contractors in connection with the abatement of the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.140 - Lien procedure. 
When a violation involves real property and the administrative fines and related costs are not paid within the prescribed time, and/or have not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal as specified in Section 1.10.120, this obligation may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property, and/or be collected as a special assessment. The lien and/or special assessment shall be imposed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 8.40.200. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
1.10.150 - Administrative fee; satisfaction of lien. 
A.  Each responsible party against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this chapter shall also be assessed an administrative fee based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee shall be included in the lien amount and recorded against the responsible party's property. 
B.  Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the finance officer, or his or her designee, will provide the responsible party or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction for recordation by the county recorder of the County of Merced. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 2, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 1.11 - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
1.11.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter provides for administrative penalties. The use of administrative penalties are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code, including any other administrative remedies that are provided for in this code. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Administrative costs" include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the board including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and the hearing itself, and costs for all inspections necessary to enforce a compliance order. 
B.  "Administrative order" means an order issued after hearing by the board requiring correction of certain violations and imposing administrative penalties and administrative costs. 
C.  "Administrative penalty" means a monetary penalty imposed by the city after failing to comply with a compliance order issued by an enforcement officer. 
D.  "Board" means the appeals hearing board of the City of Merced as set by resolution of the city council. 
E.  "Compliance order" means an order issued by an enforcement officer to a responsible party to correct certain violations as set forth in the order by a date certain, prior to the imposition of administrative penalties. 
F.  "Enforcement officer" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 1.10.020 of this code. 
G.  "Responsible party" shall have the same meaning as in Section 1.10.020 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.030 - Compliance order. 
A.  Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a violation of any provision of this code within the enforcement officer's responsibility is occurring or exists, the enforcement officer may issue a written compliance order to any responsible party. 
B.  A compliance order shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date and address or definite description of the location of the violation(s); 
2.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
3.  An order to the responsible party to correct the violation(s) within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
4.  The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved; 
5.  Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure and appeals process; and 
6.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
C.  The responsible party shall be given a reasonable period in which to comply with the compliance order. However, should a violation constitute an imminent threat to life or property, immediate compliance may be ordered. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.040 - Service of notices; failure to receive notice. 
A.  All written notices required to be given under the provisions of this chapter may be served in the following manner: 
1.  If real property is involved, by posting notice on the property; and 
2.  By personal service; or 
3.  To the property owner, by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to his or her address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared, by first class mail to the same address, and to other responsible parties at their addresses as known to the enforcement officer or at the property address. Service by regular mail under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail. 
4.  If the compliance order involves the correction of conditions to real property, which if left uncorrected could result in the demolition of the property, then notice shall be provided to all other persons with a legal interest in the property, by mailing a copy of the notice by regular mail, postage prepaid. Service under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.050 - Hearing. 
A.  If the enforcement officer determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further action shall be taken. 
B.  If compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order, the enforcement officer shall advise the secretary to the board to set a hearing before the board. 
C.  The secretary to the board shall cause written notice to be served on the responsible party and, where real property is involved, a notice of the hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it appears on the last equalized county assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.060 - Notice of hearing. 
A.  Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the board. 
B.  Every hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days or more than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the enforcement officer determines the matter is urgent or good cause exists for an extension of time. 
C.  The hearing serves to provide a full opportunity for a person subject to a compliance order to object to the determination that he or she is a responsible party, that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation continues to exist. The failure of a person subject to a compliance order to appear at a hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.070 - Hearing procedure—Findings and order. 
A.  At the time and place set forth in the notice of hearing, the board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order. 
B.  The board shall consider any written or oral evidence consistent with its rules of procedure regarding the violation and compliance by the responsible party. 
C.  Subject to Subsection G., within fifteen (15) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make findings, and issue its determination regarding: 
1.  The existence of the violation. 
2.  The failure of the responsible party and/or property owner to take required corrective action within the time period stated in the compliance order. 
D.  The board shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing. 
E.  If the board finds, by majority vote, that the preponderance of evidence demonstrates a violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order. 
F.  If the board finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue a finding of those facts. 
G.  The findings of fact and, if applicable, the administrative order, shall be served upon the responsible party and/or property owner. Service shall be made in a manner provided for giving notice by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.080 - Administrative order—Contents. 
A.  If the board determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order described in Section 1.11.070 which imposes any or all of the following: 
1.  An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where appropriate; 
2.  Administrative penalties as provided in Section 1.11.090; 
3.  Administrative costs as provided in Section 1.11.100. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.090 - Administrative penalties. 
A.  The board may impose administrative penalties for the violation of any provision of this code in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day for each ongoing violation. The total administrative penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance inspections. 
B.  In determining the amount of the administrative penalties, the board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration: 
1.  The duration of the violation; 
2.  The frequency, recurrence, and number of violations; 
3.  The seriousness of the violation; 
4.  The good faith efforts of the responsible party and/or property owner to come into compliance; 
5.  The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible party and/or property owner; 
6.  The impact of the violation on the community; 
7.  Such other factors as justice may require. 
C.  Administrative penalties imposed by the board shall accrue from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the enforcement officer or the board. 
D.  The board, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of administrative penalties for any period of time during which: 
1.  The responsible party and/or property owner has applied for necessary permits; and 
2.  Such permits are necessary to achieve compliance; and 
3.  Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state, or other appropriate governmental agency. 
E.  Administrative penalties assessed by the board shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order. 
F.  If the violation is not corrected as specified in the administrative order and no suspension is in effect, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in Section 1.11.090.A., above. 
G.  If the responsible party and/or property owner gives written notice to the enforcement officer that the violation has been corrected and if the enforcement officer finds that compliance has been achieved, the enforcement officer shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the enforcement officer or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the enforcement officer, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.100 - Administrative costs. 
The board shall assess administrative costs against the responsible party and/or property owner when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.110 - Failure to comply with administrative order. 
A.  Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs specified in the administrative order of the board may be enforced as: 
1.  A personal obligation of the responsible party; and/or 
2.  If the violation is in connection with real property, a special assessment or lien against the real property as provided for in Section 1.11.160. The special assessment or lien shall remain in effect until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.120 - Recovery of administrative penalties. 
The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a special assessment or lien. Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest and/or late charges imposed on the delinquent obligation. Collection costs imposed under this section shall be added to and become a part of the underlying obligation. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.130 - Report of compliance after administrative order. 
If the enforcement officer determines that compliance with the administrative order has been achieved, he or she shall file a compliance report with the board and serve the responsible party and/or property owner with the compliance report by personal delivery or by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.140 - Compliance dispute. 
A.  If the enforcement officer does not file a report pursuant to Section 1.11.130, a responsible party and/or property owner who believes that compliance with the administrative order has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the board by filing a request for a hearing with the board. 
B.  The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on a compliance order as provided in Sections 1.11.060 and 1.11.070. 
C.  The board shall determine the dispute as follows: 
1.  If compliance has been achieved, when it was achieved, and what relief, if any, the responsible party and/or property owner may be entitled. 
2.  If compliance has not been achieved, to what extent has it not. Further, for good cause shown, the board may amend or modify its original order. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.150 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person affected by the decision of the board may appeal the decision to the Superior Court of Merced County within twenty (20) days of the decision or service of the administrative order. The appeal shall be governed by the provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.160 - Lien/special assessment. 
When a violation involves real property and the amount of any administrative penalties and/or administrative costs imposed by the board pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within sixty (60) days or such other time limit set forth in the administrative order, and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal as provided in Section 1.11.150, this obligation may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property on which the violation occurred, and/or collected as a special assessment. The lien and/or special assessment shall be imposed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 8.40.200. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.170 - Administrative fee/satisfaction of lien. 
A.  Each responsible party against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this chapter shall also be assessed an administrative fee based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee shall be included in the lien amount and recorded against the responsible party's property. 
B.  Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and costs, the city clerk or the finance officer shall provide the responsible party or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction so that they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder of the County of Merced. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city's lien. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.180 - Foreclosure of real property lien. 
The lien may be foreclosed and the real property sold by the filing of a complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction and the issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no right to trial by jury. The city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.190 - Redemption of lien. 
The lien may be redeemed by the payment in full of all amounts secured by the lien within six (6) months after the lien is recorded and notice of the right to redeem is given to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.200 - Penalties as a personal obligation. 
If it is determined by the city council that the administrative penalties and costs set forth in the board's administrative order should become a personal obligation of the violator, it may direct that a petition be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction to enter said order as a judgment of that court. The city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.210 - Interest. 
Interest shall accrue on all amounts declared due by the appeals hearing board, and unpaid, from the date of the administrative order to the date paid pursuant to the laws applicable to civil money judgments. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
1.11.220 - Rules and regulations. 
The city council may, by resolution, adopt such rules and regulations for the administration and interpretation of this chapter as it may consider proper. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 3, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2348, adopted March 1, 2010, amended Ch. 1.12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 1.12 pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of §§ 1.12.010—1.12.090, and derived from the prior code and Ord. 1302 of 1980. 
 
1.12.010 - Violation a misdemeanor or infraction. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or fail to comply with any requirement of this code or any requirements or conditions validly imposed upon such person under the authority of this code, including an administrative order, and any person so doing is guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation is specifically designated as an infraction. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any such provision or any requirement or condition validly imposed upon such person under authority of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.020 - General penalties. 
A.  Misdemeanors. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail of Merced County for a period not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Infraction. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), for a second conviction within a period of one (1) year by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one (1) year, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
C.  Infraction a Misdemeanor. Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant has been convicted of three (3) or more of the same violations of this code within a one-year period immediately preceding the commission of the offense and such prior convictions are alleged in the accusatory pleading. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.030 - Prosecutorial authority. 
The city attorney shall have the authority to criminally prosecute violations of this code. Any violation of this code constituting a misdemeanor may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged as, prosecuted as, or reduced to an infraction. The district attorney shall not have the authority to reduce or dismiss criminal charges brought by the city attorney for violations of this code without the written consent of the city attorney or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.040 - Notice—Generally. 
If any person is arrested for a violation of this code, and such person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the citation procedures pursuant to Penal Code Section 853.6 et seq., and its successors, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.050 - Failure to appear a misdemeanor. 
Any person willfully violating their written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which they were originally arrested. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.060 - Causing, permitting, suffering prohibited. 
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful pursuant to this code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation, it is unlawful for any person to cause, permit, suffer, aid, or abet such act or omission or to conceal the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.070 - Place of confinement. 
Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the county jail of Merced County. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.080 - Violation a public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties provided in the preceding sections, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any requirements or conditions validly imposed under authority of this code is a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.090 - Nuisances—Recovery of abatement expenses. 
A.  Whenever any person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining a public nuisance, as referred to in Section 1.12.080 of this chapter, or other public nuisance, as defined under state law or other ordinances or regulations, has been given notice by an enforcement officer or by any other city officer, employee, or policing agent authorized to give such notice to abate such nuisance or cease and desist from continuing such nuisance or violation of law, and such person fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with the notice within the time specified therein, or if such a time is not specified, then within a time reasonably sufficient to enable such compliance, such noncomplying person shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in thereafter abating the nuisance and in obtaining compliance with or enforcing the law as referred to or encompassed within said notice. Costs and expenses may by recovered in accordance with Chapter 8.40. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.100 - Judicial abatement. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773 et seq., the city has the authority to judicially abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil nuisance actions. The expense of abatement may be recovered set forth in Chapter 8.40. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.110 - Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17980. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.120 - Civil violations—Injunctions and civil penalties. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, the city attorney may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin, or abate any violation or condition found to be in violation of the provisions of this code. 
B.  As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this code, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) per violation of the code for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows, or maintains a violation of any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
1.12.130 - Code enforcement performance bond. 
As part of any enforcement action taken by the city, the city has the authority to require a responsible person to post a performance bond or other security acceptable to city to ensure compliance with this code, applicable state codes or any judicial action. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 4, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 1.13 - INSPECTION 
Sections: 
 
1.13.010 - Authority to inspect. 
Enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this code are being obeyed, and to make any examinations, inspections, and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, video, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be conducted in a reasonable manner and with the consent of the owner, agent, or occupant, or as otherwise permitted by law. In an area of property accessible by the general public, an enforcement officer may enter and conduct a visual inspection without consent. If an owner, agent, or occupant refuses permission to enter or inspect, the enforcement officer may seek an inspection warrant pursuant to the applicable procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure or take any other necessary action as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.020 - Consent of landlord, occupant, or tenant required to enter occupied property. 
When it is necessary to conduct an inspection of occupied property to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes and regulations, or when the enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in an occupied building or upon occupied premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, the enforcement officer or other authorized agent may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform duties imposed by this code provided that, if such building or premises are occupied, credentials are presented to the occupant or tenant and consent to enter for the purpose of inspection is requested and granted by the occupant or tenant, or the landlord consents to entry for inspection purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.030 - Limitation on scope of consent by occupant or tenant. 
An enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall be permitted to inspect only those areas of the subject premises that are within the consenting occupant's or tenant's control or which are subject to the common authority of all occupants and tenants unless otherwise authorized by a court-issued inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.040 - Limitation on scope of consent by landlord. 
An enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall be permitted to inspect only those areas of the subject premises that the consenting landlord has authority to access and inspect him or herself, unless otherwise authorized by a court-issued inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.050 - Consent of owner or person having charge or control required to enter secured unoccupied premises. 
When it is necessary to conduct an inspection of secured unoccupied property to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations or when the enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in an unoccupied building or upon unoccupied premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, the Enforcement Officer or other authorized enforcement agent shall make a reasonable effort to locate the property owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request and obtain that person's consent to enter for the purpose of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.060 - Remedy for refused entry or inability to obtain consent. 
If a property owner, tenant, occupant or agent having charge or control of a property refuses to consent to an inspection of the subject premises by an enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent or if the property owner, tenant, occupant, or agent having charge or control of a property cannot be located after a reasonable attempt has been made, the enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent must obtain an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq., to conduct an inspection of said premises, unless otherwise authorized in this code or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.070 - Inspection of exterior code violations from public property. 
To enforce the provisions of the municipal code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, an Enforcement Officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect exterior code violations from a public street, sidewalk, park, or alley without the consent of the property owner, tenant, occupant or agent having charge or control of the premises upon which a violation may exist and without an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.080 - Inspection of exterior code violations from neighbor's yard. 
To enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, an enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect exterior code violations from a neighbor's yard or residence without the consent of the property owner, tenant, occupant, or agent having charge or control of the premises upon which a violation may exist and without an inspection warrant provided that lawful access to the neighbor's yard or residence can be obtained and the exterior code violations are in plain view from the neighbor's yard or residence. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.090 - Inspection of common areas. 
To enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, an enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect the common areas of multi-housing complexes, commercial projects, gated communities, mobile home parks and other similar developments, without the consent of the property owner, tenant, occupant or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant, provided that such common areas are accessible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.100 - Inspection of open undeveloped areas. 
To enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, an Enforcement Officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect open undeveloped areas without the consent of the property owner or agent having charge or control of the premises and without an inspection warrant provided that the subject area is accessible to members of the general public and open to public view. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.110 - Use of optical aids. 
Use of optical aids such as flashlights and binoculars may be used to conduct inspections of exterior code violations if such violations could otherwise be seen during normal daylight hours or at close range without such optical aids from a location that the observing individual is legally entitled to be located upon. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.120 - Inspections of service oriented businesses. 
To enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and/or other applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, an enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent may inspect service oriented businesses pursuant to the Municipal Code and other applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.130 - Inspections pursuant to applicable statutes, rules, codes, regulations or inspection warrants. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or preclude inspections conducted pursuant to any applicable statute, rule, code, regulation or inspection warrant for purposes of inspections related to the respective statute, rule, code, regulation or inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
1.13.140 - Refusal to permit inspection pursuant to court issued inspection warrant. 
Any property owner, tenant, occupant or agent having charge or control of the premises who refuses to permit an inspection pursuant to any court issued inspection warrant shall be subject to arrest by the enforcement officer or other authorized enforcement agent, in accordance with Section 1.09.070 of this Municipal Code. Forcible execution of said inspection under such circumstance shall be permitted only if the warrant expressly grants permission for such forcible entry. 
(Ord. No. 2348, § 5, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 1.16 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1 (part), 2004).  
1.16.020 - Claims required. 
A.  All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 810 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. 
B.  Unless the provisions hereof provide otherwise, the process and procedural requirements for processing and handling claims set forth in Government Code Section 900 et seq., shall apply to any claim filed hereunder. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1 (part), 2004).  
1.16.030 - Form of claim. 
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator and shall be on the city's claim form as adopted by resolution of the city council. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1 (part), 2004).  
1.16.040 - Claim prerequisite to suit. 
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1 (part), 2004).  
1.16.050 - Suit. 
Any action brought against the City of Merced upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940—949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Merced shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950—951 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2143 § 1 (part), 2004).  
Chapter 1.17 - CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS 
 
1.17.010 - Manner of drawing city council districts. 
Pursuant to Section 400(E) of the Charter, the city is required to draw council districts by ordinance. Pursuant to Section 400(A) of the Charter, there are to be six (6) single-member districts with the council members elected by district and the mayor elected at-large. 
(Ord. No. 2449, § 1, 10-19-2015)  
1.17.020 - Drawing of city council districts. 
A.  The city council hereby selects the NDC C North Adjusted Plan as the boundaries for the three (3) city council districts for that portion of the City of Merced located north of the Burlington/Santa Fe Railroad. A true and correct copy of the NDC C North Adjusted Plan shall remain on file in the city clerk's office. 
B.  The city council hereby selects the NDC C South Adjusted Plan as the boundaries for the three (3) city council districts for that portion of the City of Merced located south of the Burlington/Santa Fe Railroad. A true and correct copy of the NDC C South Adjusted Plan shall remain on file in the city clerk's office. 
C.  City staff is directed to prepared legal descriptions that are consistent with the NDC C North Adjusted Plan and the NDC C South Adjusted Plan and shall forward said legal descriptions to the County of Merced for use in subsequent City of Merced City Council elections. No subsequent city council action shall be necessary to confirm the validity of these legal descriptions. 
(Ord. No. 2449, § 1, 10-19-2015)  
1.17.030 - Election dates for city council districts. 
A.  The initial election date for District 1 shall be in 2016 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
B.  The initial election date for District 2 shall be in 2018 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
C.  The initial election date for District 3 shall be in 2016 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
D.  The initial election date for District 4 shall be in 2018 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
E.  The initial election date for District 5 shall be in 2016 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
F.  The initial election date for District 6 shall be in 2018 and every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2449, § 1, 10-19-2015)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - MEETINGS 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - City Hall designated. 
The municipal building on the southeast corner of the intersection of 18th and "N" Streets in the city shall be known as the "City Hall". 
(Prior code § 2.1). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 1, 10-19-2009)  
2.04.020 - Time and place of regular council meetings. 
A.  The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each and every month in the City Hall. The city council shall provide by resolution the time of each regular meeting. 
B.  In the event that the first or third Monday of a month is a city holiday, then the regular meeting shall be held upon the next business day. 
(Ord. 1350 § 1,1980: prior code § 2.2).  
2.04.030 - Meetings—Recreation and parks commission. 
A.  The recreation and parks commission of the city shall hold one (1) regular meeting each month in the city hall and may adjourn the same from time to time as the board may deem necessary and proper. 
B.  The recreation and parks commission shall provide by resolution the data and time of the regular meeting. 
(Ord. 1653 § 1, 1987: prior code § 2.3).  
2.04.040 - Meetings—Personnel board. 
A.  The personnel board of the city shall hold one (1) regular meeting each month in the City Hall and may adjourn the same from time to time as the board may deem necessary and proper. 
B.  The personnel board shall provide by resolution the date and time of the regular meeting. 
(Ord. 1294, § 1, 1980: prior code § 2.4).  
2.04.050 - Closed sessions—Violation of confidentiality a misdemeanor. 
A.  Disclosure Prohibited—Exception. No member of the city council or other person in attendance at a lawful closed session of the city council may disclose to any person any information about or concerning any report, communication, discussion or any other matter discussed, considered or decided in such session, except as may be permitted or required by law or authorized or sanctioned by the city council. 
B.  Confidential Briefing of Absent Council member. Any member of the city council not in attendance at a closed session of the city council may be briefed by the mayor or the city attorney as to what occurred at such session and when briefed shall refrain from disclosing such information except as may be authorized or sanctioned by the city council. 
C.  Disclosure to City Manager or City Attorney. The mayor may brief the city manager or the city attorney, or both, concerning any report, communication, discussion or other matter discussed, considered or decided in a closed session. Such information shall not be disclosed by the city manager or city attorney except as may be authorized or sanctioned by the city council or necessary to implement the council's instructions. 
D.  When Not Applicable. This section does not prohibit the disclosure of any matters discussed, considered or decided at a closed session that the Ralph M. Brown Act (Sections 54950, et seq. of the Government Code) does not authorize to be discussed, considered or decided at such session, nor does this section prohibit the disclosure of any other violation of the Act. 
(Ord. 1581 § 1, 1985).  
Chapter 2.08 - BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Bonds of officers and employees Generally. 
Such officers and employees of the city, as are required by the Charter or by law or by resolution of the city council, are required to enter into individual bonds to the city in the penal sums as may be designated by resolution of the city council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties as they are now or may hereafter be designated and insuring the city against loss of money or property (including that for which the city is responsible) sustained through larceny, theft, embezzlement, forgery, misappropriation, wrongful abstraction, willful misapplication, or other fraudulent or dishonest acts. Such bonds shall run for such period of time as such officers or employees may be in the service of the city. 
(Prior code § 2.9).  
2.08.020 - Bonds—Execution, approval and filing. 
All bonds shall be executed by a responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2.9).  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY OFFICERS 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2343, adopted Oct. 19, 2009, repealed § 2.12.010, which pertained to the management services officer, and derived from prior code § 2.6.2.  
2.12.020 - City engineer. 
There is established the position of city engineer, who shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city engineer shall be a civil engineer, licensed as such in the state. The city engineer shall assist the city manager in the administration and supervision of such departments, divisions, offices or agencies of the city as shall be assigned to him/her. 
(Prior code § 2.6.3). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 3, 10-19-2009)  
2.12.030 - Offices of city manager and city clerk combined. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 605 of the Charter, the offices of city manager and city clerk are combined and the new combined office is designated as "city manager-city clerk." 
(Prior code § 2.9.1).  
Chapter 2.16 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Organization of functional units for administration—Supervisory officers. 
The various departments, divisions, offices and agencies of the city may be organized into two (2) or more distinct groups for purposes of administration and supervision. When such positions are authorized by the city council, the officer having charge of personnel administration may appoint officers to administer and supervise such groups of departments, divisions, offices and agencies. Each such supervisory officer, however denominated with respect to the group of departments, divisions, offices and agencies assigned to him, shall be deemed the equivalent of an assistant city manager and shall have and exercise, on behalf of the city manager, such powers and authority of the city manager as shall be delegated to him. 
(Prior code § 2.6.1).  
Chapter 2.20 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Authority. 
Pursuant to Section 708 of the Charter of the city and under authority of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state and more particularly Chapter 1 thereof, otherwise designated as Conservation and Planning Law, Sections 2.20.020 and 2.20.030 are established as the powers and duties of the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 2.10).  
2.20.020 - Powers. 
The powers of the planning commission are as follows: 
A.  To adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs, provided such rules and regulations are not contrary to the provisions of the city Charter, or to the provisions of applicable state law and, provide further, if there be provisions of state law and the city Charter which are in conflict, that the provisions of the city Charter shall prevail; 
B.  To perform such functions and with respect to such subjects as are prescribed as are prescribed by the city Charter and by state law; 
C.  To initiate studies, to prepare plans and recommendations with respect thereto, on subjects properly related to a comprehensive planning program whether such subjects are enumerated in the Charter and state law or not; 
D.  To serve in an advisory capacity on planning matters to the city council, to other governmental agencies and officials, and to the public; 
E.  To serve as the board of zoning adjustment per Chapter 2.24, the historic preservation commission pursuant to Chapter 17.54, and the design review commission per Chapter 20.86. 
(Ord. 1310 § 2, 1980: prior code § 2.11). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
2.20.030 - Processing procedures—Notice of public hearing. 
Procedures for processing matters through and by the planning commission shall conform to provisions of the city Charter, provided that where such Charter prescribed no procedure the council may, by ordinance, prescribe procedures, and where neither such Charter provisions nor ordinance provisions exist, the provisions of applicable state law with respect thereto shall govern; provided, that on all matters requiring full public hearings pertaining to adoption or amendment of master plans or precise plans, including enactment or amendment of a zoning ordinance changing the boundaries of a district, the planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. 1310 § 3 (part), 1980: prior code § 2.12(1)).  
2.20.040 - Formal action by resolution and vote. 
Formal action by the planning commission shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1628 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1310 § 3 (part), 1980: prior code § 2.12(2)).  
2.20.050 - Meetings. 
The time, day and place for the holding of regular meetings of the planning commission shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1810 § 1, 1992: prior code § 2.12.(I)).  
Chapter 2.24 - BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Established. 
Pursuant to Section 700 of the Charter of the city, there is established a board of zoning adjustment. 
(Ord. 1310 § 4, 1980: prior code § 2.18A).  
2.24.020 - Composition. 
The planning commission, in addition to its other powers and duties, shall serve as the board of zoning adjustment and the relocation appeals board. 
(Ord. 2018 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1969 § 1, 1997: prior code § 2.18B). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 4, 10-19-2009)  
Chapter 2.28 - DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASES 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter are to establish a centralized purchasing activity to set forth efficient procedures for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services for all departments of the city at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, and to define clearly the authority for the purchasing function. 
(Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.19).  
2.28.020 - Centralized purchasing established. 
There is created a centralized purchasing division in which is vested the authority to purchase needed materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services for all departments of the city. The centralized purchasing division shall be a division of the finance department. 
(Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.20).  
Chapter 2.31 - REGIONAL AIRPORT AUTHORITY 
 
2.31.010 - Created. 
There is created the city regional airport authority, referred to in this chapter as "airport authority." 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.020 - Purpose. 
The airport authority is created for the purpose of the provision and maintenance of public airports and landing places for aerial traffic for the use of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.030 - Composition. 
The airport authority shall consist of seven (7) members. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.040 - Appointment. 
The members of the airport authority shall be appointed by motion of the city council adopted by at least four (4) affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.050 - Term of office—Initially. 
The members of the airport authority shall meet as soon as practicable after their appointment and classify themselves by lot into two (2) classes, as nearly equal in number as possible, and the terms of office of the class having the greater number shall be four (4) years and the terms of office of the class having the lesser number shall be two (2) years. On the expiration of such respective terms, all members of the airport authority shall serve a term of four (4) years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.060 - Term of office—Limitations. 
The members of the airport authority shall not be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. At any time after the expiration of two (2) years following such two (2) consecutive terms, a former member of the airport authority may again be appointed to serve thereon, subject to the limitations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.070 - Removal of members. 
The members of the airport authority shall be subject to removal by motion of the city council adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.080 - Filling vacancies. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the airport authority shall be filled by an appointment by the city council. Upon a vacancy occurring which leaves an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.090 - Compensation. 
The members of the airport authority shall serve without compensation for their services as such, but may receive reimbursement for budgeted necessary travel and other expenses incurred on official duty. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.100 - Chair, vice-chair, and secretary—Rules and regulations. 
As soon as is practicable following the first day of July of each year, the airport authority shall organize by electing one (1) of its members to serve as chair and another member to serve as vice-chair of the authority both at the pleasure of the airport authority. The airport manager or designee thereof shall serve as the secretary of the authority for the purpose of recording of minutes, and keeping a record of its proceedings and transactions. The airport authority shall prescribe its own administrative rules and regulations, and copies thereof shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.110 - Action by vote at public meeting. 
The airport authority shall meet not less than monthly in such place as shall be provided by its own administrative rules and regulations. The affirmative or negative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the airport authority shall be necessary for it to take action. All proceedings of the airport authority shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.120 - Powers and duties. 
The airport authority shall have, subject to the review and approval of the city council, the power and duty to: 
A.  Acquire by purchase, lease, donation, or otherwise, and hold, in the name of the City of Merced, in the trust for the airport authority, real or personal property necessary or convenient for such purpose; 
B.  Maintain, manage, control, operate, use, extend, construct, improve, and furnish works and property necessary or convenient for such purpose; 
C.  Dispose of by sale, lease, or otherwise, real and personal property provided, however, that real property shall not be disposed of without the prior consent of the city council; 
D.  Prescribe, revise, and collect charges for the services and facilities provided pursuant hereto; 
E.  Make and enter into contracts; 
F.  Sue and be sued in its own name; 
G.  Adopt and use a seal, alterable at its pleasure; 
H.  Have access to all services and facilities of the city; and, 
I.  Exercise any powers incidental to the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.130 - Budget. 
The airport authority shall annually prepare and submit for approval by the city council a proposed budget of its revenues and expenses which may be prepared in the same manner and by the same persons as the budget expenses and revenue estimates for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.140 - Administrative offices. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the airport authority, and shall be responsible for the administration of its affairs. The finance officer of the city shall be ex officio the finance officer of the airport authority, and the city attorney shall be ex officio the attorney for the airport authority. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.150 - Property held in trust by city. 
Real and personal property heretofore held by the city for the purpose of the provision and maintenance of public airports and landing places for aerial traffic for the use of the public shall hereafter be held for such purpose by the city in trust for the airport authority. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.160 - Deposit and use of revenue. 
The airport authority shall have control of all charges received for, and all other income and receipts derived from the services and facilities provided pursuant hereto. Such money shall be deposited in the city treasury to the credit of a special fund, to be known as the airport fund and money so deposited shall be kept separate and apart from other money of the city, and shall be drawn from such fund to meet the expenses of the airport authority in substantially the same manner as money is drawn by other agencies, commissions and departments of the city. The money in such airport fund shall be expended solely for the carrying out of the powers and duties provided in this chapter to the airport authority. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.170 - Annual audit. 
The airport authority shall cause to be prepared an annual audit of its transactions by a certified public accountant. In lieu thereof, the annual audit may be prepared in the same manner and by the same persons as the annual audit of transactions of the city.  
2.31.180 - Contributions by city council. 
The city council may from time to time contribute money to defray the expenses and obligations of the airport authority, and such money shall be deposited in the airport fund. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.190 - Debts, liabilities, or obligations. 
Debts, liabilities, or obligations incurred by the airport authority, or otherwise imposed on the airport authority or its properties, shall constitute debts, liabilities, or obligations of the airport authority, its properties and the special fund created in this chapter, and shall not constitute a debt, liability, or obligations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
2.31.200 - Civil service and retirement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be in derogation of the provisions of the Charter pertaining to civil service and retirement, and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2410, § 1, 7-1-2013)  
Chapter 2.32 - AIRPORT REGULATIONS* 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Rules and regulations adopted. 
There is declared and adopted rules and regulations for the use and conduct of the Merced Regional Airport, set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 5, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.011 - Definitions. 
"Aircraft" means a device to be used, or intended to be used, for flight in the air. 
"Airport" means the Merced Regional Airport. 
"Airport authority" means the citizens appointed by the city council of the City of Merced pursuant to Section 2.31.030 of this Code. 
"Airport operational area" means the area used for landing, takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft. 
"Airport manager" shall also include the phrase "airport superintendant" and means the person employed by the City of Merced to manage the airport, acting at the direction of the city manager. 
"City" means the City of Merced, California. 
"City council" means the city council of the City of Merced. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Merced as provided in Charter Section 500. 
"Commercial operator" means every business conducted on the airport whose operation in the judgment of the airport superintendent reasonably requires that the runways, taxiways, and ramps exist and remain in good condition and are operational. 
"Control tower" means the air traffic control facility located at the airport. 
"Cross wind component" is the existing wind direction and velocity compared to the magnetic runway heading as expressed in an equivalent wind at right angles to the runway; i.e., a fourteen (14) knot wind from a direction forty-five (45) degrees to the runway magnetic bearing would be a ten (10) knot cross wind component. 
"FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of America. 
"Fixed base operator" means any aviation business duly licensed and authorized by written agreement with the City of Merced as a fixed base operator to provide aeronautical activities at the airport under strict compliance with such agreement and pursuant to these regulations and airport minimum standards. 
"F.S.S." means a flight service station operated by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
"Fuel tenders" means any vehicle designed and used for the transportation, handling, or dispensing of petroleum, fuel, and oil. 
"Gross weight" means the maximum allowable gross take-off weight of an aircraft under standard conditions as determined by the Federal Aviation Administration and incorporated in the certificate of airworthiness of the particular aircraft. 
"Local based aircraft" means those aircraft registered with the city as stored at the airport. 
"Minimum standards" means those minimum standards and requirements for commercial aeronautical services for the airport as are adopted by resolution by the city council pursuant to these regulations. 
"Mobile equipment" means any non-self-propelled vehicle or device in which a person or property may be transported. 
"Motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle. 
"NOTAM" means notice to airmen published by FAA. 
"Public area" means any area that is normally accessed by and for public use. 
"Ramps" mean areas used for the parking, storage, and incidental surface circulation to taxiways of aircraft. 
"Runways" mean the paved portion of the airport used for the takeoff and landing of aircraft. 
"Safety areas" mean areas around taxiways and runways designed to provide additional clearance from obstructions and to protect aircraft in the event of an unintended departure from the paved portion of runways and taxiways. 
"Taxiways" mean those areas used by aircraft to taxi to and from the runway. 
(Ord. 2155 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 5, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 2410, § 2, 7-1-2013)  
2.32.020 - General rules and regulations. 
The Merced Regional Airport general rules and regulations are as follows: 
A.  Purpose. The Merced Regional Airport shall be conducted as a terminal facility for the promotion and accommodation of air commerce and shall be operated as a free public air terminal. 
B.  Hours of Operation. The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day subject to such restrictions due to inclement weather, the condition of the landing area, the presentation of special events and like causes, as may be determined by the airport superintendent and approved by the FAA. 
C.  Special Services and Facilities. Special services may be rendered or special facilities may be provided on such terms as the city council may prescribe from time to time. No person shall use the airport as a base for the carrying on of commercial activities, for the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail, for instruction in aviation in any of its branches, for the sale of fuels, refreshments or any commodity or for any other commercial purpose, unless a permit has been granted therefor by the airport superintendent. 
D.  Use to Create Obligation to Obey Regulations. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all rules and regulations provided in this article. 
E.  Responsibility of User. The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, and he/she shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, the city council, its officers, employees, and agents from any liability or loss resulting from such use as well as against claims of third persons so using the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use shall constitute an acknowledgement that the city and the city council maintain the airport in a governmental capacity. 
F.  Air Traffic Rules Adopted. The air traffic rules and regulations promulgated by the FAA and as presently in effect or hereinafter amended are referred to, adopted, and made a part of these regulations as fully set forth. 
G.  Operators and Aircraft to be Authorized by Federal Aviation Administration—Exceptions. No person not properly authorized by the FAA, and no aircraft not similarly certified, shall operate on the airport; provided, that this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft belonging to the government of the United States or to a state, territory, possession, or any political subdivision, nor to any aircraft of a foreign country operated under permission of the Federal Government of the United States. 
H.  Compliance with Rules and Regulations Required. No person shall navigate any aircraft over, land upon, or take off from, or service, repair or maintain any aircraft on the airport or conduct any operation on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with these rules and regulations and those of the FAA. 
I.  Handling, Policing and Protection of Public. The airport superintendent shall have authority to take such steps as may be necessary for the handling, policing, and protection of the public while present at the airport, subject to the review of the city manager. 
J.  Maximum Speed of Motor Vehicles—Parking. The maximum speed for the operation of motor vehicles on the airport shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour and all motor vehicles shall be parked only in such areas on the airport as may be from time to time designated by the airport superintendent. 
K.  Vending Machines. No vending machine of any kind shall be placed, used or maintained on the airport or any of its improvements or facilities, unless the airport superintendent has first given his approval. 
L.  Payment of Fees or Rentals. The payment of any fees or rentals that may be required by the city council shall be a condition precedent to the use of the airport. 
M.  Tiedown. The airport superintendent retains the prerogative of assigning tiedown spaces for both permanent and transient aircraft. Air taxi, air charter, and air service passenger and cargo pickup and drop-off points will be designated by the airport superintendent. Operators or commercial entities desiring to display or advertise their equipment and/or aircraft will be assigned specific area for such purposes by the airport superintendent. 
N.  Deemed Part of Lease. The provisions of these rules and regulations shall be deemed a part of each and every lease, permit or instrument of tenancy now in effect and heretofore issued to any tenant of any portion of the airport, or which may hereafter be issued to any such tenant. 
O.  Aeronautical Activities. All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying aircraft departing from or arriving in the air space above the airport shall be conducted in conformity with the current pertinent provisions of the Federal Aviation Regulations, and orders issued by the airport superintendent, or the control tower when in operation, including State of California rules and regulations regarding aeronautical activities. 
P.  Use of Airport. No person shall come upon or use the airport, except while traveling through as a passenger on a bus or taxicab, or while enplaning or deplaning as a passenger on a commercial aircraft operating on the airport, after such person has for lawful cause been denied the use of the airport by the airport superintendent. 
Q.  Equipment. No person, other than employees of the owner or lessee, shall make use of shops, garages, facilities, or equipment at the airport without specific permission of the lessee or owner. Facilities owned by the city, not under lease to any third party or in active use for city operations, are available for use by airport tenants with the written permission of the airport superintendent and if appropriate insurance is in place before such use. 
R.  Fuel Delivery. No person shall transport or deliver aviation fuels on the airport or dispense fuels into aircraft for hire unless said persons are holders of a valid agreement with the city authorizing them to do so. 
S.  Closing of Field. In the event the airport superintendent believes the conditions of the airport or any portion thereof to be unfavorable for taxiing, landing, or takeoff, it shall be within his/her authority to close the airport until such portions thereof is again useable, at which time the NOTAM shall be cancelled. 
T.  Securing of Unattended Aircraft. No aircraft shall be left unattended on the airport unless properly secured or within a hangar. Owners of such aircraft shall be held responsible for any damage resulting from failure to comply with this rule. 
U.  Interfering or Tampering with Aircraft. No person shall interfere with any aircraft, or put in motion the engine of such aircraft, or use any aircraft, aircraft part, instrument, or tool without the permission of the owner. 
V.  Security Requirements. All individuals, clubs, and FBOs using the airport for private or commercial operations will familiarize themselves with the airport security requirements. Failure to comply with the stated airport security requirements will be cause for the airport superintendent to deny use of the airport facilities. 
W.  Liability Insurance. The privileges of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof. The city, its officers, employees, and/or agents, shall not be liable for loss, incident, or mishap of any nature whatsoever and/or from any cause whatsoever to any individual, aircraft, or property occurring on the airport except for acts of the city's sole negligence. No person, firm, or corporation shall maintain a local based aircraft at the airport unless there is on file with the airport superintendent, written confirmation of coverage in a form approved by the city and in the minimum amounts and coverage(s) as required by the city. All public liability insurance must be endorsed to add the city, its officers, employees, and/or agents for operations on the airport. 
X.  Damage to Airport Property. Any and all airport property destroyed, injured, or damaged by accident or otherwise, shall be paid for by the party or parties responsible for such destruction, injury, or damage thereto. 
Y.  Liens on Aircraft. Pursuant to Part 3, Title 4, Chapter 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California, commencing with Section 1208.61, the City of Merced has a lien dependent upon possession for the compensation to which it is legally entitled for making repairs or performing labor upon, furnishing supplies or materials; for the storage and safekeeping of aircraft; also for reasonable charges for the use of any landing aid furnished such aircraft and reasonable landing fees, and pursuant to said chapter, the City of Merced may sell the property or so much thereof as is necessary to satisfy the lien and costs of sale at public auction, if the City of Merced is not paid the amount due within thirty (30) days after it becomes due. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 5, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.021 - Conduct. 
All users of the Merced Regional Airport are subject to ordinances governing conduct in Title 9 of the Municipal Code of the City of Merced and the following: 
A.  Disorderly Conduct. No person shall be disorderly, obnoxious, indecent, or commit any act of nuisance on the airport that creates a safety hazard. 
B.  Garbage Disposal. No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse, or other material on the airport, except in receptacles designed for that purpose. 
C.  Defacement of Property. No person shall destroy, injure, deface, or disturb any building, sign, equipment, marker, or other structure, tree, flower, lawn, or other property on the airport. 
D.  Abandonment of Property. No person shall abandon any personal property on the airport. 
E.  Loitering. No person shall loiter on any part of the airport or in any building on the airport. 
F.  False Statements. No person shall knowingly or willfully make any false statement or report to the airport superintendent. 
G.  Restricted Entry. No person shall enter any restricted areas posted as being closed to the public except as provided in these rules. 
H.  Airport Operational Area. No person shall enter upon the airport operational area, utility and service rooms or areas except: 
1.  Persons assigned to duty therein; 
2.  Authorized representatives of the airport superintendent; 
3.  Persons authorized by the airport superintendent; and 
4.  Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the field area for the purpose of embarkation and debarkation. 
I.  No person shall smoke on the airport apron, or in any hangar or service station area, gasoline storage area, or in any building, room, or place on the airport where smoking is prohibited. No smoking shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any fuel carrier when not in motion, or when it is being utilized for fueling or draining of fuel from aircraft. No smoking shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any aircraft fuel tank while the aircraft is being fueled or drained of fuel. 
J.  No person shall take or use any aircraft, aircraft instruments, or tools thereof owned, controlled, or operated by any other person while such aircraft parts, instruments or tools are stored, housed, or otherwise left on the airport or within its hangars without the consent of the owner or operator thereof. 
K.  No person shall occupy the road or walks in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct their proper use. 
L.  No person shall walk in a picket line as a picket or take part in any public demonstration on any part of the airport which would interfere or tend to interfere with aviation operations. 
M.  No person shall enter the airport public area, terminal building, or the airport operational area with a dog or other animal, unless such dog or animal is restrained by leash or properly confined. Service animals are permitted for appropriate purposes. 
N.  No person shall post or display signs, advertisements, circulars, printed or written matter at the airport except in designated areas, without the approval of the airport superintendent. 
O.  All orders of the fire chief of the city, or authorized representative(s) thereof, shall be complied with by any and all tenants and personnel at the airport. 
P.  Any person finding lost articles shall deposit them at the office of the airport superintendent. Articles unclaimed within sixty (60) days may be returned to the finders thereof. Articles not claimed or turned over to the finders thereof shall be turned over to the Merced Police Department as unclaimed property. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 5, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.022 - Operation of motorized ground vehicles. 
A.  General Rules. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport except in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations and the laws of the state of California for the control of such vehicles. 
1.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle of any kind on the airport operational area in a reckless manner. 
2.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport contrary to the directions of posted traffic signs. 
3.  No person shall operate a motorized vehicle or equipment on the runway, and taxiways, and associated safety areas, at the airport prior to the successful completion of the FAA Airport ground vehicles access operators training program. 
4.  The driver of any motor vehicle operated on the airport must, at all times, comply with the order, signal or directive of the airport superintendent or an authorized representative of the airport superintendent, including the signals from the control tower when in operation. 
5.  All vehicles shall yield to all moving aircraft. 
6.  No vehicles shall operate nor park adjacent to taxiways and runways without authorization from the airport superintendent or designee. 
7.  Emergency conditions existing on the airport operational area will not mitigate or cancel any existing rules. During such conditions, the driver of every motor vehicle shall give way to emergency vehicles. 
B.  Motor Vehicle License Tags. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport when such vehicle does not possess valid license tags issued by an appropriate authority, unless such vehicle is strictly for on-field use and is registered with the airport superintendent. 
C.  Vehicle Safety. No motor vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed, equipped, or loaded as to endanger persons or property. 
D.  Parking. No person shall park a motor vehicle on the airport other than in an area specifically established for parking. No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport, nor shall any person park a motor vehicle on the airport for a period more than seventy-two (72) hours unless approval for such parking is obtained from the airport superintendent. No person shall park a motor vehicle in an area requiring payment for parking thereon without paying the required parking fee. 
E.  Reflectors. All motor vehicles authorized to operate on the airport operational area shall be equipped with two (2) reflectors on the rear. Mobile equipment used outside of airline passenger loading gate areas shall be equipped with two (2) reflectors for each side (front and rear) and two (2) reflectors on the rear. Reflectors shall be red on motor vehicles, and amber on mobile equipment. A reflector will be considered adequate when it is so designated, located, and maintained as to be visible for at least five hundred (500) feet when opposed by a vehicle with ordinary headlights. 
F.  Repair of Motor Vehicles. No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than designated shop areas, except those minor repairs necessary to remove such motor vehicle from the airport. Nor shall any person move, interfere, or tamper with any motor vehicle, or put in motion the engine; or take, or use, any motor vehicle part, instruments or tool thereof without the permission of the owner. 
G.  Buses. No carrier by motorbus for hire shall load or unload persons at the airport at any place, other than designated for such purpose, nor shall such conveyance pick up passengers on the airport without prior agreement of the city. 
H.  Taxicabs. No person shall, within the boundary of the airport, solicit, or invite persons to ride in any taxicab, rental cars, or other vehicles used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire unless that person is the holder of an agreement authorizing same with the city. 
I.  Passenger Loading Gates. No motor vehicle of any type shall cross passenger-loading gates between an aircraft and the gate. 
J.  Removal of Vehicles. Motor vehicles that are parked by their owner or operators on the airport in violation of these rules may be towed/removed whenever it is determined by the airport superintendent that such motor vehicles create a nuisance or a hazard. The airport superintendent shall have the authority to make a reasonable charge against the owner or operator of such motor vehicle for such towing or moving service, and the motor vehicle so towed or removed shall be subject to a lien for such charge. 
K.  Motor Vehicle Operation in Hangar. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any hangar on the airport without exhaust protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of sparks. 
L.  Accident Reports. All persons involved in an accident, other than one involving an aircraft, occurring on the airport, shall make a full report thereof to the Merced City Police Department, which report shall include names and addresses of all persons involved. 
M.  Rental Car Concessions. Rental car concessions shall be by agreement executed with the city. 
(Ord. 2355 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.030 - Aircraft operating rules. 
The Merced Regional Airport general aircraft operating rules are as follows: 
A.  Operation of Aircraft. No person shall navigate any aircraft, land upon, fly same from, service, maintain, repair any aircraft, or conduct any aircraft operations on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with current Federal Aviation regulations, Transportation Security Administration regulations established under federal authority, and these rules. 
B.  Operating While Drunk or Drugged. No person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or hangars, or operate such craft, while under the influence of, or using any intoxicating liquor or habit-forming drug. 
C.  Tail Wheels or Tail Skids. No aircraft shall use paved runways, unless equipped with tail wheels. No aircraft shall operate on any of the airport with tail skids, in order to protect and preserve pavement. 
D.  Radio Contact. Radio contacts by the pilots of aircraft, operators of motor vehicles, and control tower operators shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure and by means of the terminology prescribed by the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration whenever practicable. 
E.  Parking of Aircraft. No person shall park aircraft in any area on the airport other than areas designated for that purpose. 
F.  Disabled Aircraft. All disabled aircraft and parts thereof on the airport operational area shall be promptly removed by the owner unless required or directed by the airport superintendent or authorized representatives of the Federal Aviation Administration to delay such action pending an investigation of an accident. If it is impossible for the owner to promptly remove the aircraft or part, airport personnel may remove it and the airport superintendent shall charge the owner for this service. 
G.  Airport May Refuse Clearance. The airport superintendent may delay, suspend, or restrict any or all flight operations at the airport, and may refuse take-off clearance to any aircraft without regard to weather conditions whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, and approved by the FAA. 
H.  Taxiing of Aircraft. 
1.  No person shall taxi an aircraft until he/she has ascertained that there will be no danger of collision with any person or object. 
2.  No aircraft shall be taxied in a careless or reckless manner. 
3.  During periods of control tower operation, pilots shall not taxi onto or across any runway until specifically cleared to do so by radio or visual signal. 
4.  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with prescribed taxiing patterns associated with the particular runway in use. 
I.  Starting Engines. No person shall start or run an engine in an aircraft unless a person appropriately licensed to do so is inside the aircraft attending the engine controls. Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine or engines unless the aircraft is provided with adequate brakes or the aircraft has been secured. 
J.  Engine Testing. No person shall run the engine or engines of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such a manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property, or in such a manner as to blow dirt, paper, or other materials across taxiways or runways, or in such a manner as to endanger the safety and operations of the airport. 
K.  Engine Run-up. Engine run-up before takeoff shall be accomplished on run-up pads or other areas provided for this purpose. No engine run-up shall be permitted in any areas that would create a hazard to persons, aircraft, or other property. 
L.  Flying Instructions. No one other than a pilot with an instructor's rating, shall teach the art of flying on the airport for hire, reward, or gratuitously, and no one other than a pilot with an instructor's rating shall "flight check" students. 
M.  Familiarity with Rules and Regulations. Every person instructing students in flying at the airport shall acquaint themselves and their students with the rules and regulations in effect. 
N.  Accident Reports. Witnesses of and participants in accidents on or within the airport shall provide written notification thereof to the airport superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours or as soon after the accident as possible, together with their names and addresses, telephone numbers, and insurance information. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 6, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.040 - Fueling operations. 
A.  Hangar Fueling. No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine or engines are running, or while such aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed space. 
B.  Dispensing Apparatus. During the refueling or defueling, the aircraft and the fuel-dispensing apparatus shall both be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential. 
C.  Spillage. Persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft shall exercise extreme care to prevent overflow or spillage of fuel. 
D.  Ignition Service. No person shall use any material during fueling or defueling of aircraft that is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition. 
E.  Fire Extinguishers. Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within reach of all persons engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft. 
F.  Hoses. Fuel hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound, and nonleaking condition. 
G.  Fueling Devices. All hoses, funnels, and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling operations shall be equipped with a ground device to prevent ignition of volatile liquids. 
H.  Passengers. No passengers shall be permitted in any aircraft during fueling, unless an attendant is present at or near the cabin door, who is not engaged in the fueling procedure. 
I.  Fifty-Foot Restriction. Only personnel engaged in fueling or operation of the aircraft shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of fuel tanks of such aircraft during such operation except as provided in subsection (H) above. 
J.  Radio Transmitters. No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch electrical appliance on or off in an aircraft during fueling or defueling. 
K.  Engine Operator. No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is fuel on the ground under such aircraft. 
L.  Fuel Tenders. Fuel tenders will not be driven in front of, or in line with, the taxi path of any aircraft in motion or with its engine running. 
M.  Riders. No riders are allowed outside of the tender's cab. 
N.  Backing Fuel Tenders. Fuel tenders shall not be moved backwards unless there is a qualified observer to aid the driver through appropriate voice and/or hand signals. 
O.  Fueling Practices. These rules do not replace additional good fueling practices, and do not constitute only those procedures necessary for safe fueling operations. The authorized fuel dealer and his personnel are responsible for good, safe service of aircraft operating for the airport. 
P.  Denial of Operation. Any driver or assistant can be denied permission by the airport superintendent to operate fuel tenders on the airport if these rule are violated, or there are prior incidents of noncompliance. 
Q.  Fueling Permit. Each person, individual, or corporation who dispenses fuel for their own use shall obtain a noncommercial fueling permit from the city and carry pollution insurance or place a bond in an amount and in the form satisfactory to the city that insures against any toxic spill. Proof of such insurance must be on file before such fueling activity is permitted. 
R.  Compliance with Other Laws. All fuel dispensing equipment and facilities shall comply with all local, state, and federal laws in regards to their installment, operation, and maintenance. 
S.  Dispensing Equipment Installation. Fuel dispensing equipment and facilities installed pursuant to this section cannot be used for the commercial resale of fuel or for the use of anyone other than the owners of the equipment and/or facility. 
T.  Fuel Tank Installation. Each person installing fuel tanks under this section will be required to enter into a lease agreement with the city prior to the installation of fuel tanks. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.050 - Air traffic rules. 
A.  Federal and State Air Traffic Rules. The applicable air traffic and flight rules for the type of aircraft being operated of the Federal Aviation Administration and the State of California governing the operation of aircraft, and the same are currently in effect or as hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of the air traffic and flight rules of the city as fully as set forth herein. 
B.  Take-Offs and Landings. Take-offs and landings shall be made from the runway. All operations shall be confined to hard surface. 
C.  Traffic Patterns. Unless otherwise directed by an operational control tower, the normal traffic patterns will be as follows: 
1.  Runway 30 traffic pattern is left-handed. 
2.  Runway 12 traffic pattern is right-handed. 
D.  Helicopter Operations. Operations of helicopters shall be conducted in such a manner as to preclude any damage by their downwash to other aircraft on the airport. When landing or departing, their flight path shall be the shortest route to airport operational area while avoiding parked aircraft. Helicopters shall not be flown over any parked aircraft at an altitude below two hundred (200) feet AGL. Helicopters shall be flown and/or taxied over runways and taxiways whenever possible. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.060 - Instruction and practice flying. 
A.  Familiarity with Rules and Regulations. Every person instructing students in flying at the airport shall acquaint them with the rules and regulations in effect. 
B.  Instruction. Instruction practices and procedures shall comply with FAA Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.070 - Noncommercial hangar ramp area rules. 
A.  Hangar and Room Designations. For purposes of identification, all hangar buildings and spaces at the airport are designated by letter and space number according to a drawing and schedule prepared by the airport superintendent. 
B.  Hangar Use. No person, firm, co-partnership or corporation shall hereafter occupy or use a hangar, or tenant tiedown ramp area, at the airport without having first completed and signed a rental agreement approved in writing for such purposes by the city. 
C.  Tenant of Hangar. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be permitted to use or become a tenant of hangars for the sole purpose of parking or storage of miscellaneous vehicles or materials unrelated to aviation. Any unauthorized tenancy for other than aviation use shall be subject to cancellation by the airport authority or the airport superintendent, or designated representative, upon thirty (30) days' written notice. 
D.  Transfer of Hangars. Hangars may not be transferred to any party for any purpose without written approval of the city. 
E.  Painting. Hangars and facilities shall not be used for painting, spraying, or other treatment of aircraft, vehicles or articles that might deposit foreign materials on walls, floors, fixtures, or endanger neighboring aircraft finishes or hangar contents. 
F.  Storage. Such facilities shall not be used for storage of vehicles, other than those of the hangar tenant, and only then when tenant will be using their own aircraft on trips. 
G.  Modification of Hangar. No modifications, installations, systems or other improvements or attachments shall be made or attached at any time to the hangar without written approval of the airport superintendent. 
H.  Attachments to Hangars. No pulleys, slings, or other lifting devices shall be attached to the building frame, supports, or other structural member of the hangar without written approval of the airport superintendent or his designee. 
I.  Maintenance, Construction and Restoration of aircraft. Individual aircraft owners, partnerships, formally organized aviation clubs or hired company pilots may work on privately-owned, aviation club-owned, or company aircraft in maintenance, construction, or restoration as permitted by Federal Aviation Regulations, unless otherwise specifically prohibited by any provision of this code or minimum standards for the airport. No tenant shall engage or hire outside help or mechanical service other from those authorized as a commercial operator by possessing a valid permit in accordance with the minimum standards to perform such work on the airport. 
J.  Fire extinguishers. Each tenant shall provide at lease one (1) fire extinguisher of either CO 2 or powder content in tenant's aircraft or in the hangar at all times while tenant's aircraft is in or about the facilities. 
K.  Drip Pan. Each tenant shall provide and maintain a drip pan under each and every engine of tenant's aircraft while such aircraft is in storage or being worked on in tenant's assigned area. 
L.  Spillage. No spillage of oils, drainage of fuel, use of solvents and detergents, aircraft washing, paint removal, or other acts leading to unsightliness or damage to pavement shall be permitted in subject area other than in specifically designated locations. Accidental spillage shall be immediately removed by using absorbent materials and neutralized. 
M.  Damage. All hangar tenants shall be responsible for hangar damage caused by their tenancy, excluding normal wear and tear. 
N.  Keys. All tenants shall provide the airport superintendent with one (1) key to hangar door lock or will use a lock furnished by the airport to facilitate fire protection inspection, hangar maintenance and inspections of structure and doors. The airport superintendent will notify any tenant with no less than a fifteen (15) day notice of pending inspections of their hangar. 
O.  Engine Operations. No aircraft engines may be started or operated inside the hangars at any time, and no aircraft engine shall be run up to high-power settings in or about the subject areas unless moved and tailed to unobstructed and non-dust-producing areas. 
P.  Children. No unattended children shall be allowed within any Airport hangar, and no unescorted children shall be allowed to loiter about, play on, or otherwise occupy the subject areas of other aircraft parking or movement areas of the airport at any time. 
Q.  Hangar Entrances. Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
R.  Liability Insurance. City of Merced liability insurance affords protection only to the city, and does not apply to users of the airport. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.081 - Commercial operation use permits. 
It is intended that every business conducted on the airport whose operations, in the judgment of the airport superintendent, reasonably require that the runways, taxiways, and ramps exist and remain in good condition and operational, shall be required to obtain a commercial operator permit and pay the appropriate charge as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 2355 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.090 - Fire and safety regulations. 
A.  Firearms. No person, except peace officers, duly authorized personnel of the United States Post Office, airport personnel, members of the armed forces of the United States on official duty, or properly licensed persons shall carry any weapon, explosive, or flammable material on the airport, except when such material is intended for legitimate aviation use. This section shall not apply to persons carrying firearms in cases, broken down, or unloaded when said firearms are being transported for the purpose of sale, demonstration, hunting, or other sports activities. 
B.  Caution to Prevent Fires. Every person using the airport or its facilities in any way shall use the utmost caution to prevent fire and shall otherwise conduct himself/herself so as to prevent bodily injury or property damage. 
C.  Fueling or Draining Aircraft. No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while its engine is running, or while in a hangar or other enclosed place. Fueling shall be done in such manner and with such equipment that has adequate connections for the grounding of static electricity shall be continuously maintained during such time. 
D.  Cylinders or Flasks of Compressed Gas. No cylinder or flask of compressed flammable gas shall be kept or stored, except at a place designated by the airport superintendent and the fire department of the city for that purpose. 
E.  Cleaning of Motors. The cleaning of motors or other parts of aircraft shall not be carried on in any hangar, except with nonflammable substances. If flammable liquids are employed for this purpose, the operation shall be carried on in the open air or in such other structures as may meet with the approval of the airport superintendent and the fire department of the city and in compliance with any applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations governing such activity. 
F.  Cleaning of Aircraft. No person shall use flammable volatile liquids for the cleaning of an aircraft engine, propellers, appliances, or for any other purpose, unless such operations are conducted in open air or in a room specifically set aside for that purpose. Such rooms shall be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate, and readily accessible, fire extinguishing apparatus. 
G.  Smoking. No person shall smoke or ignite any match or cigarette lighter in any hangar or other building on the airport. 
H.  Maintenance Work. No aircraft maintenance work shall be carried on or performed in any hangar, except in maintenance hangars so designated by the airport superintendent or as permitted by Section 2.32.070. 
I.  Accumulations of Boxes, Crates, and Other Rubbish. No boxes, crates, rubbish, paper, or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about any hangar, and all oil, paint, and varnish cans, bottles, or other containers shall be removed from the hangar immediately upon being emptied. 
J.  Storage. No person shall store or stock material or equipment in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard. 
K.  Storage of Flammable Liquids. No person shall keep or store any flammable liquids, gases, signal flares, or other similar materials in the hangars or any buildings on the airport, unless such materials are kept in a proper receptacle. 
L.  Waste. Tenants shall provide suitable receptacles for storage of waste, rags, and other rubbish. All wastes, rags, and other rubbish shall be removed on a regular basis by the tenant. 
M.  Open-Flame Operations. No person shall conduct any open-flame operation in any hangar or on the airport unless specifically authorized by the airport superintendent. 
N.  Floor Care. Floors shall be kept clean and free from oil, and no volatile flammable solvent shall be used for cleaning floors. All lessees on the airport shall keep the floors of the hangars and hangar and terminal apron pits and areas adjacent thereof, leased by them respectively, free and clear of oil, grease, and other flammable materials. 
O.  Doping. "Doping" processes shall be conducted only in open air, or in designated and properly designed fireproofed and ventilated rooms or building in which all illumination, wiring, heating, ventilation equipment, switches, outlets, and fixtures shall be spark-proof and vapor-proof. No person shall enter or work in a "dope" room while "doping" processes are being conducted unless such person wears spark-proof shoes. 
P.  Storage in Apron Area. Gasoline, oil, and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on apron and ramp areas. In addition, no material of such type shall be kept, except enclosed and covered in housings of a design and type approved by, and at a place directed by the airport superintendent. 
Q.  Dangerous Cargo. The loading, unloading, or parking of aircraft or any vehicle carrying explosive or highly toxic cargoes is prohibited except with the written permission of the airport superintendent in areas so designated by the airport superintendent. 
R.  Pesticides. No pesticides or emptied containers thereof shall be dumped or left unattended at any place on the airport where they are likely to present a hazard to persons, animals, crops, or property. All emptied containers, sacks, barrels, etc., are to be removed, disposed of, or stored in a proper and safe manner immediately after use. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 7, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.100 - Requirements for flying clubs. 
A.  Purpose of Flying Clubs. A flying club may be either a nonprofit corporation or an unincorporated association created for the purpose of fostering flying for pleasure, developing skills in flying, and developing an awareness and appreciation of aviation and aeronautics. 
B.  By-Laws. Each club must furnish the airport superintendent prior to operating at the airport with a copy of the by-laws, articles of incorporation, operating rules, and membership agreement. 
C.  Officers and Directors. A current roster of officers and directors must be filed with the airport superintendent prior to operating at the airport. 
D.  Use of Airport for Commercial Purposes Prohibited. Flying clubs shall not engage in any commercial operation as herein defined. 
E.  Membership List. The flying club shall keep a membership record containing the full names and addresses of all its members, past and present, together with the date when their membership commenced and terminated. These records shall be available for review upon reasonable request by the airport superintendent. 
F.  Insurance. All flying clubs must obtain public liability and property damage insurance with a hold harmless agreement in favor of the City of Merced, its officers and employees in an amount and form satisfactory to the city. 
G.  Aircraft Registration. All aircraft owned, leased, or used by the club must be registered with the airport superintendent. Club owned or leased aircraft cannot be used for commercial ventures, purposes, or operations. 
H.  Laws and Regulations. All members must comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
I.  Fixed Based Operation. Any flying club organized and operated by a fixed base operator as a commercial venture or for commercial purposes or operations as heretofore defined, must meet all the requirements of a fixed base operator as specified in the minimum standards and requirements of the conduct of commercial aeronautical services and activities at the Merced Regional Airport. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 7, 10-19-2009)  
2.32.200 - Failure to comply. 
In addition to any other penalty prescribed by this chapter, any person operating or handling an aircraft on the airport in violation of any provisions of this article or refusing to comply therewith in any respect, may be removed or ejected from the airport by or under the authority of the airport superintendent, and upon the order of the city manager may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as may be deemed necessary to insure the safeguarding of the same and the public and its interest therein. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.300 - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation for any person to violate this chapter. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. An administrative fine may also be imposed not to exceed the amount allowable for a criminal fine. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from pursuing criminal, civil, and administrative, or any other legal remedy to address violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.310 - Administrative enforcement. 
A.  Any person authorized to enforce ordinances may issue an administrative citation to any person who violates this chapter. 
B.  The citation shall set forth the section or sections of this chapter so violated; the date; the approximate time thereof; the location where the violation occurred; the amount of the fine; a statement printed on the notice indicating that payment of the fine is required to be made not later than twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of citation issuance; the procedure for the alleged violator to deposit the amount of the fine with the finance officer or to contest the citation pursuant to Section 2.32.320; and an appropriate notice to the recipient of his or her right not to contest the violation and appropriate instructions and procedures for payment, as prescribed by the finance officer. 
C.  Any person to whom an administrative citation is issued may, within twenty-one (21) days of receipt, pay the amount of the fine in lieu of contesting the violation. Upon timely payment under this section, and proof of the cessation of the violation satisfactory to the city manager or his designee unless it is determined that the penalty for the violation shall include ejection from the airport, may resume use of the airport pursuant to the terms and conditions of usage prior to the violation of this chapter. 
D.  The city council shall, by resolution adopt a schedule of fines. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.320 - Contesting citations. 
A.  For a period of twenty-one (21) calendar days from the issuance of the administrative citation, a person may request an initial review of the administrative citation by the airport superintendent. The request may be made by writing to the airport superintendent. There shall be no charge for this review. 
B.  If, following the initial review, the airport superintendent is satisfied that the violation did not occur, or that extenuating circumstances make dismissal of the citation appropriate in the interest of justice, the airport superintendent shall cancel the citation. The airport superintendent shall advise the finance officer of the cancellation. The airport superintendent or the finance officer shall mail the results of the initial review to the person contesting the citation. 
C.  If the person is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the person may request an administrative hearing of the violation no later than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the mailing of the results of the airport superintendent's initial review. The request shall be made in writing. The person requesting an administrative hearing shall deposit the amount of the fine with the finance officer. 
D.  The finance officer shall provide a written procedure to allow a person to request an administrative hearing without payment of the fine upon satisfactory proof of an inability to pay the amount due. Notice of this procedure shall be provided to all persons requesting an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.330 - Administrative hearing process. 
The administrative hearing process shall include the following: 
A.  The city manager or his duly authorized representative (hearing officer) shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from the accused violator and any witnesses. 
B.  The person requesting a hearing shall have the choice of a hearing by mail or in person. 
C.  Written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by first class mail. The hearing shall be set no sooner than twenty (20) days following the request for hearing. The administrative hearing shall be held within ninety (90) calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing. One (1) continuance of the hearing, not to exceed twenty-one (21) days, may be granted upon written request to the city manager or authorized hearing officer. 
D.  The administrative hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the city manager and approved by the city attorney. The hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair, and impartial review of the dispute. The hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive testimony from the party charged with the violation and any witnesses. All documents relating to the dispute shall be submitted as evidence. The hearing officer's decision or order shall be deemed the final administrative order or decision of the city. The administrative hearing procedures provided by this section shall not apply to any criminal enforcement of this chapter. 
E.  The police officer or person who issues a citation may, but shall not be required to, participate in an administrative hearing. 
F.  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision which may be served personally upon, or by first class mail to, the owner or the authorized representative of the owner. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
2.32.340 - Payments collected by finance officer. 
Charges and fines imposed, and payments to be collected shall be processed and collected by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 2355 § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 2.36 - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2410, § 3, adopted July 1, 2013, repealed Ch. 2.36, §§ 2.36.010—2.36.030, which pertained to regional airport authority and derived from prior code §§ 4.28, 4.29, 4.32; Ord. No. 1238, §§ 1—3, adopted 1979; Ord. 1878, § 1, adopted 1994; and Ord. No. 2343, § 8, adopted Oct. 19, 2009. 
 
2.36.010—2.36.030 - Reserved.  
Chapter 2.40 - RELOCATION AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Relocation agency established. 
A relocation agency is established in this chapter to provide relocation assistance to those persons entitled thereto under the provisions of state or federal law, and under such relocation assistance guidelines as may hereafter be adopted or amended from time to time by the city council of the city. 
(Prior code § 2.90).  
2.40.020 - Coordination of relocation activities. 
The relocation agency shall act as a central relocation agency within the meaning of Government Code Section 7261.6 to coordinate all relocation activities within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Prior code § 2.91).  
2.40.030 - Contracts with other public agencies. 
Subject to the approval of the city council, the relocation agency of the city may contract with other public agencies to provide or administer relocation assistance for such other public agencies. 
(Prior code § 2.92).  
2.40.040 - Adoption of guidelines. 
The city council, by ordinance or resolution, may adopt and from time to time amend local guidelines for the providing of relocation assistance. 
(Prior code § 2.93).  
Chapter 2.44 - HOLIDAYS 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Saturday a holiday. 
Every Saturday is a holiday as regards the transaction of the business in the public offices of the city. 
(Prior code § 14B.1).  
2.44.020 - Defined. 
Every holiday enumerated in Section 6700, subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j) and (k) of the Government Code is a holiday as regards the transaction of business in the public offices of the city, except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution. 
(Prior code § 14B.2).  
2.44.030 - Special holidays. 
Every day appointed by the President of the United States or the Governor of California for a public fast, thanksgiving or holiday, as provided in Section 6700 (n) of the Government Code, is not a city holiday unless so designated by the city council by resolution. 
(Prior code § 14B.3).  
2.44.040 - Continuation of essential public services. 
Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, police and fire protection services shall continue during every holiday. Other essential public services as may from time to time be designated by the city manager, shall continue during every holiday. 
(Prior code § 14B.4).  
Chapter 2.48 - SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
2.48.010 - Public auction after three months. 
Unclaimed property in possession of the police department of the city, which remains unclaimed for a continuous period of three (3) months shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder after notice as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1611 § 1, 1986: prior code § 21.16).  
2.48.020 - Notice. 
The chief of police shall give notice of the time and place of any public auction of unclaimed property by one publication, which shall be completed at least five (5) days before the date of such auction. Such notice shall contain an adequate description of all property to be sold. 
(Prior code § 21.17).  
2.48.030 - Transfer to public use. 
In lieu of sale at public auction as provided in Section 2.48.010, any unclaimed property in possession of the police department, which remains unclaimed for a continuous period of three (3) months, may be transferred to the purchasing agent of the city. If the purchasing agent determines that any such property transferred to him is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. 
(Ord. 1611 § 2 1986: prior code 21.18).  
2.48.040 - Cash payment. 
All unclaimed property sold at public auction shall be paid for in cash by the purchaser at the time of the sale. 
(Prior code § 21.19).  
Chapter 2.50 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2434, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2014, repealed Ch. 2.50, §§ 2.50.010—2.50.080, which pertained to mobile home rent review and derived from Ord. 1441, § 1, adopted 1982.  
Chapter 2.52 - BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the bicycle advisory commission is to serve as an advisory body to the city council on matters having to do with bicycle transportation within the City of Merced. In forming the bicycle advisory commission, it is the intent of the city council to improve conditions for bicyclists in the City of Merced, promote bicycling as a means of transportation with the associated benefits of improved air quality, improve safety conditions for bicyclists, and to help implement policy, programs, and bike routes for all ages. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
2.52.020 - Establishment. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 700 of the Charter, there is hereby established a bicycle advisory commission which shall consist of seven (7) voting members. At least two (2) voting members of the commission shall be from a recognized bicycle organization. All seven (7) voting members must be qualified electors of the City of Merced. 
B.  A majority of the voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. 
C.  In accordance with Section 702 of the Charter, members shall be appointed by at least four (4) affirmative votes of the city council and subject to removal by motion of the city council adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes. 
D.  The city council may appoint an additional two (2) members to sit on the commission as ex officio, nonvoting members. Said ex officio, nonvoting members may be non-city residents who live within the City of Merced's sphere of influence or persons who otherwise demonstrate a strong concern for bicycle-related issues within the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
2.52.030 - Terms. 
A.  In accordance with Section 702 of the Charter, the bicycle advisory commission members shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the members of the bicycle advisory commission shall, on the first meeting following the establishment of the commission, draw lots to determine the three (3) initial members that will serve for a term of one (1) year and three hundred sixty-four (364) days. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
2.52.040 - Meetings. 
Regular bicycle advisory commission meetings shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of every even numbered month during normal city business hours or as otherwise set by resolution of the city council. The meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 704 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
2.52.050 - Officials. 
A.  In accordance with Section 704 of the Charter, the members of the bicycle advisory commission shall, as soon as practical following the first day of July, organize by electing two (2) of the seven (7) voting members to serve as chair and vice-chair at the pleasure of the commission. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the members of the bicycle advisory commission shall, on the first meeting held following the establishment of the commission, elect a chair and vice-chair to serve until their successor is elected following the first day of July. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
2.52.060 - Jurisdiction of the commission. 
A.  The bicycle advisory commission shall have the responsibilities as provided below: 
1.  Review and advise the city council, as directed by the city council or requested by the staff, on the design of capital improvement projects, street improvements, and parking facility projects as they relate to bicycling, except for matters pertaining to pedestrian issues. 
2.  Review and advise the city council, as directed by the city council or requested by the staff, on changes and updates to the bicycle master plan, general plan, Municipal Code and other policy documents which relate to bicycling. 
3.  Promote bicycling as a viable form of transportation. 
4.  Assist in the development and dissemination of bicycle safety awareness and education materials to the community. 
5.  Initiate requests to city staff from the community on issues of concern related to bicycling. 
6.  Such other duties as the city council may proscribe. 
(Ord. No. 2323, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
Chapter 2.54 - ARTS AND CULTURE ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.54.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the arts and culture advisory commission is to serve as an advisory body to the city council on matters having to do with public art, art projects, cultural programs and activities and the promotion of the arts within the city. In forming the arts and culture advisory commission, it is the intent of the city council to foster the arts in the city, and to help implement policy, programs, and standards for public art. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
2.54.020 - Establishment. 
Pursuant to Section 700 of the Charter, there is hereby established an arts and culture advisory commission which shall consist of seven (7) voting members. Six (6) voting members of the commission shall be from the established city council voting districts and the seventh member shall be appointed at large. All seven (7) voting members must be qualified electors of the city. 
A.  Members shall have knowledge, expertise or experience in one (1) or more of the following areas: 
1.  Visual, performing, literary, music or other types of art; 
2.  Planning, historical, preservation, architectural background; 
3.  Economic development, business, marketing, public relations; 
4.  Member of artistic, cultural, community organization; or 
5.  Educational partner. 
B.  A majority of the voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. 
C.  In accordance with Section 702 of the Charter, members shall be appointed by at least four (4) affirmative votes of the city council and subject to removal by motion of the city council adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes. 
D.  The city council may appoint an additional four (4) members to sit on the commission as ex-officio, nonvoting members. Said ex-officio, nonvoting members may be non-city residents who live within the city's sphere of influence who demonstrate expertise in any number of art disciplines, or other areas of expertise or knowledge. One of the ex-officio members shall be a member of the city council. 
E.  The services of the city staff shall be made available to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
2.54.030 - Terms. 
A.  In accordance with Section 702 of the Charter, the arts and culture advisory commission members shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
B.  Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, the members of the arts and culture advisory commission shall, on the first meeting following the establishment of the commission, draw lots to determine the three (3) initial members that will serve for a term of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
2.54.040 - Meetings. 
Regular arts and culture advisory commission meetings shall be held on the second Thursday of every odd-numbered month at three p.m. or as otherwise set by resolution of the city council. The meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 704 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
2.54.050 - Officials. 
A.  In accordance with Section 704 of the Charter, the members of the arts and culture advisory commission shall, as soon as practical following the first day of July, organize by electing two (2) of the seven (7) voting members to serve as chair and vice-chair at the pleasure of the commission. 
B.  Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, the members of the arts and culture advisory commission shall, on the first meeting held following the establishment of the commission, elect a chair and vice-chair to serve until their successor is elected following the first day of July. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
2.54.060 - Jurisdiction of the commission. 
The arts and culture advisory commission shall have the responsibilities as provided below: 
A.  Provide recommendations to the city council and other appointed bodies and city departments for the following: 
1.  Displays of art within a public facility, or any public art within the city, or exterior space for outdoor visual art, or promote the arts for city beautification and to enhance the quality of life; 
2.  Programs that promote art or enhance cultural development; 
3.  Act as a resource to the community and local arts and culture for mentorship, internships, facilitating process, marketing and advocating; 
4.  Coordinate and collaborate with the Merced County Arts Council, and other individuals and groups, both private and public, to support, promote, enhance and recognize artistic endeavors and cultural activities that are reflective of the community across all cultures, races and stages of life; 
5.  Recommend funding options that maximize opportunities for sustainable projects that incorporate preventative maintenance for public arts projects and cultural activities throughout the city; 
6.  Recommend the establishment of artistic standards across disciplines; and 
7.  Such other duties as the city council may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2489, § 1, 7-16-2018)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - PURCHASING SYSTEM  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
3.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases in this section are defined as follows: 
A.  "Bidder's list" means a current file of sources of supply of articles for each category of commodities repetitively purchased for city use. 
B.  "Purchasing supervisor" means the person appointed by the city manager as the purchasing officer for the city. 
C.  "Contractual services" means rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property, and other services of like nature. 
D.  "Department" means any department, division, agency, board, commission, committee or other unit of the city government which derives its support wholly or in part from the city. 
E.  "Lowest responsible bidder" means a bidder who, in addition to price, has: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill to perform the contact; 
2.  The facilities to perform the contract promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency to perform the contract according to its terms; 
4.  A favorable record of performance of previous contracts; 
5.  A favorable record of compliance with laws and ordinances relating to the contract; 
6.  Sufficient financial resources to perform the contract; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies and equipment to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
9.  A minimum number and limited scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
F.  "Materials, supplies and equipment" means any and all articles, things or personal property which are furnished to or used by any department of the city government. 
G.  "Open market purchase" means a purchase made without prior newspaper advertising or city council action. 
H.  "Purchase" means the acquisition of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services, including leases or rentals, as well as other transactions by which the city acquires ownership. 
I.  "Responsible bid" means an offer submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the specifications, delivery, terms, conditions and other requirements included in the invitation for bids. 
J.  "Responsible bidder" means a bidder who submits a responsible bid and who is not only financially responsible but is possessed of the resources, judgment, skill, ability, capacity and integrity requisite and necessary to perform the contract according to its terms. 
K.  "Specification" means an accurate and complete description of the material, supply, equipment or contractual service upon which bids are solicited, including the requirements for physical performance. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part) 1976: prior code § 2.21).  
3.04.020 - Rules, regulations and procedures. 
Purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services shall be made in accordance with: 
A.  Purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter; 
B.  Such rules and regulations as shall be adopted by the city council by resolution; 
C.  Such administrative regulations as the city manager shall establish for internal management and operation of the purchasing function. 
(Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.22).  
3.04.030 - Filing of estimated requirements—Requisitions. 
Department heads shall file with the purchasing supervisor detailed estimates of their requirements for materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services in such manner, at such times and for such future periods as the purchasing supervisor shall prescribe in writing. The filing of such detailed estimates of requirements shall not prevent any department head from filing with the purchasing supervisor a requisition for any materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were prepared. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.23).  
3.04.040 - Powers and duties of purchasing supervisor. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the purchasing supervisor shall have the power and duty to: 
A.  Prepare specifications and purchase or contract for all materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services needed by any and all departments of the city; 
B.  Establish methods and procedures as may be necessary for the practical conduct of the purchasing function; and 
C.  Submit to the city manager, through proper authority, such reports and information as may be required. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.24).  
3.04.050 - Requisitions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all departments of the city shall submit requests for materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services on request for purchase forms prescribed by the purchasing supervisor. All purchase requisitions shall be signed by the department head; however, a department head may delegate this authority to sign requisitions to any employee of the department by filing written authorization with the purchasing supervisor. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.25).  
3.04.060 - Purchase orders—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services shall be made only by purchase orders issued by the purchasing supervisor, and no purchase of any materials, supplies, equipment and contractual services shall be made by any person independently of the purchasing supervisor. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.26(A)).  
3.04.070 - Purchase orders—Small order. 
Where desirable or necessary to expedite small unit purchases, the purchasing supervisor may authorize the various departments of the city government to use a small order purchase order in accordance with administrative regulations established by the city manager. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.26(B)).  
Article II. - Purchases Not Exceeding Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars 
 
3.04.080 - Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and contractual services of an estimated value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less, the "bidding threshold," may be made by the purchasing supervisor in the open market. The bidding threshold shall be adjusted annually to account for inflation by using the consumer price index, ("CPI") for the region closest to the city. The finance officer shall cause the CPI calculation to occur and shall implement the adjustment when the cumulative increase is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and for every thousand dollars cumulative total thereafter. In the event the CPI is no longer available, the finance officer shall use a similar index to account for inflation in any adjustment to the bidding threshold. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 2299 § 2, 2008: Ord. 1994 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.27(A)).  
3.04.090 - Soliciting bids. 
The purchasing supervisor shall serve the best interests of the city through soliciting bids from prospective vendors by direct mail requests, checking prices by telephone inquiry, comparing prices on file, or by notice on official city bulletin boards. Notices soliciting bids shall include a general description of the materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services to be purchased. The purchasing supervisor may require written specifications. The purchasing supervisor shall keep a record of all open market purchases and the bidding in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public inspection. Such records may be destroyed after two (2) years. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.27(B)).  
3.04.100 - Bid approval. 
The purchasing supervisor, at his discretion, when it is in the best interests of the city to do so, may waive any informalities or minor irregularities in any bid process, may reject any or all bids, offers or quotations, or may accept the bid, offer or quotation that best serves the public purpose even though it may not be the lowest. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.27(C)).  
3.04.110 - Exceptions to Sections 3.04.090, 3.04.120, and 3.04.130. 
A.  Generally. The restrictions and requirements of Sections 3.04.090, 3.04.120, and 3.04.130 shall not apply to contracts involving the obtaining of professional or specialized services such as, but not limited to, services rendered by architects, attorneys, engineers, and other specialized consultants. 
B.  Services. The city manager is authorized to bind the city, by written contract, purchase order, or change order, involving an expenditure not exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any one (1) transaction, exclusive of sales or use tax, hereinafter "city manager's authorization," without advertising or previous action by the city council, for the payment for professional or specialized services or other valuable considerations or a combination of services and supplies, to be furnished to the city in any one (1) contract. The city manager's authorization shall be adjusted for inflation utilizing the same index and methodology as the bidding threshold in Section 3.04.080 of this code. 
C.  Limitations. The power of the city manager to act under this section shall be dependent upon the existence of funds authorized for the specific program by the city council, and such power will not be used by the city manager to split contracts for supplies or services, or combinations thereof, so as to avoid the bid requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2299 § 3, 2008: Ord. 1994 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1619 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1338 § 1, 1980: prior code § 2.27.1).  
Article III. - Purchases Over Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars 
 
3.04.120 - Written contract. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and contractual services of an estimated value greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the "contract threshold," shall be made by the purchasing supervisor by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the procedures described in Section 3.04.130. The contract threshold shall be adjusted for inflation utilizing the same index and methodology as the bidding threshold in Section 3.04.080 of this code. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 2299 § 4, 2008: Ord. 1994 § 3, 1998: Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(A)).  
3.04.130 - Notice inviting bids. 
Notices inviting bids shall be published by the purchasing supervisor at least once in the official newspaper, and the first such notice shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of opening the bids. In addition to the published notice, the purchasing supervisor shall serve the best interests of the city through soliciting bids from prospective vendors by direct mail requests, by notice on official city bulletin boards, or by any other means which he determines to be advantageous to the city. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and written specifications may be secured, and shall designate the date, time and place for opening bids. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(B)).  
3.04.140 - Bidder's security. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing supervisor, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) calendar days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The purchasing supervisor on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract may award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the purchasing supervisor awards the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(C)).  
3.04.150 - Bid opening procedure. 
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing supervisor, shall be identified as "bid" on the envelope, and shall be opened in public on the date at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § l (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(D)).  
3.04.160 - Tabulation of bids. 
The purchasing supervisor shall tabulate all bids received and after consultation with the appropriate department head award the contract. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. Such records may be destroyed after two (2) years. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part); 1976: prior code § 2.28(E)).  
3.04.170 - Tie bids. 
If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the purchasing supervisor, in his discretion, may accept the one he chooses, or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(F)).  
3.04.180 - Bid approval. 
The purchasing supervisor, in his discretion, when it is in the best interests of the city to do so, may waive any informalities or minor irregularities in any bid process, may reject any or all bids, or may accept the bid that best serves the public purpose even though it may not be the lowest. The purchasing supervisor may readvertise for bids or proceed with the purchase of the materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services by negotiation in the open market. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(G)).  
3.04.190 - Performance bonds. 
The purchasing supervisor, before entering into a contract, shall have authority to require a performance bond in an amount as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. When a performance band is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(H)).  
3.04.200 - Splitting requisitions. 
No undertaking involving amounts in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the "contract threshold," shall be split into parts by the department head issuing the requisition or by the purchasing supervisor so as to produce amounts of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less, and thus below the contract threshold, for the purpose of avoiding the provisions and restrictions of this article. The contract threshold shall be adjusted for inflation utilizing the same index and methodology as the bidding threshold in Section 3.04.080 of this code. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 2299 § 5, 2008: Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.28(I)).  
3.04.210 - Exemptions from competitive bidding. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, competitive bidding requirements for purchases in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the "bidding threshold," may be waived with the approval of the city council. Waivers may be authorized for, but are not limited to, cooperative purchasing in conjunction with other governmental entities, professional services, annual service or supply agreements, or purchases necessary for standardization on particular types of equipment. The bidding threshold shall be adjusted for inflation utilizing the same index and methodology as the bidding threshold in Section 3.04.080 of this code. 
(Ord. 2299 § 6, 2008: Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.29).  
3.04.215 - Local business preference policy. 
The council may, by resolution, adopt a local business preference policy which otherwise complies with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2485, § 1, 2-20-2018)  
Article IV. - Public Works Contracts 
 
3.04.220 - Written contract. 
Pursuant to Section 1109 of the Charter, every project, not otherwise exempt by the Charter, involving an expenditure of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the construction or improvement of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks and playgrounds shall be let by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the procedure described in this article. The expenditure threshold set forth above shall be adjusted as required by Section 1109 of the Charter. 
(Ord. 2298 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(A)).  
3.04.221 - Administrative regulations. 
The finance officer shall prepare administrative regulations for consideration by the city manager to implement the provisions of Section 3.04.220 hereof. 
(Ord. 2298 § 2, 2008).  
3.04.230 - Notice inviting bids. 
Notices inviting bids shall be published by the purchasing supervisor at least once in the official newspaper, and the first such notice shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of opening the bids. In addition to the published notice, the purchasing supervisor shall serve the best interests of the city through soliciting bids from prospective vendors and contractors by direct mail requests, by notice on official city bulletin boards, or by any other means which he determines to be advantageous to the city. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and written specifications may be secured, and shall designate the date, time and place for opening bids. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(B)).  
3.04.240 - Bidder's security. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing supervisor or the city council, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) calendar days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, may award it to the next lowest responsible bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(C)).  
3.04.250 - Bid opening procedure. 
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing supervisor, shall be identified as "bid" on the envelope, and shall be opened in public on the date, at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(D)).  
3.04.260 - Tabulation of bids. 
The purchasing supervisor shall tabulate all bids received and after consultation with the appropriate department head forward the summary to the city manager, through proper authority, with a recommendation as to the best and lowest bid. The city manager shall forward the summary and recommendation, with any comments, to the city council. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. Such records may be destroyed after two (2) years. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(E)).  
3.04.270 - Tie bids. 
If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council, in its discretion, may accept the one it chooses, or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
(Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(F)).  
3.04.280 - Acceptance or rejection of bids. 
The city council, in its discretion, when it is in the best interests of the city to do so, may waive any informalities or minor irregularities in any bid process, may reject any or all bids, or may accept the bid that best serves the public purpose even though it may not be the lowest. The city council may readvertise for bids or, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceed with the purchase of the materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services by negotiation in the open market. 
(Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(G)).  
3.04.290 - Work by city employees. 
The city council, after rejecting all bids, or if no bids are received, may declare and determine that, in its opinion, based on estimates approved by the city manager, the work in question may be performed better or more economically by the city with its own employees and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect by at least five (5) affirmative votes, the council may proceed to have the work done in the manner stated. 
(Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(H)).  
3.04.300 - Urgency contracts let without bids. 
Contracts for public works projects exceeding the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), as the same may be adjusted from time to time pursuant to Section 1109 of the Charter, may be let without advertising for bids if such work shall be first determined and authorized by the city manager and thereafter confirmed by the city council to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health, or property, and shall be authorized by motion passed by at least five (5) affirmative votes of the city council and containing a declaration of the facts constituting such urgency. 
(Ord. 2298 § 3, 2008: Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(I)).  
3.04.310 - Performance bonds. 
The city council, before entering into a contract, may require a performance bond in an amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. When a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(J)).  
3.04.320 - Splitting requisitions. 
No undertaking involving amounts in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), as the same may be adjusted from time to time pursuant to Section 1109 of the Charter, shall be split into parts so as to produce amounts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less for the purpose of avoiding the provisions and restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. 2298 § 4, 2008: Ord. 1241 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 2.30(K)).  
Article V. - Emergency Purchases 
 
3.04.330 - Generally. 
In the event an emergency arises which requires the immediate purchase of materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services, the city manager may authorize the purchasing supervisor to secure in the open market at the lowest obtainable price, any such materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services even though the amount thereof exceeds the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). In each such instance the purchasing supervisor shall submit to the city manager, through proper authority, a full written report of the circumstances of such emergency, including a written explanation from the department head requesting the purchase, and a description of the items purchased. 
As used in this chapter, an emergency shall be deemed to exist if: 
A.  There is a great public calamity; or 
B.  There is immediate need to prepare for national or local defense; or 
C.  There is a breakdown in machinery or an essential service which requires the immediate purchase of materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services to protect the public health, welfare or safety; or 
D.  An essential department operation affecting the public health, welfare or safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed purchasing procedure would cause an undue delay in procurement of the needed materials, supplies, equipment, or contractual services. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.31). 
(Ord. No. 2326, § 1, 3-16-2009)  
Article VI. - System Maintenance 
 
3.04.340 - Inspection of goods received. 
The purchasing supervisor, or a person designated by him, shall inspect all deliveries of materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase order or contract. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.32).  
3.04.350 - Storerooms and warehouses—Inventory record. 
The purchasing supervisor or a person designated by him shall control and supervise all storerooms and warehouses, and all materials, supplies and equipment in his custody, and shall maintain or cause to be maintained a suitable inventory record thereof. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.32.1).  
3.04.360 - Stores revolving fund. 
The city council shall provide a stores revolving fund of sufficient amount to finance the purchase and storage of materials, supplies and equipment which are used in sufficient quantities to effect advantageous purchasing and storage. Such fund shall be under the control of the purchasing supervisor. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.32.2).  
3.04.370 - Surplus materials, supplies and equipment. 
A.  All departments shall submit to the purchasing supervisor, at such times and in such forms as he prescribes, reports showing all materials, supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, scrapped, unnecessary or unsuitable for public use. The purchasing supervisor shall have authority to transfer among departments or to sell such materials, supplies or equipment, or to trade in or exchange obsolete, worn out, scrapped, unnecessary or unusable materials, supplies, and equipment for new materials, supplies and equipment. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all sales of materials, supplies, equipment and other personal property which have become obsolete, worn out, scrapped, unnecessary or unsuitable for public use, of an estimated value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less, may be made by the purchasing supervisor in the open market. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all sales of materials, supplies, equipment and other personal property which have become obsolete, worn out, scrapped, unnecessary or unsuitable for public use, of an estimated value greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be made after receiving written bids in accordance with regulations established by the city manager. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.32.3).  
3.04.375 - Unclaimed bicycles used in programs to prevent delinquency. 
Bicycles in the possession of the police department which have been unclaimed for a period of at least sixty (60) days may, upon permission from the council, instead of being sold at public auction at the highest bidder pursuant to provisions of Section 2.0805 of the Civil Code, be turned over to the probation officer or the welfare department of the county, or to any charitable non-profit organization which is authorized through its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or tax law, or both for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(Ord. 1895 § 1, 1994).  
3.04.380 - Exceptions to city responsibility to pay. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchase of any materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services for the use of the city or any of its departments shall not be valid or binding on the city unless the purchase is made or authorized by the purchasing supervisor. The city shall not be responsible to pay for any materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services which are ordered, acquired or received contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 8-08 supplement; Ord. 1162 § 1 (part), 1976: prior code § 2.32.4).  
Chapter 3.08 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.08.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 26.101).  
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
B.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
C.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
D.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and he shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 26.102).  
3.08.030 - Amount and payment. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If, for any reason the tax due is not paid the operator of the hotel, the finance officer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the finance officer. 
(Ord. 1936 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1771 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1714 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1595 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1142 § 1, 1975: prior code § 26.103).  
3.08.040 - Collection and advertisement restrictions. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 26.105).  
3.08.050 - Registration certificate. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the finance officer and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
1.  The name of the operator. 
2.  The address of the hazel. 
3.  The date upon which the certificate was issued. 
4.  This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Prior code § 26.106).  
3.08.060 - Reports and remittances. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the finance officer, make a return to the finance officer, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the finance officer. The finance officer may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collections of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of this city until payment thereof is made to the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 26.107).  
3.08.070 - Penalties for failure to remit tax when due. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to rest any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to emit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquent penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the finance officer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1585 § 1, 1985: prior code § 29.108).  
3.08.080 - Tax default investigation and hearing. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the finance officer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance officer procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the finance officer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the finance officer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the finance officer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the finance officer shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the finance officer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days. 
(Prior code § 26.109). 
(Ord. No. 2434, § 2, 9-2-2014)  
3.08.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the finance officer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. 
B.  Payment of all tax, interest, and penalties shall be required at the time a notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk. No appeal pursuant to this section shall be taken unless such payment in full is made. 
C.  Any taxes the city council determines should not have been assessed shall be refunded to the operator, along with the apportioned interest and penalties paid on such taxes. 
(Prior code § 26.110). 
(Ord. No. 2434, § 2, 9-2-2014)  
3.08.100 - Records to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of any payment to the city, which records the finance officer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 26.111).  
3.08.110 - Refunds. 
A.  Claim by Operator. An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city when it is established in a manner prescribed by the finance officer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
B.  Claim by Transient. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim with the finance officer, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the finance officer, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the finance officer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
C.  Evidence. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto, provided such claim is filed no later than one (1) year from the date of the overpayment. 
(Ord. 2316 § 13, 2008: prior code § 26.112).  
3.08.115 - Enjoining collection prohibited. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the city or an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter, and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 2434, § 3, 9-2-2014)  
3.08.120 - Collection by city by court action. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 26.113).  
3.08.130 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in Section 3.08.060, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance officer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, and as set forth in Section 3.08.080 hereof. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, and punishable as set forth in Section 3.08.080 hereof. 
(Prior code § 26.114). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 9, 10-19-2009)  
3.08.140 - Divulging of information forbidden. 
It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city having an administrative duty under this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any retailer or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof to be seen or examined by any person. However, the city council may, by resolution, authorize examination of the returns by federal or state officers or employees or by the tax officer of this or any other city if a reciprocal arrangement exists. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Prior code § 26.115).  
Chapter 3.12 - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS—NONDISCRIMINATION 
 
3.12.010 - Intent of chapter. 
In conjunction with this chapter the city intends to become a forceful catalyst to bring about the full cooperation of all the necessary elements of the community, including public and private agencies, developers, contractors, subcontractors, labor unions and job training and manpower programs, to end discrimination resulting from such discrimination in employment and advancement. 
(Prior code § 2.60).  
3.12.020 - City manager to enforce compliance. 
The city manager shall act as compliance officer in administering this chapter and on obtaining compliance with its provisions. 
(Prior code § 2.61).  
3.12.030 - Construction contract—Defined. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the term "construction contract" means a written contract between the city and an independent contractor for the construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, repair, maintenance or demolition by contractors for the city of the following municipal improvements: buildings and structures, streets, bridges, drains, ditches, canals, dams, tunnels, sewers, fire alarm systems, parking lots, parks or playgrounds or other improvements to real property. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above, the term "construction contract" shall not include the following: 
1.  Any contract between the city and any other governmental agency or entity or between the city and any public utility. 
2.  Any action taken by the city council or city manager in case of public emergency. 
3.  Any contract entered into pursuant to or under any special assessment proceedings or laws. 
(Prior code § 2.62).  
3.12.040 - Construction contract—Provisions to be included. 
All construction contracts shall contain the following provision: 
In the performance of this contract the contractor will not refuse or fail to hire or employ any qualified person, or bar or discharge from employment any person, or discriminate against anti person with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because of such person's race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, sex or age. If the contractor or any of his subcontractors shall be found in violation of the above discrimination provisions, the contractor shall be deemed to be in material breach of the contract and thereupon the city shall have the power to do all or any of the following: (1) To cancel or suspend the contract in whole or in part, and (2) to deduct and retain from the amount payable to the contractor the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars for each person discriminated against in the performance of the contract for each calendar day during which such person was discriminated against in the performance of the contract, as liquidated damages for such breach of contract; provided, that the number of persons discriminated against shall not be deemed, for the purpose of determining the amount of such damages only, to exceed the number of positions in connection with which such discrimination occurs, e.g., if twenty persons are improperly discriminated against in connection with five positions, then the multiple used in assessing damages shall be the number of positions and not the number of persons discriminated against. In the event such finding is made after completion of the contract and after payment of all sums due contractor by the city, the contractor shall be obligated to pay such sum to the city upon demand by the city. Violations of such provisions by subcontractors shall, for the purposes of this provision, be deemed to be violations by the contractor. A contractor shall not be deemed in breach of the provisions of this paragraph unless the state fair employment practices commission or an appropriate federal commission or agency, or a court of the state finds, in any action or proceeding to which such contractor is a party, that the contractor or a subcontractor is a party, that the contractor or subcontractor discriminated against one or more specifically named employees or applicants for employment because of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, sex or age in the performance of this contract, provided that such court has issued a final judgment in such action or proceeding, or that the fair employment practices commission has issued a final order pursuant to section 1420 of the Labor Code, or that such appropriate federal commission or agency has issued a final order or obtained a final injunction, and provided further, that for the purpose of this paragraph no judgment, order, decree or injunction shall be considered final during the period within which (1) appeal may be taken, or (2) the same has been stayed by order of the court or (3) further proceedings for vacation, reversal or modification are in progress before a competent administrative or judicial tribunal. 
The contractor shall include the provisions of the above paragraph in every subcontract so that such provision shall be binding upon each of his subcontractors and vendors. 
(Prior code § 2.63).  
3.12.050 - Construction contract—Additional provisions. 
Every construction contract which requires payment by the city to a contractor of a sum in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall in addition to the provisions contained in Section 3.12.040 contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin or ancestry, in connection with employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training including apprenticeship. Such affirmative action shall be in accordance with the affirmative action guidelines adopted by resolution of the city council, a copy of which is included in the contract documents. 
(2)  The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the city, setting forth that the contractor is prohibited from discriminating against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color or national origin or ancestry, and that the contractor is required to take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without discrimination in connection with employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship; provided, that if a contractor is required by any federal or state law, order, rule or regulation to post a similar notice, such posting shall satisfy the requirements hereof. 
(3)  The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color or national origin or ancestry, or in lieu thereof that the contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
(4)  The contractor will send to each labor union or representative of workers with which he has a collectible bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice, to be provided by the city, advising the labor union or workers' representative of the contractor's nondiscrimination and affirmative action commitments under this contract, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment; provided, that if a contractor is required by any federal or state law, order, rule or regulation to transmit a similar notice to such labor organizations, such transmittal shall satisfy the requirements hereof. 
(5)  The contractor will comply with all applicable provisions of this article and the affirmative action guidelines adapted pursuant thereto. 
(6)  The contractor shall file and shall cause any or all of his principal subcontractors, i.e., subcontractors in excess of twenty thousand dollars, to file compliance reports with the city manager, if so directed by the city manager. Compliance reports shall be filed within such times and shall contain such information as to the practices, policies, programs, and employment policies, programs and employment statistics of the contractor and each such subcontractor, and shall be in such farm, as the city manager shall prescribe, to permit a determination as to whether such contractor or subcontractor is complying with the nondiscrimination and affirmative action provisions of this contract. 
In addition, the contractor and such of his principal subcontractors as are designated by the city manager shall attend compliance meetings from time to time as directed by the city manager for the purpose of reviewing the practices, policies, programs and employment statistics of the contractor and of each such subcontractor, to permit a determination as to whether such contractor or subcontractor is complying with the nondiscrimination and affirmative action provisions of this contract. 
(7)  Contractor shall permit, during contractor's normal business hours and at contractor's place of business, access by the city manager to his records of employment, employment advertisements, application forms and other data and records pertaining to contractor's employment practices for the purpose of determining whether contractor is complying with the nondiscrimination and affirmative action provisions of this contract. 
(8)  Contractor shall include provisions similar to those specified in the above paragraphs in each construction subcontract which exceeds twenty thousand dollars so that each subcontractor will be required in the performance of his subcontract to take affirmative action as is required of the prime contractor. 
(9)  If the city should find that the contractor or any of his subcontractors has breached any of the above mentioned affirmative action covenants, the city shall have the right to terminate or suspend its contract with the contractor in whole or in part or to deduct from the amount payable to such contractor the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars for each calendar day during which the contractor or his subcontractor is found to have been in noncompliance, as damages for such breach, or bath; provided, that no such finding shall be made if it is determined that such contractor or subcontractor has in goad faith attempted to comply with such requirements. Violations of such provisions by such subcontractors shall, for the purposes of this provisions, be deemed to be violations by the contractor. 
(Prior code § 2.64).  
3.12.060 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to negotiated contracts already approved or authorized by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor to those contracts proposed to be awarded for which notice to bidders is published prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the adoption of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2.65).  
Chapter 3.16 - FUNDS  
Article I. - Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund 
 
3.16.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Sections 180 to 207 of the state Streets and Highway Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Prior code § 2.33).  
3.16.020 - Moneys to be paid into fund. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of Sections 180 to 207 of the state Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways, other than state highways, shall be paid into the fund created by the preceding section. 
(Prior code § 2.34).  
3.16.030 - Expenditure of moneys in fund. 
All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Sections 180 to 207 of the state Streets and Highway Code. 
(Prior code § 2.35).  
Article II. - Revolving Petty Cash Fund for Police Department 
 
3.16.040 - Established. 
There is established, pursuant to Section 1114 of the Charter, a revolving petty cash fund for the police department. 
(Prior code § 2.36).  
3.16.050 - Use. 
The petty case fund established by the preceding section shall be paid to the chief of police and used for payment in cash of expenditures provided for in the budget of the particular fiscal year that cannot conveniently be paid otherwise, and the chief of police shall account for the expenditures of such funds monthly in the form and in the manner as may be, from time to time, designated by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2.37).  
3.16.060 - Amount allocated to fund. 
The sum of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) is allocated to the petty cash fund for the police department, which amount may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2.38).  
Article III. - Other Funds 
 
3.16.070 - Airport capital improvement projects fund. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1113 of the Charter of the city, there is established the airport capital improvement projects reserve fund, a special fund for airport capital improvement projects. 
(Prior code § 2.39).  
3.16.080 - Recreation and parks general capital outlay fund. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1113 of the Charter of the city, there is established the recreation and parks general capital outlay fund. 
(Prior code § 2.40).  
3.16.090 - Capital improvement reserve fund. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1113 of Charter of the city, there is established the capital improvement reserve fund, which shall be a special fund for special capital outlay purposes. 
(Prior code § 2.41).  
3.16.100 - Capital equipment reserve fund. 
Pursuant to Section 1113 of the Charter of the city, there is established the capital equipment reserve fund, which shall be a special fund for special capital outlay purposes. 
(Prior code § 2.42).  
3.16.110 - Departmental trust fund and petty cash funds. 
There is established for the city, a departmental trust fund and petty cash fund. The finance officer of the city is instructed to set up the same in the books of the city. 
(Prior code § 2.43).  
3.16.120 - Administration of funds. 
The city council may, from time to time, by resolution, provide for the handling of any moneys in the fund established by the preceding section and any and all other matters and things reasonably pertaining to such funds, all in accordance with the provisions of Section 1114 of the Charter of the city. 
(Prior code § 2.44).  
3.16.130 - Sewers and drains capital outlay reserve. 
Pursuant to Section 1113 of the city Charter, there is created a special capital outlay fund to be known as "sewers and drains capital outlay reserve," and there shall be apportioned, appropriated or placed into such fund such moneys as the city council may, from time to time, designate. 
(Prior code § 2.45).  
Chapter 3.20 - DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Adoption authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 23A.1).  
3.20.020 - Imposition and amount of tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 23A.2).  
3.20.030 - Who pays tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 23A.3).  
3.20.040 - Exemptions from tax—Instruments to secure debts. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 23A.4).  
3.20.050 - Exemptions from tax—Public agencies. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 1137 § 1, 1957: prior code § 23A.5).  
3.20.060 - Exemptions from tax—Plans of reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or, 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subsection A(1) to (4) of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 23A.6).  
3.20.070 - Exemptions from tax—Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 23A.7).  
3.20.080 - Exemptions from tax—Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of any interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 23A.8).  
3.20.090 - Administration by county recorder. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 23A.9).  
3.20.100 - Claims for refund. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  A person, described in Section 3.20.020, may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim with the finance officer, provided such claim is filed no later than one (1) year from the date of the overpayment. 
C.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
D.  Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, except where said code conflicts with this chapter, then the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 2316 § 14, 2008: prior code § 23A.10).  
3.20.110 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county of Merced, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. 
(Prior code § 23A.11).  
Chapter 3.24 - PROPERTY TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Annual tax to be assessed and levied by county. 
An annual tax is levied on all property subject to taxation in the city, to be assessed and collected by appropriate officers of the county of Merced pursuant to Government Code Sections 51540 to 51562, inclusive. 
(Ord. 1138 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 26.1).  
3.24.020 - Council to fix levy. 
As soon as convenient after receiving a statement of the total value of all property within the city, and in any event before September 1st each year, the city council shall fix the levy or rate percent of taxes levied for all municipal purposes for the fiscal year, designating the number of cents on each one hundred dollars of property levied for each fund, and shall cause a statement of such levy to be delivered to the county auditor before September 1st each year. 
(Ord. 1138 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 26.2).  
Chapter 3.28 - SALES TAX 
 
3.28.010 - Imposition and rate of tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on or after July 1, 1956. The tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to any and all other taxes imposed by any other section or chapter of this code. 
(Prior code § 26.39).  
3.28.020 - Tax levied in same manner as state tax. 
The tax levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, is levied in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as sales taxes are levied pursuant to Part 1 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, known as the "Sales and Use Tax Law," as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956. 
(Prior code § 26.40).  
3.28.030 - Adoption of state sales tax law by reference—Exceptions. 
A.  All of the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, except the provisions thereof pertaining solely to the Use Tax and Sections 6051, 6052, 6053, 6066, 6067, 6068, 6069, 6070, 6071, 6451, 7052, 7056, 7101, 7102, 7151, 7152 and 7153, applicable to sales of property at retail, are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein, and all provisions of any other section or chapter in conflict therewith are inapplicable to this chapter, and the tax imposed. 
B.  The term "gross receipts," as used in this chapter, does not include the amount of any tax imposed by the state of California upon or with respect to retail sales whether imposed upon the retailer or upon the consumer. 
C.  The term "sale" means and includes, in addition to the meanings contained in subsection A of this section, the withdrawal by a retailer in this city of tangible personal property from a place in this city, from a place in California outside this city under the control of the retailer or from a place in California outside this city at the order of the retailer, for delivery in any manner at a point in California outside this city under such circumstances that the transaction of which the withdrawal is a part would have been considered a sale within the meaning of subsection A of this section had the point of delivery been within this city; provided, however, that withdrawals pursuant to a transaction in foreign or interstate commerce shall not be sales for the purpose of this section. Charges made for the delivery of tangible personal property so withdrawn shall be included in the grass receipts by which the tax imposed under this section is measured unless such charges are separately stated and are imposed for transportation which occurs after the sale of property to the purchaser. 
D.  All of the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law adopted, providing for the adoption of rules and regulations and for hearings on the part of the State Board of Equalization, shall be performed by the city council of the city. All other provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law adopted, providing for the performance of official action on the part of the State Board of Equalization, shall be performed by the city finance officer. 
E.  The city shall be deemed substituted for the state whenever the state is referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
F.  The city attorney shall be substituted for the Attorney General whenever the Attorney General is referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
G.  The city finance officer shall be substituted for the State Controller whenever the State Controller or State Board of Control are referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
H.  The county of Merced shall be substituted for the county of Sacramento whenever the county of Sacramento is referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
(Prior code § 26.41)  
3.28.040 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 1514 § 2, 1983: prior code § 26.42).  
3.28.050 - Adoption of rules and regulations by reference. 
A.  The rules and regulations of the State Board of Equalization as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, pertaining to the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the Sales and Use Tax Law, insofar as applicable, except Rule No. 55, (Section 2015, Title 19, California Administrative Code, Sales and Use Taxi shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter until specifically abandoned by the rules and regulations adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter. The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" whenever the word "state" appears in said rules and regulations. 
B.  In lieu of Rule No. 55, specifically excepted in subsection A, the following interpretations shall apply in the administration of this chapter: 
1.  The sales tax does not apply to sales of property which is: 
a.  Imported into this city from a foreign country and sold by the importer in the original package in which imported; 
b.  Sold to foreign purchasers for shipment abroad and delivered to a ship, airplane, or other conveyance furnished by the purchaser for the purpose of carrying the property abroad and actually carried to a foreign destination, title and control of the property passing to the foreign purchaser upon delivery, and no portion of the property being used or consumed in the United States. Copies of U.S. Customs Shippers export declarations filed with the collector of customs must be obtained and retained by retailers to support deductions taken under this subdivision. The tax applies to the transaction if the property is diverted in transit or for any reason not actually delivered outside the city pursuant to the contract of sale or not shipped abroad by a foreign purchaser, regardless of documentary evidence held by the retailer of delivery of the property to be carried for shipment outside the city, or to a foreign purchaser for shipment abroad; 
c.  Mailed by the seller, pursuant to the contract of sale, to persons in the armed forces at points outside continental United States, notwithstanding the property is addressed in care of the postmaster and forwarded by him to the addressee. When mail is addressed to Army post offices (A/P/O's) in care of the postmaster or to naval forces addressed in care of the postmaster, it will be presumed that it is forwarded outside California. The seller must keep records showing the names and addresses as they appear on the mailed matter and should keep evidence that the mailing was done by him; 
d.  Shipped to a point outside this city pursuant to the contract of sale when the property is marked for export and delivered by the retailer to the contracting officer, officer in charge, port quartermaster, or other officer of the United States for transportation and delivery to the purchaser at such a point. 
2.  The sales tax does not apply to sales of airplanes, and parts and equipment for airplanes, transported to a point outside this city pursuant to the contract of sale when such property is delivered to the United States Army Corps or any other agency or instrumentality of the United States for transportation and delivery to the purchaser or someone designated by him at that point. 
3.  The sales tax does not apply (either in interstate or intrastate commerce) to sales of property shipped from a point outside the city to a purchaser inside the city, or to the retailer's agent in the city, for deliver to the purchaser, if none of the elements of sale, other than such delivery, takes place in the city. 
4.  The sales tax does apply (either in interstate or intrastate commerce) to sales of property shipped from a point outside of the city, to a purchaser inside the city, or to the retailer's agent in the city, for delivery to the purchaser where any element of the sale, in addition to such delivery, takes place in the city. 
5.  "Element of sale" means and includes solicitation of an order, the acceptance of an order, the giving of an order, whether such order is given in person, by telephone, or by mail, or the payment of the purchase price. 
6.  The city finance officer may approve the payment of the sales tax by retailers located outside the city in accordance with a formula if he finds that the formula will produce the same or approximately the same tax as if detailed accounting procedures had been followed. A retailer desiring to use such a formula shall furnish such information as may be rewired by the city finance officer to enable him to make the required finding. The formula may be used by the retailer for such period of time, not to exceed one (1) year, as may be authorized by the city finance officer in writing, and is subject to renewal upon application for periods not to exceed one (1) year. 
C.  Payment in full of sales taxes in accordance with an approved formula shall constitute full satisfaction of the retailer's sales tax liability. Prior code § 26.43).  
3.28.060 - Verbatim excerpts shall not exclude balance. 
The inclusion of any clause, portion or part of the State Sales and Use Tax Law, Part 1, Division 2, of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or the rules and regulations of the State Board of Equalization, verbatim in this chapter shall not in or of itself exclude any of the remaining provisions of said Sales and Use Tax Law or rules and regulations that are made a part hereof by reference only. 
(Prior code § 26.44).  
3.28.070 - Permit—Application. 
Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business as a seller within the city shall file with the city finance officer an application for a permit for each place of business from which taxable sales will be made. Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city finance officer and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information as the city finance officer may require. The application shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or same person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the application, to which shall be attached the written evidence of his authority. 
(Prior code § 26.45).  
3.28.080 - Permit—Issuance—Display. 
After compliance with Section 3.28.070 by the applicant, the city finance officer shall grant and issue to each applicant a separate permit for each place of business from which taxable sales will be made. A permit is not assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein; provided, however, a change of location may be endorsed upon the permit by the city finance officer. The permit shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued. 
(Prior code § 26.46).  
3.28.090 - Permit—Fees. 
At the time of making an application for permit, and at the time a change of location is endorsed upon a permit, the applicant for permit or for an endorsement of a change of location on a permit shall pay to the city finance officer a fee of one dollar ($1.00). 
(Prior code § 26.46.1).  
3.28.100 - Permit—Revocation. 
Whenever any person fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adapted pursuant hereto, the city council, upon hearing, after giving the person ten (10) days' notice in writing specifying the time and place of hearing and requiring him to show cause why his permit or permits should not be revoked, may revoke or suspend any one or mare of the permits held by the person. The notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for the service of notice of a deficiency determination under the Sales and Use Tax Law. The city finance officer shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless the city council of the city is satisfied that the former holder of a permit will comply with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adapted pursuant hereto and directs the city finance officer to issue such permit, 
(Prior code § 26.47).  
3.28.110 - Permit—Renewal. 
A seller whose permit has been previously suspended or revoked shall pay the city finance officer a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for the renewal or issuance of a permit. 
(Prior code § 26.48).  
3.28.120 - Permit—Operation without. 
A person who engages in business as a seller in the city without a permit or permits, or after a permit has been suspended or revoked and before the renewal or issuance of a permit, and each officer of any corporation which so engages in business, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26.49).  
3.28.130 - Due date. 
The taxes imposed by this chapter are due and payable to the city finance officer on or before the last day of the month next succeeding each quarterly period, the first quarterly payment to be due and payable under this chapter on October 31, 1956. The city finance officer may rewire returns and payment of the amount of taxes for quarterly periods other than calendar quarters depending upon the principal place of or the nature of the business of the seller or retailer or may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. 
(Prior code § 26.50).  
3.28.140 - Reimbursement. 
The tax imposed shall be collected by the retailer from the consumer insofar as it can be done. 
(Prior code § 26.51).  
3.28.150 - Unlawful advertising. 
It is unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 36.52).  
3.28.160 - Suit for tax. 
All taxes levied shall be payable to the city finance officer and any civil suit for the collection thereof may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state, and the city attorney of the city shall prosecute the action. 
(Prior code § 26.53).  
3.28.170 - Resale certificate. 
The city finance officer may at his option accept a state resale certificate as evidence that any sale is not a sale at retail, or he may in his discretion require an affidavit from the seller setting forth such information respecting such sale as he deems necessary to determine the nature of such sale. 
(Prior code § 26.54).  
3.28.180 - Extension of time—Waiver or compromise. 
The city finance officer shall have power, for good cause shown, to extend for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days the time for making any return or paying any amount required to be paid under this chapter, when requested so to do in writing, before the same becomes delinquent. The city finance officer may, with the written approval of the city attorney, waive or compromise any penalty or interest that would otherwise accrue under the provisions of this chapter. The city finance officer shall make and transmit to the city council quarterly a detailed report of any sums so waived or compromised with the reasons therefor. 
(Prior code § 26.54.1).  
3.28.190 - Disposition of proceeds. 
All moneys collected under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and paid as follows: seven-sixteenths thereof to the capital outlays fund established by Section 1113 of the Charter, and nine-sixteenths thereof to the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 26.55).  
3.28.200 - Divulging of information—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city having an administrative duty under this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any retailer or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. However, the city council may, by resolution, authorize examination of the returns by federal or state officers or employees or by the tax officer of this or any other city if a reciprocal arrangement exists. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Prior code § 26.56).  
3.28.210 - False or fraudulent returns. 
Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report under the provisions of this chapter, who makes any false or fraudulent return, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due and required to be paid hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26.57).  
3.28.220 - Violators of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26.58).  
Chapter 3.32 - USE TAX 
 
3.32.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, are defined as follows unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Sales price" means that total amount for which tangible personal property is sold, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction an account of any of the following: 
1.  a.  The cast of the property sold; 
b.  The cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest charged, losses, or any other expenses; 
c.  The cast of transportation of the property prier to its purchase. 
2.  The total amount for which the property is sold includes all of the following: 
a.  Any services that are a part of the sale; 
b.  Any amount for which credit is given to the purchaser by the seller. 
3.  "Sales price" does not include any of the following: 
a.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
b.  The amount charged for property returned by customers when that entire amount is refunded either in cash or credit, but this exclusion shall not apply in any instance when tin customer, in order to obtain the refund, is required to purchase other property at a price greater than the amount charged for the property that is returned. 
c.  The amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing or applying the property sold. 
d.  The amount of any federal tax imposed upon or With respect to retail sales whether imposed upon the retailer or upon the consumer and regardless of whether or not the amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge, and the amount of any California state sales or use tax. (The term "gross receipts" includes the amount of any manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of the property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the retailer thereof, and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge). 
e.  Transportation charges separately stated, if the transportation occurs after the purchase of the property is made. 
B.  "Use" includes the exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership of that property; subject, however, to the following exceptions; 
1.  It does not include the sale of that property in the regular course of business. 
2.  It does not include the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been subject to sales or use tax under a sales or use tax ordinance, whether enacted in accordance with, or purporting to be in accordance with, Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California by any other city and county, county other than Merced bounty, or city in this state, or enacted in accordance with the organic law of any such city. 
3.  It does not include the storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the public utilities commission of the state. 
4.  It does not include the use or consumption of property purchased by operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city. 
C.  The word "storage," as used in this chapter, includes any keeping or retention in the city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business or subsequent use solely outside this city of tangible personal property purchased from a retailer. 
(Prior code § 26.59).  
3.32.020 - Imposition and rate of tax. 
A.  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the effective date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said city at the rate of one percent of the sale's price of the property. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, where the sales price of tangible personal property purchased for storage, use or other consumption in the city pursuant to a contract of sale actually executed in good faith prior to July 1, 1956, includes Merced city sales or use tax, the rate of tax applied shall be that rate in effect when the contract is executed. 
(Prior code § 26.60).  
3.32.030 - Use tax levied in same manner as state tax. 
The tax levied, except as otherwise herein provided, is levied in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as use taxes are levied pursuant to Part 1 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, known as the "Sales and Use Tax Law," as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956. 
(Prior code § 26.61).  
3.32.040 - Adoption of state use tax law by reference—Exceptions. 
A.  All of the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, except the provisions pertaining solely to the sales tax and Sections 6008, 6009, 6011, 6201 to 6204, inclusive, 6207, 6226, 6241 to 6246, inclusive, 6355, 6403, 6453, 7052, 7056, 7057, 7101, 7102, 7151, 7152 and 7153, are adapted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth, and all provisions of any other ordinance in conflict therewith are inapplicable to this chapter and the tax imposed. 
B.  The term "sales price" shall not include the amount of any California state sales tax or use tax. 
C.  All of the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law adapted providing for the adoption of rules and regulations and for hearings on the part of the State Board of Equalization shall be performed by the city council of the city. All other provisions of the state Sales and Use Tax Law adopted providing for the performance of official action on the part of the State Board of Equalization shall be performed by the city finance officer. 
D.  The city shall be substituted for the state whenever the state is referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
E.  The city attorney shall be substituted for the attorney general whenever the attorney general is referred to in said Sales and Use Tax Law. 
F.  The city finance officer shall be substituted for the state controller and state board of control whenever the state controller or state board of control are referred to in the Sales and Tax Use Law. 
G.  The county of Merced shall be deemed substituted for the county of Sacramento whenever the county of Sacramento is referred to in the Sales and Use Tax Law. 
(Prior code § 26.62).  
3.32.050 - Adoption of rules and regulations by reference. 
The rules and regulations of the State Board of Equalization pertaining to the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the Sales and Use Tax Law, insofar as applicable, shall apply to the interpretations of this chapter until specifically abandoned by the rules and regulations adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.63).  
3.32.060 - Interpretation. 
The inclusion of any clause, portion or part of the Sales and Use Tax Law, Part 1, Division 2, of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, verbatim in this chapter shall not in or of itself exclude any of the remaining provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Law that are made a part hereof by reference only. 
(Prior code § 26.64).  
3.32.070 - Duty to collect tax. 
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this city shall apply to the city finance office for authorization to collect the tax imposed by this chapter. Any retailer not maintaining a place of business in this city may apply to the city finance officer for authorization to collect the tax imposed. Upon receipt of any application in such form as required by him, the city finance officer in the case of a retailer maintaining a place of business in the city, shall authorize, and in the case of a retailer not maintaining a place of business in the city, may authorize the applicant to make such collections and to forward the same to the city finance officer. 
(Prior code § 26.65).  
3.32.080 - Persons liable to tax. 
Every person storing, using or otherwise consuming in this city tangible personal property purchased from a retailer, is liable for the tax; provided, however, no tax shall be due hereunder if the tax imposed by the provisions of Chapter 3.28 of this code has been paid an the sale of such property. The liability of such person is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt from a retailer authorized pursuant to Section 3.32.070 to collect the tax, given to the purchaser pursuant to Section 3.32.090, is sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Prior code § 26.66).  
3.32.090 - Collection of tax by retailer. 
Every retailer who is authorized by the city finance officer to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and who makes sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or other consumption in this city, not exempted under the provisions of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the purchaser at the time of making the sale, or, if the storage, use or other consumption of the tangible personal property is not then taxable hereunder, at the time the storage, use or other consumption becomes taxable. Upon collecting the tax, the retailer, on demand, shall give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the city finance officer. The tax so collected by the retailer shall be held in trust by him for the city and shall be paid to the city by the retailer in the manner and at the times elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.67).  
3.32.100 - Separate display of tax from list or other price. 
The tax so collected by the retailer from the purchaser shall be displayed separately from the list price, the price advertised in the premises, the marked price or other price on the sales check or other proof of sale. 
(Prior code § 26.68).  
3.32.110 - Personal property to which tax applies. 
Except as otherwise specifically exempted, the tax imposed applies to all tangible personal property located in this city and purchased from a retailer; provided, however, that if the retailer in good faith takes from the purchaser a certificate that the property was purchased prior to the effective date of this chapter or was not purchased for storage, use or consumption in this city and has not been nor will be so stored, used or consumed, he shall be relieved of liability to collect and pay the tax. The certificate shall be signed by and bear the name of the purchaser, shall indicate the address of the purchaser and the place where such tangible personal property will be stored, used or consumed, the date of purchase, and shall be substantially in such form as the city finance officer may prescribe. 
(Prior code § 26.69).  
3.32.120 - Registration of retailers. 
Every retailer selling tangible personal property for storage, use or other consumption in the city and which retailer maintains a place of business in said city or acts through agents located in said city and which retailer is not licensed under the provisions of Section 3.28.010 of this code, shall register with the city finance officer and give the name and address of such agent or agents and office or other place of business in the city. 
(Prior code § 26.70).  
3.32.130 - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes imposed by this chapter are due and payable to the city finance officer on or before the last day of the month next succeeding each quarterly period, the first quarterly payment to be due and payable under this chapter on or before the last day of October, 1956. The city finance officer may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for quarterly periods other than calendar quarters depending upon the principal place of or the nature of the business of the seller or retailer or may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. 
(Prior code § 26.71).  
3.32.140 - Returns. 
Each return filed by a retailer shall show the total sales price of the property sold by him during the reporting period in respect of which he collected the tax imposed. Each return filed by a purchaser shall show the total sales price of the property purchased by him during the reporting period, in respect of which a tax is due under this chapter. All returns shall also show the amount of taxes for the period covered by the return and such other information as the city finance officer deems necessary to the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.72).  
3.32.150 - Extension of time—Waiver or compromise. 
The city finance officer shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend for a period of not to exceed thirty-one (31) days the time for making any return or paying any amount required to be paid under this chapter, when requested so to do in writing, before the same becomes delinquent. The city finance officer may, with the written approval of the city attorney, waive or compromise any penalty or interest that would otherwise accrue under the provisions of this chapter. The city finance officer shall make and transmit to the city council quarterly, a detailed report of any sums so waived or compromised with the reasons therefor. 
(Prior code § 26.73).  
3.32.160 - Schedules for payment of tax. 
The city council, by resolution, shall adopt roles prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. Such schedules shall be so determined as to facilitate collection of this tax at the same time that the retailer collects the tax imposed under the California Sales and Use Tax Law and so as to produce an average tax return of one percent (1%) on all purchases subject to the use tax. 
(Prior code § 26.74).  
3.32.170 - Suit for tax. 
All taxes levied shall be payable to the city finance officer and any civil suit for the collection thereof may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state, and the city attorney of said city shall prosecute the action. 
(Prior code § 26.75).  
3.32.180 - Resale certificate. 
The city finance officer may at his option accept a state resale certificate as evidence that any sale is not a sale for storage, use or consumption in the city, or he may in his discretion rewire an affidavit from the seller setting forth such information respecting such sale as he deems necessary to determine the nature of such sale. 
(Prior code § 26.76).  
3.32.190 - Disposition of proceeds. 
All moneys collected under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and paid as follows: seven-sixteenths thereof into the capital outlays fund established by Section 1113 of the Charter, and nine-sixteenths thereof into the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 26.77).  
3.32.200 - Divulging of information forbidden. 
No officer or employee of the city having an administrative duty under this chapter shall make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any retailer or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particulars thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any bank containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. However, the city council may, by resolution, authorize examination of the returns by federal or state officers or employees or by the tax officers of this or any other city if a reciprocal arrangement exists. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any penalties. 
(Prior code § 26.78).  
3.32.210 - False and fraudulent returns. 
No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report under the provisions of this chapter, shall make any false or fraudulent return, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due and required to be paid hereunder. 
(Prior code § 26.79).  
3.32.220 - Failure to make return or furnish data. 
No retailer or other person shall fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city finance officer, or render a false or fraudulent return. 
(Prior code § 26.80).  
3.32.230 - Violators of chapter. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26.80.1).  
Chapter 3.36 - LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.36.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "uniform local sales and use tax ordinance" of the city. 
(Prior code § 26.81).  
3.36.020 - Purpose. 
The city council of the city declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes; 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordnance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes an .875 percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.82).  
3.36.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on October 1, 1974. 
(Prior code § 26.83).  
3.36.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.83.1).  
3.36.050 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of .90 percent during the period from October 1, 1974 to and including June 30, 1975; and at the rate of .925 percent during the period from and after July 1, 1975; in each case, such percentage rate applying to the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.84).  
3.36.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. Delivery charges shall be included in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured, regardless of the place to which delivery is made, when such charges are included in the measure of the sales or use tax imposed by the state. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 26.84.1).  
3.3.070 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the following percentages of the sales price of the property: .90 percent during the period from October 1, 1974 to and including June 10, 1975; .925 percent during the period from and after July 1, 1975. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 26.85).  
3.36.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.85.1).  
3.36.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law—Limitations. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result of such substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of this substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 4828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 26.85.2).  
3.36.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.85.3).  
3.36.110 - Exclusions and exemptions—From tax measure. 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax. 
A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state; 
C.  The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city; 
D.  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the public utilities commission of the state. 
(Prior code 26.85.4).  
3.36.120 - Exclusions and exemptions—Amount subject to tax. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Past 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempted from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 26.85.5).  
3.36.130 - Exclusions and exemptions—Effective when. 
Section 3.36.120 shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.36.110 shall become inoperative. 
(Prior code § 26.85.6(a)).  
3.36.140 - Exclusions and exemptions—Application of provisions. 
In the event that Section 3.36.120 becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 3.36.110 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Section 3.36.120 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.36.120 shall again become operative and Section 3.36.110 shall become inoperative. 
(Prior code § 26.85.6(b)).  
3.36.150 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26.86).  
3.36.160 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 26.87).  
3.36.170 - Existing sales and use tax provisions suspended. 
At the time this chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Chapter 3.28 and Chapter 3.32 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed; provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt this chapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 3.28 and Chapter 3.32 shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one (1) percent continuously from and after July 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 3.28 and Chapter 3.32 shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one (1) percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Chapter 3.28 and Chapter 3.32 in force and effect prior to and including June 30, 1956. 
(Prior code § 26.88).  
3.36.180 - Disposition of moneys collected. 
All moneys collected under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 1638 § 1, 1986: prior code § 26.89).  
3.36.190 - Penalty—Misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 26.90).  
Chapter 3.38 - MERCED VITAL CITY SERVICES PROTECTION MEASURE GENERAL TRANSACTIONS (SALES) AND USE TAX 
 
3.38.005 - Chapter title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Merced Vital City Services Protection Measure" (the "measure"). This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.010 - Purposes. 
The people of the city of Merced declare that this chapter, pursuant to the measure, is adopted as a general tax to ensure adequate funding for vital city services which are funded by the city's general fund. Among the vital services funded by the general fund are police protection, fire protection, and road and street maintenance and improvements. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.020 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative ten (10) days after certification by the city council of the returns of the election indicating approval by a majority of the voters voting in the election of the measure enacting this chapter. The general transactions (sales) and use tax imposed hereunder shall be operative the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter ("Operative Date"). Based on a November 8, 2005 election, the operative date for the general transactions (sales) and use tax imposed hereunder shall be on April 1, 2006. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.025 - Termination date. 
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this measure shall expire on March 31, 2026, unless extended by the voters. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.030 - Tax suspended if proceeds taken by state. 
Upon written notice to the State Board of Equalization as required, this chapter shall be automatically suspended, and all funding related thereto stopped, if the revenue generated under this chapter is diverted by the state of California. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.035 - Transactions (sales) tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in such territory on and after the operative date of the tax until the tax is terminated under Section 3.38.025 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.040 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer for storage, use, or other consumption in the city at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent of the sales price of the property sold on and after the operative date of the tax until the tax is terminated under Section 3.38.025 of this chapter. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.050 - Citizens oversight committee. 
A.  Pursuant to the measure, and Sections 200 and 706 of the City Charter, there is created a Merced vital city services protection measure citizens' oversight committee ("citizen's oversight committee") to review the revenues and expenditures generated and spent under this chapter. 
B.  The citizens' oversight committee shall consist of three (3) voting members from each of the existing three (3) policing districts of the city, as these policing districts exist on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, for a total of nine (9) voting members. 
C.  Initial voting members of the citizens' oversight committee shall be nominated to the city council by the citizens revenue task force. 
1.  The city council shall first consider the nominations from the citizens revenue task force as a whole and either affirmatively vote to appoint or not appoint the nominees as a whole. 
2.  In the event a majority of the city council fails to appoint the nominees as a whole, the city council may make individual appointments from the nominations from the citizens' revenue task force. 
a.  The remainder of any unfilled positions on the citizens' oversight committee shall be returned to the citizens revenue task force for further nominations. 
3.  The city council shall consider those nominations by following the same procedure as set forth in subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section. 
D.  Any vacancy for a voting member on the citizens' oversight committee shall be filled by having the citizens oversight committee make nominations to the city council for consideration as a whole. 
1.  The city council shall first consider the nominations as a whole and either affirmatively vote to appoint or not appoint the nominees as a whole. 
2.  In the event the city council fails to affirmatively appoint the nominees as a whole, the city council may make individual appointments from the nominees submitted by the citizens' oversight committee. 
a.  The remainder of any unfilled positions on the citizens oversight committee shall be returned to the citizens oversight committee for further nominations. 
3.  The city council shall consider these nominations by following the same procedure as set forth in subsections (D)(1) and (2) of this section. 
E.  In addition to the voting members, there shall be made available to each employee association and unrepresented employees, a nonvoting ex-officio member of the committee from each employee association, including unrepresented employees. Each employee association, including unrepresented employees, shall determine the selection process and term for their ex-officio member. In addition, each association shall have the right to designate an alternate ex-officio member to the committee to serve when the ex-officio is unable to attend. 
F.  Voting members of the committee shall be restricted to individuals who are registered voters within the city of Merced. Elected officials at any level of government and employees of the city of Merced and the dependents of each are ineligible to serve as voting members of the committee. 
G.  All voting members appointed shall serve without compensation for a term of four (4) years. The voting members first appointed to the committee shall classify themselves by lot so that by the following city council election the term of one (1) of the voting members in each policing district shall expire. Such lot shall provide for the grouping of terms to such an extent as is necessary in order that the term of at least three (3) voting members, one (1) from each policing district, shall expire on each succeeding city council election. 
H.  The committee shall review the projected revenues and recommended expenditures for the funds generated by this chapter and shall make their recommendations to the city council on the same as a part of the city's budget process. After a review of the independent audit required by Section 3.38.070 of this chapter, the citizens' oversight committee shall provide its findings to the city council. Unless modified by city council resolution, the citizens' oversight committee shall not have any function, power, or authority other than as expressly provided in this chapter. 
The citizens' oversight committee shall meet quarterly or as often as it deems necessary to accomplish the objectives stated in this section. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.060 - Accounting and report. 
Prior to the adoption of the city budget in June of each year, the city manager and the finance officer shall present to the city council an accounting of the tax revenues received and expenditures made under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.070 - Independent audit. 
After the close of every fiscal year in which the tax imposed hereunder is levied, the city shall cause an independent audit to be conducted as to the revenue generated as a result of this measure and to ensure the proper expenditure thereof consistent with the purposes of this chapter. The report and any findings of the independent auditor shall be transmitted to the mayor, city council, city manager, city attorney, finance officer, and the citizens' oversight committee established by Section 3.38.050 of this chapter.  
3.38.080 - State requirements. 
Pursuant to the requirements of the State Board of Equalization, this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions (sales) and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, and which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance, which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions (sales) and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions (sales) and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions (sales) and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions (sales) and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.090 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, as required by state law, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the transactions (sales) and use tax imposed under this chapter; provided, however, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date of this chapter, the city shall nevertheless contract and in such case the operative date of the transaction (sales) and use tax shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.100 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer, or his or her agent, to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state, or has more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which retail sales are consummated shall be determined under the rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.110 - Additional permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.120 - Adoption of provisions of state law—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.130 - Adoption of provisions of state law—Limitations. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this transaction (sales) and use tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempted from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provision of that code; 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.140 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions (sales) and use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the transactions (sales) tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property, if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use, or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter; 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised; 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer; 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.150 - Amendments to state law. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.160 - Nonexclusivity. 
The sales tax levied under this chapter is in addition to, not in lieu of, any and all other applicable taxes already in existence. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.170 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected hereunder. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
3.38.180 - Authority to amend. 
In order to further the purposes and intent of this chapter, the city council is authorized to amend this chapter in the following areas without a further vote of the people: 
A.  The composition of the citizens oversight committee; 
B.  The suspension or reactivation of this chapter if the revenue generated under this chapter is diverted by the state of California for purposes other than those specifically enumerated in this section; 
C.  Any change required by the state of California as a precondition to the collection of the special tax authorized hereunder. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any proposed change to the tax rate imposed under this chapter shall be submitted to the vote of the people. 
(Ord. 2222 § 1 (part), 2005).  
Chapter 3.40 - REVENUE BONDS 
 
3.40.010 - General provisions. 
The city council, exercising the powers reserved to the city under Sections 3 and 5 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state of California and Sections 200 and 201 of the Charter of the city, may, when the public interest and necessity require, by resolution or resolutions, issue revenue bonds for any of the purposes as set forth in Sections 54309 and 54309.1 of the Government Code of the state of California. Such revenue bonds shall be issued by the city council pursuant to provisions of the Revenue Bond Law of 1941 (California Government Code Sections 54300 et seq.), as in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter (and all of the provisions of such law are incorporated in this section by reference and made a part hereof); excepting, however, that no election shall be required for the issuance of any revenue bonds by the city council; and that the terms "local agency" and "legislative body," as used in the law, means the city council; and to that end, Sections 54380 through 54387 of the Government Code of the state of California are not incorporated in this chapter and shall not be applicable to the issuance of such revenue bonds; and excepting further, however, that the revenue bonds may bear interest at a rate not exceeding eight percent a year, payable annually or semiannually. 
(Ord. 1214 § 1, 1978).  
Chapter 3.44 - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA TAX 
 
3.44.010 - Establishment. 
There is created and established a parking and business improvement area designated as "business improvement area A," for brevity and convenience sometimes referred to in this chapter as "area." 
(Prior code § 8A.1).  
3.44.020 - Description. 
A description of the exterior boundaries of such area is set forth in exhibit A attached to this section and by reference made a part of this chapter. 
Exhibit A 
All that portion of the city shown on a map entitled "Map of the City of Merced and Subdivisions of Adjoining Acreage Property" filed for record in Volume 2 of Official Plats at Page 59, Records of Merced County, California, described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of the main track of the Southern Pacific Railroad with the westerly line of "G" Street; thence northerly along the westerly line of "G" Street to the center of the alley between 19th and 20th Streets; thence along the alley westerly to the easterly line of "V" Street; thence southerly along the easterly line of "V" Street to the center line of aforesaid "Southern Pacific Railroad" main track; thence easterly along the track to the point of beginning. 
(Prior code § 8A.2).  
3.44.030 - Additional tax—Applicability. 
All businesses within the boundaries of the area, not exempt by law, shall be subject to the provisions of the additional tax imposed by this chapter, except rental dwelling units, transient and permanent, and coin-operated amusement machines and vending machines. 
(Ord. 1239 § 1, 1979: prior code § 8A.3).  
3.44.040 - Additional tax—Levy. 
There is levied a business license tax on businesses conducting their activities in the area of twice the tax each is paying on the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8A.4).  
3.44.050 - Additional tax—Collection. 
The collection of the additional levy to the license tax imposed by this chapter shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as the ordinary business license tax of the city under the provisions of Title 5 and shall be due and payable as provided in Title 5. 
(Prior code § 8A.5).  
3.44.060 - Additional tax—Exemptions—Voluntary contributions. 
Any business, person or institution located within the area, which is exempt from the payment of the ordinary business license tax of the city by reason of the provisions of the United States or state constitutions or laws, is not to be taxed under this chapter but may make a voluntary contribution to the city. Such contribution shall be used for the purpose provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8A.6).  
3.44.070 - Additional tax—Disposition of proceeds. 
The uses to which the proceeds from the additional tax revenue, realized from the additional levy of license tax imposed by this chapter, shall be put are capital improvements, administration, promotion, and such other uses as the city council, upon the recommendation of the advisory board, shall approve by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 1211 § 2, 1978: prior code § 8A.7).  
3.44.080 - Additional tax—Generally beneficial. 
The additional revenue collected under this chapter shall be spent only for the benefit of the entire area in general, and not for the promotion or benefit of any specific business; provided, that incidental benefit to one or more specific businesses shall not be prohibited, if such benefit results from an activity or program recommended by the advisory board, and found by the city council to benefit the entire area in general. 
(Ord. 1211 § 3, 1978: prior code § 8A.8).  
3.44.090 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  A business, within the boundaries of the area, may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim with the finance officer, provided such claim is filed no later than one (1) year from the date of the overpayment. 
C.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 2316 § 15, 2008).  
Chapter 3.50 - LOCAL CABLE USAGE FEES 
 
3.50.010 - Fee for support of local cable usage; reauthorization for state franchise holder PEG fee. 
A.  For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city, there shall be fee paid to the city equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of the state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for the purpose of facilitating public, educational, and governmental access consistent with state and federal law. The term 'gross revenues' shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860, as amended from time to time. 
B.  The fee on state franchise holders to support public, educational and governmental channel facilities in Merced Municipal Code Section 3.50.010(A) is reauthorized and shall remain unchanged and in full effect as to all state franchise holders. 
C.  The PEG fee in Merced Municipal Code Section 3.50.010 shall automatically be reauthorized upon expiration of any existing or future franchise certificate(s) held by any state franchise holder operating within the city. 
D.  This Section shall automatically be reauthorized upon the expiration of any existing or future certificate(s) held by any state franchise holder operating within the city. This section shall so renew upon the future expiration of any franchise certificate(s) until such time that the city council [takes] formal affirmative action to cease renewals. 
(Ord. 2293 § 1 (part), 2007). 
(Ord. No. 2483, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
3.50.020 - Special provisions applicable to holders of state video franchises. 
A.  Franchise Fee. A state video franchise holder operating in the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term "gross revenues" shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860, as amended from time to time. 
B.  Audit Authority. Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees. 
C.  Customer Service Penalties Under State Video Franchises. 
1.  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
2.  The city shall monitor state video franchise holder's compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law: 
a.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation. 
b.  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation. 
c.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation. 
3.  A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed by the city within sixty (60) days of the assessment. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council's decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final. 
D.  City Response to State Video Franchise Applications. 
1.  Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One (1) complete copy must be provided to the city clerk and one (1) complete copy to the director of information technology. 
2.  The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
E.  PEG Channel Capacity. A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least three (3) public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels. 
1.  PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming. 
2.  Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities. 
3.  The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier. 
4.  To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law. 
5.  After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law. 
6.  Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal. 
F.  Interconnection. Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent's network at a technically feasible point on the holder's network as identified by the holder. If no technically-feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. 
G.  Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. A state video franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements, or any successor system or process thereof, of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder's network. 
(Ord. 2293 § 1 (part), 2007).  
Chapter 3.52 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX 
 
3.52.100 - Imposition of Tax. 
A.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Cultivation: 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax of up to the greater of (i) twenty five dollars ($25.00) per square foot of canopy area or (ii) ten (10) percent of gross receipts. The canopy area shall be the greater of (i) the maximum canopy square footage authorized by the state license issued to the commercial cannabis business or (ii) the actual canopy area of the business. In no case shall the canopy square footage not utilized under a permit be deducted for the purpose of determining the tax. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation within the city limits for different categories of commercial cannabis cultivation subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (A)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (A)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (A), the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation shall, for each such business, be the greater of (i) seven dollars ($7.00) per square foot of cultivation area or (ii) four (4) percent of gross receipts. 
B.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Nurseries: 
1.  Every person operating a commercial cannabis nursery in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to four dollars ($4.00) per square foot of nursery area. The nursery area shall include all areas of the commercial business that contain cannabis plants in the immature stage as defined by the state. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis nurseries within the city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (B)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (B)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (B), the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person operating a commercial cannabis nursery shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of nursery area. 
C.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Manufacturing: 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per square foot of manufacturing area. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing within the city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (C)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (C)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (C) the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing shall be seven dollars ($7.00) per square foot of manufacturing area. 
D.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Distribution: 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis distribution in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to the greater of (i) five dollars ($5.00) per square foot of building or (ii) ten (10) percent of gross receipts. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis distribution within the city city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (D)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (D)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (D) the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person engaged in commercial cannabis distribution shall, for each such businesses, be the greater of (i) one dollar ($1.00) per square foot of distribution area annually or (ii) two (2) percent of gross receipts. 
E.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Retailing: 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis retailing in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to ten (10) percent on gross receipts for adult-use retail and a rate of up sevem (7) percent on gross receipts for medicinal retail. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis retailing within the city city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (E)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (E)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (E) the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person engaged in commercial cannabis retailing shall be four (4) percent of gross receipts for medicinal retail and seven (7) percent of gross receipts for adult-use retail. 
F.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Testing: 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis testing in the city limits of the city shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to one dollar ($1.00) per square foot of building area. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this Chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis testing within the city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (F)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (F)(1). 
3.  Subject to modification by the city council as set forth in this subsection (F) the initial rate of the annual commercial cannabis business tax for each person engaged in commercial cannabis testing shall be twenty five cents ($0.25) per square foot of building area. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.200 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter. 
A.  "Business tax" or "commercial cannabis business tax" means the tax due pursuant to this Chapter for engaging in lawful commercial cannabis business in the city. 
B.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the cannabis sativa Linnaeus, cannabis Indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 14017 of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this Chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  "Canopy area" means all premises that contain mature plants at any point in time; including all of the space within the boundaries. If mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation. 
D.  "Commercial cannabis business" means any commercial business activity relating to cannabis, including but not limited to cultivating, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging, transporting, distributing, delivering, or sale of cannabis, medicinal cannabis or a cannabis or medicinal cannabis product, except as related Business and Professions Code Section 19319, and as they may be amended or Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45 and as they may be amended. 
E.  "Commercial cannabis cultivation" means any activity, other than a cannabis nursery as defined in subsection H, involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis for non-personal use. 
F.  "Commercial cannabis distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between entities licensed pursuant to the Medical and Adult Use of Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same. 
G.  "Commercial cannabis manufacturing" means any aspect of the cannabis extraction and infusion processes, including processing, preparing, holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products. Cannabis manufacturing also includes any processing, preparing, holding, or storing of components and ingredients. Cannabis manufacturing does not include cannabis distribution or cultivation. 
H.  "Commercial cannabis nursery" means a facility that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis for non-personal use. 
I.  "Commercial cannabis retailing" means business, other than a business all of whose sales constitute cannabis distribution, where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination for sale, including an establishment that delivers cannabis or cannabis products as part of a sale. 
1.  "Adult-use cannabis retailing" means any commercial cannabis retailing that does not qualify as medicinal cannabis retailing, such as sales intended for adults twenty one (21) years of age and over and who do not possess a physician's recommendation. 
2.  "Medicinal cannabis retailing" means the sale of cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for cannabis patients who possess a physician's recommendation for the use of cannabis. 
J.  "Commercial cannabis testing" means a facility, entity, or site that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, and that is accredited as operating to ISO standard 17025 by an accrediting body, and registered with the state department of public health. 
K.  "Cultivation area" means all portions of the premises deducting therefrom driveways, sidewalks, landscaping, manufacturing area, nursery area, vacant unused space, areas used exclusively for office space, employee break rooms, restrooms, and storage space unrelated to the commercial cannabis business (such as a janitorial closet). 
L.  "Gross receipts" means the total amount actually received or receivable from all cannabis sales; the total amount or compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit is allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise; and discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and gains realized. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the material used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
M.  "Manufacturing area" means the entire premises utilized for production, preparation, propagation, storage or compounding of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods deducting for non-production portions of the premises, such as space used exclusively for office space, employee break rooms, restrooms, and storage space unrelated to the commercial cannabis business (such as a janitorial closet). 
N.  "Nursery area" means the entire premises utilized for production of clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis deducting for non-production portions of the premises, such as space used exclusively for office space, employee break rooms, restrooms, and storage space unrelated to the commercial cannabis business (such as a janitorial closet). 
O.  "Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.300 - Payment Obligation. 
Except to the extent such tax is prohibited under state or federal law, any entity subject to this Chapter must pay the tax rate set pursuant to this Chapter. Failure to pay the taxes required by this Section within thirty (30) days after the due date shall be subject to the following penalties: 
A.  A penalty in the sum equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due; and 
B.  If the tax remains unpaid, an additional penalty equal to ten (10) percent shall be added on the first day of each calendar month following the month of the imposition of the twenty-five (25) percent penalty if the tax remains unpaid.  
3.52.400 - Remittance. 
The taxes imposed by this Chapter are annual taxes payable in quarterly installments. The tax year for purposes of this Chapter runs from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year. No later than the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (for example, no later than April 30 for the quarter running from January 1 through March 31), each taxpayer shall remit to the quarterly installment. 
Where a tax is based on a flat rate per square foot area, the quarterly installment shall be no less than the amount calculated by multiplying the relevant square footage by one-quarter of the relevant annual tax rate. This tax shall not be prorated for square footage only used or permitted for a portion of the quarter, or for a business that was in operation during only a portion of the quarter. 
Where a tax is based on a percentage of gross receipts, the quarterly installment shall be no less than the amount calculated by applying the relevant tax rate to the paid based on the actual gross receipts for the quarter. 
Where a tax is based on a combination of flat rate per square foot of area and percentage of gross receipts, the quarterly installment shall be no less than the greater of the amounts set forth in the prior two paragraphs. 
No later than January 31 of each year, each taxpayer shall file with the city their final tax statement with respect to all commercial cannabis business activities during the prior calendar year. If the total of all installment payments made for the tax year is less than the final annual tax due, the difference shall be remitted to the city along with the tax statement. If the total of all installment payments exceeds the final annual tax due, then the excess payment shall be applied as a credit against the subsequent year's installment payments. 
Any quarterly installment or final tax payment that is not timely made shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 3.52.300. 
The taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be remitted directly to the city quarterly as set forth in this Chapter. Each business shall pay on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, the minimum amount due if square footage versus gross receipts is applicable, and at the end of the fiscal year, any amount owed greater than the amount paid is due and shall be paid on or before the last day of the month following the close of the calendar year. All other gross receipts or square footage tax is due and payable at the end of each quarter. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to excuse any person from any obligation under any other provision of the municipal code; including, but not limited to, provisions of the code relating to business licensing and business license taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.500 - Payment of Tax Does Not Authorize Unlawful Business or Activity. 
The payment of any commercial cannabis business tax required under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal matter. Nothing in this section implies or authorizes that any activity connected with the distribution or possession of cannabis is legal unless authorized by state and federal law. Nothing in this section shall be applied or construed as authorizing the sale of cannabis. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.600 - Modification, Repeal or Amendment. 
The voters expressly authorize the city council to amend, modify, change, revise, or appeal any provision in this Chapter as the city council deems in the best interest of the city without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment to Section 3.52.100 that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this Chapter above the maximum rates established by this Chapter or to change the services funded by the tax. 
The city council may impose any tax authorized by this Chapter at a lower rate and may establish exemptions, or other reductions as otherwise permitted under state and federal law. No action by the council under this Section shall prevent it from later increasing the tax or removing any exemption, incentive, or reduction, and restoring the maximum tax rates specified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.700 - Use of Tax Proceeds 
Proceeds of the tax shall be deposited in a special fund and available only for expenditures on local police and fire protection services and parks and recreation services, and not for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018)  
3.52.800 - Administration. 
A.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures to implement and administer this Chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter. 
B.  The city shall engage an annual audit of all proceeds raised by this measure. Such audit may be combined with any other independent audit engaged by the city. 
C.  The city shall cause a report to be filed annually as required by Government Code section 50075.3. 
D.  An independent citizens' oversight committee shall be formed to review the revenues and expenditures generated and spent. Said committee shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1) from each of the six (6) city council districts, plus one (1) at-large member from any area of the city, as long as all members are city residents. Nominees shall be appointed by the city council. Elected officials at any level of government and employees of the city are ineligible to serve as members of the committee. Members so appointed shall serve without compensation for a term of four (4) years. 
E.  The committee may meet quarterly but not less than once per year to review the revenues and expenditures generated and spent under this Chapter, and provide its findings to the city council at least once a year prior to budget adoption. Unless modified by city council resolution, the committee shall not have any function, power, or authority other than those expressly provided herein. In no event shall a failure of the city council or the citizens' oversight committee to take an action required by this Section 5.52.800.E invalidate any tax collected under this Chapter; however, any court of competent jurisdiction may issue an order to the city compelling the city to comply with this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2490, § 3, 6-5-2018) 

  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2425, § 1, adopted May 19, 2014, amended Ch. 5.04 to read as herein set out. Former 5.04, §§ 5.04.010—5.04.270, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 15.1—15.26; Ord. No. 1319, § 2, adopted 1980; and Ord. No. 2316, § 16, adopted 2008. 
 
5.04.010 - Person defined. 
As used in this chapter, the word 'person' includes a corporation, business entity, association, syndicate, partnership, club, business trust, society and individual. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.020 - Preparation of licenses. 
The finance officer shall prepare and print licenses for all classes of businesses mentioned in this chapter for the term of one (1) year or for shorter or longer periods as authorized in this chapter, provided that such license fee is prorated for the yearly period. Licenses shall provide for the signature of the finance officer. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.030 - Records of licenses. 
The finance officer shall keep a ledger or record in which he shall keep the account of all licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.035 - Application—General information. 
Every applicant shall furnish, but not limited to, the following information if applicable: 
A.  Business name, location, phone number and mailing address. 
B.  License contractor information. 
C.  Social security number or federal tax identification number, state tax identification number and/or state sales tax number. 
D.  Corporation must provide corporate information. 
E.  Partnership or sole owner must provide owners name, address, phone number, date of birth and driver's license. 
F.  A non-profit must provide a 501(c) or other proof of tax exempt status. 
G.  Additional information may include emergency contacts. Applicants under age of eighteen (18) must provide guardian information. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.040 - Duty to obtain and pay fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, club or association to commence, carry on, engage in or continue in, in the city, any business, trade, occupation or employment upon which a license tax is imposed by the terms and provisions of this chapter and for which a license tax is required to be procured by the terms and provisions of this chapter, without first paying such license tax and procuring such license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.050 - Authority under license. 
A license shall authorize the party obtaining the same to transact the business described in such license in a particular locality in the city; provided, that the party complies with all other provisions of the Code, and other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.060 - Separate license required for each place of business. 
A separate license must be obtained on each branch establishment or separate place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.070 - Proration of fee. 
A license must be taken out before commencing business provided, that the person taking out a license under the provisions of this chapter after the beginning of any year shall pay only a pro rata amount of such sum for the balance of the time of the annual license, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.080 - Finance officer ascertains who pays. 
The finance officer shall make diligent inquiry as to all persons in the city liable to pay a license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.090 - Prior year statement necessary when fee is based on receipts. 
In all cases where the amount of the license fee is based upon the amount of receipts or sales affected or business transacted, the finance officer must require such person to state under oath the average amount of business which he, or the firm of which he is a member, or of which he is an agent or attorney, or the association or corporation of which he is a president, secretary or managing agent or other officer, transacted in the year next preceding the commencement of the year for which the license is asked. Thereupon, such person, agent, president, secretary or other officer must procure a license from the finance officer for the term desired and for the class of business for which such person is liable in accordance with such statement. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.100 - Persons first starting in business. 
Persons first starting in business must pay a first license tax equal to the annual rate established for such business or occupation; except, that all persons and firms commencing business and who are classified under Section 5.08.020 of this title "gross receipts license," shall pay a first license tax in accordance with the classification in which they are placed at the following rates: Classification A the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00); Classification B the sum of forty dollars ($40.00); Classification C the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) and Classification D the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00). For each succeeding year, the amount of such license shall be governed by the statement required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.110 - Penalties for failure to make or falsification of statement. 
Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to make a statement, or willfully making an incorrect statement, required by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or subject to an administrative citation under Chapter 1.10. Such person shall also be required to pay a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent if not reported within thirty (30) days from the due date. This penalty shall be increased by an additional twenty-five (25) percent for each thirty (30) days thereafter until paid in full, up to a maximum penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the original amount due. In addition, if the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days from the due date, an additional twenty-five (25) percent penalty shall be imposed on the license pursuant to Section 5.04.240. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.120 - No license without statement. 
Whenever a statement is provided for in this chapter, no license shall be issued or shall be renewed until such statement is made, sworn to and presented to the finance officer as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.130 - Authority of finance officer to administer oaths. 
The finance officer is authorized to administer all oaths required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.140 - [Reserved.]  
5.04.150 - Deposit of money into city treasury. 
The finance officer shall periodically deposit into the city treasury for the benefit of the general fund all money collected for licenses under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.160 - Reserved.  
5.04.170 - License assignment restricted. 
No license issued shall be in any manner assignable or authorize any person other than therein mentioned or named to transact or carry on such business or authorize any other business than is therein mentioned or named to be continued or transacted thereunder, or at any place other than therein mentioned or named. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.180 - Exhibition of license. 
Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall conspicuously exhibit the same in his place of business, or carry same on his person when he has no fixed place of business, and shall produce the same when requested to do so by the finance officer, chief of police, fire chief or their representative. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.190 - Charitable institutions and organizations. 
The securing of a business license under this chapter shall be exempt from the license tax to any institution or organization, with proof of a 501(c) or other tax exempt status, which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of a charitable purpose, or from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects, whenever the receipts of such function are to be appropriated to any church, school or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the city; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed, and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any individual; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such institution or organization from complying with the provisions of any law or regulation of the city requiring such institution or organization to obtain permission from the city council; provided further, that whenever any venture or activity to be sponsored by any institution or organization which does not meet or deviates from the intent or provisions of this section or when any institution or organization sponsors or is connected with a commercial, profitmaking venture or activity for the benefit of an individual or individuals, if such individual or individuals in any way control or conduct the advertising, promotion, ticket sales or any part of such venture or activity other than the actual performance, prior permission must be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.200 - Exclusions. 
A.  Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this code, the provisions in this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the following persons or firms: 
1.  Any public utility which pays to the city a tax under a franchise or similar agreement, or any publicly owned public utility. 
2.  Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions set forth under Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution. 
3.  Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions as set forth in Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution. 
4.  Any person or firm who the city is not authorized to license under any law or the Constitution of the United States or the State of California. 
B.  The finance officer may require the filing of a verified statement from any person or firm claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, which statement shall set forth all the facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.210 - Fees—Collection by civil action. 
The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be a debt due the city from and against any person who maintains, carries on, engages in or conducts in the city any business, occupation, trade, profession or employment, upon which a license tax is imposed, or for the commencing, engaging in, carrying on or conducting of which a license is required to be procured without first having paid such license tax and procured such license according to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Such persons shall be liable in a civil action in the name of the city as plaintiff in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax imposed by this chapter and for the cost of suit, and for reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.220 - Fees—Payable in lawful money of United States. 
The license tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable in lawful money of the United States of America to the finance officer. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.230 - Fees—When due. 
All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be payable in advance and shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid. Penalties for the non-payment thereof shall be imposed as provided in Section 5.04.240. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.235 - Additional fees—When due. 
Any business required to pay additional fees, under the following provisions, shall make payment the same time and in the same manner as the license tax: 
A.  Business improvement area tax — Chapter 3.44 
B.  Home occupation certificate fees — Chapter 20.54, Section 20.54.100. 
C.  Massage license fee — Chapter 5.44. 
D.  Solicitor licenses fees — Chapter 5.08, Section 5.08.800. 
E.  Street and sidewalk vendor fees - Chapter 5.54. 
F.  Any other permit or fee under Title 5 business licenses and regulations shall be made at the same time as the business license tax. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.240 - Fees—Late—Penalty. 
Subject to other provisions of this chapter, licenses not paid within thirty (30) days from the due date as provided shall be subject to a twenty-five (25) percent penalty. Daily licenses shall be subject to a twenty-five (25) percent penalty if not paid prior to the beginning of any act or business activity required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. These provisions of delinquency and penalty shall not be construed in any way, as affecting the liability of the period in default for prosecution on account of failure to pay the license fee as is now prescribed or may hereinafter be prescribed by ordinance. In addition to the twenty-five (25) percent penalty, a penalty for failure to make a statement or falsification of such statement pursuant to Section 5.04.110 shall also be required. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.250 - Enforcement. 
Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to make a statement, or willfully making an incorrect statement, required by this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation under Chapter 1.10. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.260 - Compliance with other codes before license is issued. 
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of the building code, the fire code, Title 18, Title 20 and when applicable, the rules and regulations of the police and health departments. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
5.04.270 - Refunds. 
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in Section 5.08.045. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 1, 5-19-2014)  
Chapter 5.08 - LICENSE TAXES, RELATED PROVISIONS, AND REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Generally. 
The rates of the license tax for the business, trades, occupations and employments named in this chapter are, and the same are fixed in and for the city, in accordance with this chapter and the same shall be paid by any person engaged in or about to engage in, or carrying on, or about to carry on the same in the city. The finance officer shall license businesses under Section 5.08.020 or 5.08.040 in accordance with Section 5.08.015 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.27). 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 2, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.015 - Tax basis election. 
A.  If a business is specifically identified in Section 5.08.040 of this chapter, such business may make an election to be taxed under the gross receipts (Section 5.08.020) or the base rate (Section 5.08.040) provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Election may be made at the time of filing the application for persons first starting in business and may be revised thereafter. The initial election and any subsequent election shall be made on a form prescribed by the finance officer and shall be in effect for at least a year. Such form shall be filed with the finance officer at least ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of the year the election is to be effective. 
C.  If no election is made by a business, the business shall be taxed under the provisions of Section 5.08.040. 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 3, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.020 - Gross receipts license. 
A.  Every person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, either as principal or agent, whether on commission or otherwise, and whether for present or future delivery, or whether goods, wares or merchandise are owned or consigned to such person, and every person carrying on or conducting the business or occupation as set forth in this section, or who furnishes water service, gas or gas service, electricity or electric service, telephones or telephone service for domestic or other uses, and every person engaged in any other kind of lawful business not otherwise mentioned in this chapter shall pay an annual license based upon annual gross receipts at the following classifications: 
Business License Classifications 
Classification A 
Auto parts and accessories 
Furniture 
Hardware 
Electrical appliances 
Appliances—General 
Sporting goods 
Jewelry and precious jewels 
Precious metals 
Medicine and drugs 
Water and water service 
Telephone and telephone service 
Electricity and electric service 
Gas and gas service 
and other businesses not listed above, operating on a gross profit of thirty (30) percent or more will be classified in this category. 
Classification B 
Bakery products 
Butcher shops 
Candy stores 
Dry cleaning 
General merchandising 
Groceries 
Job printing 
Photographic studio 
Fowl and animal feed and related products 
Florist 
Office supplies and equipment 
Lunches 
Laundry 
Meals 
Drive-in restaurants 
Fruits and vegetables 
Shoes 
Clothing 
Wearing apparel 
Soda fountains 
and other businesses not listed above, operating on a gross profit of seventeen (17) percent will be classified in this category. 
Classification C 
Service stations 
Ice 
Wood 
Coal 
Tire and recapping 
Wholesaler or jobbers of merchandise 
Automobiles—New and used 
Trucks—New and used 
Farm equipment—New and used 
Machinery or other articles of manufacture or trade 
Lumber and lumber products 
Tractors—New and used 
and other businesses not listed above, operating on a gross profit of over ten (10) percent to seventeen (17) percent will be classified in this category. 
Classification D 
All businesses, whether listed above or not, which operate on a gross profit of ten (10) percent or under will be classified in this category. 
Gross Sales Classification Rates 
ANNUAL 	A 	B 	C 
3,000 or under 	$20.00 	$16.00 	$9.00 
3,001 to 6,000 	30.00 	24.00 	16.00 
6,001 to 9,000 	40.00 	32.00 	23.00 
9,001 to 12,000 	50.00 	40.00 	30.00 
12,001 to 24,000 	60.00 	48.00 	37.00 
24,001 to 36,000 	70.00 	56.00 	44.00 
36,001 to 48,000 	80.00 	64.00 	51.00 
48,001 to 60,000 	90.00 	72.00 	58.00 
60,001 to 72,000 	100.00 	80.00 	65.00 
72,001 to 84,000 	110.00 	88.00 	72.00 
84,001 to 96,000 	120.00 	96.00 	79.00 
96,001 to 108,000 	130.00 	104.00 	86.00 
108,001 to 120,000 	140.00 	112.00 	93.00 
120,001 to 132,000 	150.00 	120.00 	100.00 
132,001 to 144,000 	154.00 	123.00 	102.00 
144,001 to 156,000 	158.00 	126.00 	104.00 
156,001 to 168,000 	162.00 	129.00 	106.00 
168,001 to 180,000 	166.00 	132.00 	108.00 
180,001 to 192,000 	170.00 	135.00 	110.00 
192,001 to 204,000 	174.00 	138.00 	112.00 
204,001 to 216,000 	178.00 	141.00 	114.00 
216,001 to 228,000 	182.00 	144.00 	116.00 
228,001 to 240,000 	186.00 	147.00 	118.00 
240,001 to 252,000 	190.00 	150.00 	120.00 
252,001 to 264,000 	194.00 	153.00 	122.00 
264,001 to 276,000 	198.00 	156.00 	124.00 
276,001 to 288,000 	202.00 	159.00 	126.00 
288,001 to 300,000 	206.00 	162.00 	128.00 
300,001 to 312,000 	210.00 	165.00 	130.00 
312,001 to 324,000 	214.00 	168.00 	132.00 
324,001 to 336,000 	218.00 	171.00 	134.00 
336,001 to 348,000 	222.00 	174.00 	136.00 
348,001 to 360,000 	226.00 	177.00 	138.00 
360,001 to 372,000 	230.00 	180.00 	140.00 
372,001 to 384,000 	234.00 	183.00 	142.00 
384,001 to 396,000 	238.00 	186.00 	144.00 
396,001 to 408,000 	242.00 	189.00 	146.00 
408,001 to 420,000 	246.00 	192.00 	148.00 
420,001 to 432,000 	250.00 	195.00 	150.00 
432,001 to 444,000 	254.00 	198.00 	152.00 
444,001 to 456,000 	258.00 	201.00 	154.00 
456,001 to 468,000 	262.00 	204.00 	156.00 
468,001 to 480,000 	266.00 	207.00 	158.00 
480,001 to 492,000 	270.00 	210.00 	160.00 
492,001 to 504,000 	274.00 	213.00 	162.00 
504,001 to 516,000 	278.00 	216.00 	164.00 
516,001 to 528,000 	282.00 	219.00 	166.00 
528,001 to 540,000 	286.00 	222.00 	168.00 
540,001 to 552,000 	290.00 	225.00 	170.00 
552,001 to 564,000 	294.00 	228.00 	172.00 
564,001 to 576,000 	298.00 	231.00 	174.00 
576,001 to 588,000 	302.00 	234.00 	176.00 
588,001 to 600,000 	306.00 	237.00 	178.00 
600,001 to 612,000 	310.00 	240.00 	180.00 
612,001 to 624,000 	314.00 	243.00 	182.00 
624,001 to 636,000 	318.00 	246.00 	184.00 
636,001 to 648,000 	322.00 	249.00 	186.00 
648,001 to 660,000 	326.00 	252.00 	188.00 
660,001 to 672,000 	330.00 	255.00 	190.00 
672,001 to 684,000 	334.00 	258.00 	192.00 
684,001 to 696,000 	338.00 	261.00 	194.00 
696,001 to 708,000 	342.00 	264.00 	196.00 
708,001 to 720,000 	346.00 	267.00 	198.00 
720,001 to 732,000 	350.00 	270.00 	200.00 
732,001 to 744,000 	354.00 	273.00 	202.00 
744,001 to 756,000 	358.00 	276.00 	204.00 
756,001 to 768,000 	362.00 	279.00 	206.00 
768,001 to 780,000 	366.00 	282.00 	208.00 
780,001 to 792,000 	370.00 	285.00 	210.00 
792,001 to 804,000 	374.00 	288.00 	212.00 
804,001 to 816,000 	378.00 	291.00 	214.00 
816,001 to 828,000 	382.00 	294.00 	216.00 
828,001 to 840,000 	386.00 	297.00 	218.00 
840,001 to 852,000 	390.00 	300.00 	220.00 
852,001 to 864,000 	394.00 	303.00 	222.00 
864,001 to 876,000 	398.00 	306.00 	224.00 
876,001 to 888,000 	402.00 	309.00 	226.00 
888,001 to 900,000 	406.00 	312.00 	228.00 
900,001 to 912,000 	410.00 	315.00 	230.00 
912,001 to 924,000 	414.00 	318.00 	232.00 
924,001 to 936,000 	418.00 	321.00 	234.00 
936,001 to 948,000 	422.00 	324.00 	236.00 
948,001 to 960,000 	426.00 	327.00 	238.00 
960,001 to 972,000 	430.00 	330.00 	240.00 
972,001 to 984,000 	434.00 	333.00 	242.00 
984,001 to 996,000 	438.00 	336.00 	244.00 
996,001 to 1,008,000 	442.00 	339.00 	246.00 
1,008,001 to 1,020,000 	446.00 	342.00 	248.00 
1,020,001 to 1,032,000 	450.00 	345.00 	250.00 
1,032,001 to 1,044,000 	454.00 	348.00 	252.00 
1,044,001 to 1,056,000 	458.00 	351.00 	254.00 
1,056,001 to 1,068,000 	462.00 	354.00 	256.00 
1,068,001 to 1,080,000 	466.00 	357.00 	258.00 
1,080,001 to 1,092,000 	470.00 	360.00 	260.00 
1,092,001 to 1,104,000 	474.00 	363.00 	262.00 
1,104,001 to 1,116,000 	478.00 	366.00 	264.00 
1,116,001 to 1,128,000 	482.00 	369.00 	266.00 
1,128,001 to 1,140,000 	486.00 	372.00 	268.00 
1,140,001 to 1,152,000 	490.00 	375.00 	270.00 
1,152,001 to 1,164,000 	494.00 	378.00 	272.00 
1,164,001 to 1,176,000 	498.00 	381.00 	274.00 
1,176,001 to 1,188,000 	502.00 	384.00 	276.00 
1,188,001 to 1,200,000 	506.00 	387.00 	278.00 
1,200,001 to 36,000,000 	6.00 	3.00 	2.00 
36,000,000 to 72,000,000 	7.20 	3.60 	2.40 
72,000,001 to 108,000,000 	8.80 	4.40 	3.00 
108,000,001 to 144,000,000 	10.80 	5.40 	3.60 
Over 144,000,000 add 	13.20 per $12,000 	6.60 per $12,000 	4.40 per $12,000 
 
Rates for Classification D: one-half of amounts shown in Column C. 
B.  Gross Receipts Defined. The term 'gross receipts,' as used in this chapter is defined as follows: The total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of an act, service or employment of whatsoever nature it may be, whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not, for which a charge is made, including all receipts, cash credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom an account of the costs of the property sold, the costs of the material used, labor or service costs, interests paid or payable, losses or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not be included and this section shall not be construed to impose any tax upon any business or transaction which the city is not authorized to license or tax under any law of the state or of the United States. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale, shall be deducted for the purpose of determining gross receipts under this section. 
C.  The term "gross profit," as used in this chapter, is defined as follows: 
The difference between the revenues or sales of a business and the related costs and expenses of producing revenues or sales, excluding income or revenue derived from sources other than its regular activities and before income deductions and selling, general and administrative expenses. Income deductions are a class of items which, although necessarily incurred in the course of business and customarily charged before arriving at net income, are more in the nature of costs imposed from without than costs subject to the control of everyday operations. Selling, general and administrative expenses are a grouping of expenses which include such items as salespersons' salaries and commissions, advertising and promotion, travel and entertainment, administrative office payroll and expenses, and executives' salaries. Gross profit percentage for purposes of determining business license classification is calculated by dividing gross profit by revenues or sales. 
D.  For purposes of determining eligibility and administering this section and Section 5.08.040, the regulations of the State Board of Equalization, State of California shall be used. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1742 § 2, 1989: prior code § 15.28). 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 4, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2425, § 5, adopted May 19, 2014, repealed § 5.08.030, which pertained to tax basis election and derived from prior code § 15.29; and Ord. 1888, § 1 (part), adopted 1994.  
5.08.040 - Base rate license. 
A.  The base rate license taxes for the businesses listed below are as follows: 
CPI Base Rate Schedule for 2014 
Business 	Measurement 	Base Tax Rate Per Year (Unless Otherwise Indicated) 	BIA 
Agricultural Products Processing 		$244.04 	
Alcoholic Beverage Distribution 		$244.04 	
Alterations/Dressmakers/Carpet Cleaners 		$292.88 	$36.00 
Amusement Rides 	Daily/Each Ride 	$97.61 	
Automotive Part Manufacturing 		$244.04 	
Automotive Service, Repair, and Hand Trade Shops 		$292.88 	$36.00 
Barbershop 	1—3 Operators 	$229.12 	$36.00 
	Each Additional Operator 	$76.40 	$12.00 
Beauty Parlor 	1—3 Operators 	$292.88 	$36.00 
	Each Additional Operator 	$97.64 	$12.00 
Billiard or Pool Hall 	First Table 	$195.24 	$24.00 
	Each Additional Table 	$97.64 	$12.00 
Boat Manufacturing 		$244.04 	
Brokers 	Each Person 	$292.88 	$36.00 
Business Service Concern 		$292.88 	$36.00 
Campground or Trailer Court 		$488.08 	
Carnival or Circus 	Weekly 	$956.50 	
	Daily 	$191.30 	
Coin-Operated Audio/Video Machines 	Each Unit 	$390.44 	
Commercial Salvage Haulers 		$292.88 	
Construction Contractors 		$381.84 	$60.00 
Custodial and Pest Control Services 		$292.88 	$36.00 
Dwelling Units 	3 or More Units/Per Unit 	Gross Receipts Plus; $9.56 Per Unit 	
Feat or Performance 	Daily 	$97.61 	
Financing or Lending Agencies 		$763.68 	$120.00 
Fortune Teller 	Each Person 	$390.44 	
Health Services—Licensed Trade 	Each Person 	$390.44 	$48.00 
Household Furniture and Furnishings Manufacturing 		$244.04 	
Itinerant Vendor 	Daily/Each Vendor 	$95.46 	
Label Manufacturing 		$244.04 	
Motels/Hotels 	1—20 Rooms 	$585.68 	
	21—30 Rooms 	$780.96 	
	31—60 Rooms 	$976.20 	
	61—80 Rooms 	$1,366.64 	
	81—90 Rooms 	$1,757.16 	
	Over 90 Rooms 	$1,952.36 	
Out-of-Town Wholesale Delivery 		$585.68 	$72.00 
Pawnshops 		$1,952.36 	$240.00 
Photographic Studio 	Each Photographer 	$390.44 	$48.00 
Producers and Distributors of Heavy Industrial Equipment and Machinery 		$244.04 	
Professionals 	Each Person 	$390.44 	$48.00 
Radio Broadcasting 	Each Broadcaster 	$916.40 	$144.00 
Real Estate Agents 	First Person 	$292.88 	$36.00 
	Each Additional Person 	$195.24 	$24.00 
Retail Freight Hauling 	Each Vehicle 	$292.88 	$72.00 
Skating Rink 		$780.96 	
Sports Facilities 		$976.20 	
Supplying or Distributing Milk 	Each Vehicle 	$390.44 	
Theatres and Shows—Fixed Place of Business 	700 or Greater Seating Capacity 	$2,342.84 	
	699 or Less Seating capacity 	$976.20 	
	Daily 	$48.81 	
Theatres and Shows—Nonfixed Place of Business 	Weekly 	$976.19 	
	Daily 	$244.05 	
Travel Bureaus 	Each Agent 	$390.44 	$48.00 
Traveling Photographer 		$1,103.36 	
Undertaker/Mortician/Funeral Homes 		$976.20 	$144.00 
Vending Machines 	1-15 Units 	$585.68 	
	Each Additional Unit 	$58.60 	
Warehouse 		$585.68 	
 
B.  The base rate license tax for each of the businesses identified in subsection A of this section shall be adjusted on April 1st of each year, based upon the change in the Consumer Price Index—All Urban Consumers, West as published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The new rate will be computed by dividing the December index by 148.1 (the January 1994 index) and then multiplying by the base tax rate licensing tax. 
(Amend. 2009; Amend. 2010; Amend. 2011; Amend. 2012; Amend. of 4-1-2013) 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 6, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.041 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  A person, as defined by Section 5.04.010, operating a business, trade, occupation, or employment upon which a license tax is imposed by this chapter may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim with the finance officer, provided such claim is filed no later than one (1) year from the date of the overpayment. 
C.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 2316 § 17, 2008). 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 7, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.050 - Dwelling units. 
For the purpose of this chapter, units are defined as structures under one (1) ownership, whether or not joined together or connected, whether located on a single plot of ground consisting of one (1) or more city lots or portions thereof or on different plots of ground located at various places within the city, and which units in the aggregate are intended or designated for or used as the homes of families or households, living independently of one another, and in which every such family or household has provided separate living quarters intended for residents. Every person engaged in the business of keeping or conducting three (3) or more apartment units, cabin units, dwelling units or similar type rental units shall pay an annual license fee based upon annual gross receipts shown in Section 5.08.020 plus the current per unit charge shown in Section 5.08.040 under dwelling units. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994). 
(Ord. No. 2425, § 8, 5-19-2014)  
5.08.060 - Card tables. 
Every person who maintains a place where card tables are furnished to the public for the playing of games or cards thereon shall be considered to be engaged in the business of furnishing card tables to the public for the purpose of playing games or cards thereon. A license shall be required for such activity in addition to any other license rewired in this chapter for any other business conducted upon the premises. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.32).  
5.08.070 - Card tables—Investigation. 
The character and fitness of every person and place or establishment subject to the provisions of Section 5.08.060 shall first be investigated by the chief of police before any license or renewal of a license is issued. After conducting such investigation, if the chief of police finds that the character, reputation or fitness of any such person, place or establishment is good, he shall notify the finance officer, who shall issue the license. If, after conducting such an investigation, the chief of police finds that the character, reputation or fitness of any such person, place or establishment is bad, then he shall recommend the denial of such license, which recommendation shall be transferred to the finance officer. The finance officer shall thereupon notify the applicant of such fact, whereupon the applicant may appeal to the city manager. If the city manager concurs in the recommendation of the chief of police, or if no appeal to the city manager is made by the applicant the license shall not be issued. At the time of any appeal to the city manager, the city manager shall make available to the applicant the facts upon which the denial of the license or renewal is based. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.33).  
5.08.080 - Card tables—Appeal. 
The applicant may appeal to the city council, which must conduct a public hearing into the matter under such rules as the city council may prescribe. If the city council, after the public hearing, concurs in the findings of the chief of police and the city manager, then no license shall be issued to the applicant. If the city council disagrees with the findings of the chief of police and the city manager, then it shall order the license to be issued to the applicant and the finance officer shall so issue the license. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.34).  
5.08.090 - Card tables—Licensing does not permit prohibited games. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as permitting or licensing the dealing, playing, carrying an or conducting of any game prohibited by or in any manner contrary to the provisions of the Penal Code of the state or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.35).  
5.08.100 - Carnival. 
The term "carnival" is intended and does apply to what are commonly known as "carnival shows" and other similar aggregations of shows. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.36).  
5.08.110 - Circus. 
The term "circus" means any circus, caravan, menagerie or collection of animals or other acrobatic performances. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.37).  
5.08.120 - Contractors. 
Any contractor licensed under the base rate provisions of Section 5.08.040 who sells merchandise in connection with a contracting business shall pay an additional license fee for doing business as a merchant under the "gross receipts" provisions of Section 5.08.020 in addition to the base rate license. Every person or firm engaged in the business of a contractor must produce evidence that he holds a valid state contractor's license before a license will be issued. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.38).  
5.08.130 - Itinerant vendor. 
"Itinerant vendor" means and includes all persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary and transient business in the city, selling different articles of wearing apparel, dry goods, fancy goods, notions, jewelry, cutlery, groceries, machinery, vehicles of all kinds and types, hardware, tin ware, mill products or merchandise of any class or character, with the intention of continuing such business in the city for a period of not more than ninety days, and who for the purpose of carrying an such business has no fixed place of business or hires, leases or occupies any room, building or structure therein for the exhibition or sale of such items and articles as set forth above, or from which room, building, or structure the sales are to be made or business solicited by means of samples or delivery from house to house; any such person or firm so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, grader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with, or as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 15.39).  
5.08.800 - Solicitor—Defined. 
"Solicitor" means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares and merchandise for present or future delivery or for services to be performed immediately or in the future whether such person has, carries or exposes a sample of such goods, wares and merchandise or not and whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.101).  
5.08.810 - Solicitor—License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to act as solicitor within the city without having first obtained a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1564 § 2, 1984: prior code § 15.102).  
5.08.820 - Solicitor—Application for license. 
Applicants for license under this chapter shall file with the finance officer an application in writing on a form to be prescribed by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.103).  
5.08.830 - Solicitor—Contents of application. 
The application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the solicitor; 
B.  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation by whom employed; 
C.  The length of service of each solicitor with such employer; 
D.  The place of residence and nature of the employment of the solicitor with such employer during the last preceding year; 
E.  The nature or character of the goods, wares merchandise or services to be offered by the solicitor; 
F.  A personal description of the solicitor; 
G.  A statement as to any convictions of any crimes, misdemeanors, violations of municipal ordinances, the date, the nature of the offense and the penalty assessed therefor. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1534 § 1, 1984: prior code § 15.104).  
5.08.840 - Solicitor—Other information. 
Such information shall be accompanied by such credentials and other evidence of good moral character and identity of each solicitor as may be reasonably required by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.105).  
5.08.850 - Solicitor—Application fees. 
A.  The application fee for solicitors hereunder shall be as follows: 
1.  For each new application where an investigation is required, five dollars ($5.00) for each application payable in advance; 
2.  For each replacement application or issuance of a new identification card, five dollars ($5.00) for each such replacement. 
B.  Fees and investigations as used in this section refers solely to individuals and not to firms. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1534 § 2, 19984: prior code § 15.106).  
5.08.860 - Solicitor—Photograph required. 
Each application for a license as required by this chapter must be accompanied by two (2) prints of a recent photograph of the solicitor, which photographs shall not exceed two (2) inches square in size and shall be full front views of the face and head only of such solicitor. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1534 § 3, 1984: prior code § 15.101).  
5.08.870 - Solicitor—Fingerprints required. 
At the time of making the application for a license, each solicitor shall present himself at the office of the chief of police of the city for the purpose of being fingerprinted and supplying routine information required on the fingerprinting forms provided without expense by the city, including the physical characteristics of each person, identifying marks or scars, age, name, address and signature. Such fingerprint records are to be taken in triplicate and each individual so presenting herself is advised that the city reserves the right to retain one (1) of such fingerprint records in its files for permanent safekeeping, and to send one (1) such fingerprint record to the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the Department of Justice at Washington, D.C., and to the Criminal Investigation Department of the California Department of Justice at Sacramento, California, for the purpose of filing. No fingerprint records will be returned in the event the license applied for is not issued or is subsequently suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.108).  
5.08.880 - Solicitor—Investigation—Character and business responsibility. 
The original copy of the application shall promptly be referred to the chief of police, who shall promptly make an investigation of the applicant's character and business responsibility. If the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reason therefor and return the application to the finance officer. The finance officer shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. If the chief of police finds that the applicant's character and business responsibility are satisfactory, he shall endorse his approval on the application and return it to the finance officer, who shall promptly issue the license and identification card. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1534 § 4, 1984: prior code § 15.109).  
5.08.890 - Solicitor—License and identification card to be carried on person. 
Each applicant for a license must at all times retain in his possession the business license issued by the finance officer and each applicant issued an identification card must retain the same in his personal possession at all times were engaged in the business so licensed within the city and must produce and show the same on the demand of any person solicited or of any police officer or official of the city. No person issued an identification card shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made upon such license or card, or deface such license or card in any way. Each license and card shall be personal and not assignable or transferable, nor shall any license or card be used by any person other than the licensee or the person for whom issued. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: Ord. 1534 § 5, 1984: prior code § 15.110).  
5.08.900 - Solicitor—Conditions and regulations. 
The following conditions and regulations shall also apply to the exercises of the privileges granted by licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter in addition to those set forth in other parts of this chapter or elsewhere in this code: 
A.  Shouting—calling wares. No person acting under authority of any license issued under this chapter shall shout or call his wares in a loud, boisterous or unseemly manner, or to the disturbance of citizens or dwellers in the city. 
B.  Identification by comparing signature with that on license. Every solicitor, upon the request of any police officer or other officer of the city, shall sign his name for comparison with the signature upon the license or card or the signature upon the license application. 
C.  Order to be written in duplicate. Any person acting under authority of any license issued under this chapter who solicits orders for future delivery shall write each order at least in duplicate, plainly stating the quantity of each article or commodity ordered, the price to be paid therefor, the total amount ordered and the amount to be paid on or after delivery. One copy of such order shall be given to the customer. 
D.  Loitering on streets or private property. No solicitor shall stop or remain in any one place upon the streets, alleys or public places in the city longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy, nor shall any solicitor stop or remain upon any private property within the city without the consent of the owner thereof or some person having authority to grant such permission. 
E.  Every solicitor shall, upon request of any person solicited, provide his/her name, business address and telephone number and the name, business address and telephone number of the person, organization, or entity an whose behalf solicitation is being made. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1733 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.111).  
5.08.910 - Solicitor—Revocation of license. 
A.  A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor; 
3.  Any violation of this chapter; 
4.  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
5.  Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  This section shall be self-executing and the suspension or revocation shall be effective immediately. The city clerk shall give notice of the suspension or revocation of license and sufficient notice shall be given if mailed or delivered to the licensee at his last known local address. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.112).  
5.08.920 - Solicitor's license—Appeals to city council. 
In the event that any applicant desires to appeal from any order, revocation or other ruling of the finance officer, the chief of police or any other officer of the city, made under the provisions of this chapter, such applicant or any other person aggrieved shall file written notice of such appeal with the city clerk and such matters shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council, at which time the city council shall hear and receive evidence, written and oral upon all matters involved. The decision of the city council may be final upon all parties concerned. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.113).  
5.08.930 - Solicitation unlawful where "No Peddlers" sign posted. 
It is unlawful for any person described in Section 5.08.800 of this chapter to perform or attempt to perform the acts described in such section by ringing the doorbell or mocking at the door or otherwise calling attention to his presence of or at any residence whereon a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar import is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view, and no such person, described in Section 5.08.800 shall perform or attempt to perform any of the acts described in such section in any building, structure or place of business whereon or wherein a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar import, is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view. 
(Ord. 1888 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1609 § 1 (part), 1986: prior code § 15.114).  
Chapter 5.12 - SALE OF WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - License—Required. 
In addition to any other business license or fees required by this title, every person proposing to engage in the business of selling at retail within the city, pistols, revolvers or other firearms capable of being concealed upon the person, shall apply for a license to conduct the business, and shall pay the application fee therefor as established by ordinance or resolution. The chief of police shall investigate or cause to be investigated the suitability of the premises on which said business is to be conducted, and the character and fitness of the person proposing to conduct the business and of each partner, associate or employee of said person, if such partner, associate or employee is to be authorized to sell such firearms at retail. The chief of police may issue such license if, in his judgment, considering the suitability of the premises and the character and fitness of each person who is to be authorized to sell such firearms, the public safety and welfare will not be adversely affected. 
(Ord. 1139 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 15.57.2 (part)).  
5.12.020 - License—Application. 
The chief of police may prepare, use and modify such application forms and other documents as are reasonably necessary to provide information for such investigation. The application fee in such amount as is determined by the city council shall be paid to the chief of police and transmitted by him to the finance officer. Such application fee shall not be refundable in the event that the license is not granted. 
(Ord. 1139 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 15.57.2 (part)).  
5.12.030 - License—Form prescribed by state. 
Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be in the form prescribed by the Attorney General of the state, and shall conform to the requirements of Section 12071 of the Penal Code of the state, as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. 1139 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 15.57.2 (part)).  
Chapter 5.16 - TAXICABS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Generally 
 
5.16.010 - Generally. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Driver" means every person in charge of or operating any passenger-carrying or motor-propelled vehicle as herein defined, either as agent, employee or otherwise, of owner, as owner or under the direction of the owner, as herein defined. 
B.  "Owner" means every person, firm or corporation having use or control of any passenger-carrying automobile or motor-propelled vehicle as defined in this section, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise. 
C.  "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel. 
D.  "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle of a distinctive color, such as is in common usage in this country for taxicabs, or operated at rates per mile, for waiting time or for bath, and equipped with a taximeter used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of the passengers or of any persons hiring the same. 
E.  "Taximeters" means any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated and printed, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon such instrument, appliance, device or machine such charge is indicated by figures and such figures imprinted upon a receipt which may be handed or delivered to the patron of such passenger-carrying vehicle. 
(Prior code § 27.1).  
5.16.020 - Registration and license fee. 
Every person who under this chapter has been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall pay the following registration and license fees to the city: 
A one hundred twenty dollar ($120.00) registration fee for the first car and a six dollar ($6.00) registration fee for each additional car, and a license fee of six dollars ($6.00) per car per quarter. 
(Prior code § 27.2).  
5.16.030 - Identification of cabs—Display of telephone number. 
All taxicabs or other vehicles employed in the city for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire, except vehicles operating from a fixed terminal over regular routes, shall be equipped with and carry a sign in the rear and on the front part of the vehicle bearing the ward "TAXI," the letters of which may be either block or gothic type not less than five (5) inches in height and the stems of such letters shall not be less than three-fourths of an inch in height, together with the telephone number of the concern, company, corporation or association owning the taxicab, which telephone number shall be in numerals either block or gothic type not less than two (2) inches in height, with stems or lines one-fourth of an inch in height. In the event such taxicab is an extra or spare cab not in regular use and being substituted for one (1) of the taxicabs regularly licensed by this chapter, such taxicab must be identified in addition to the foregoing signs by a card, placard or sign fixed to the rear and to the front of the taxicab in like letters of either block or gothic type at least five (5) inches high containing the word "EXTRA" OR "SPARE." 
(Prior code § 27.3).  
5.16.040 - Police right of entry for purpose of enforcement. 
The chief of police, or any member of the police department under his direction, shall have the right at any time after displaying proper identification to enter into or upon any certified taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated. 
(Prior code § 27.4).  
5.16.050 - Unsafe cabs not to be placed in service; unsafe cabs to be ordered out of service. 
Before any taxicab is placed in service, it shall first be inspected for safety by the police department. If a taxicab is found to be unsafe, it shall not be placed in service. Thereafter, any taxicab which is found after any inspection by any member of the police department to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service it shall be immediately ordered out of service. Before such taxicab shall again be placed in service, it shall be placed in a safe condition and such condition shall be verified by the police department. 
(Prior code § 27.5). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 10, 10-19-2009)  
5.16.060 - Interior of cabs to be cleaned daily. 
The interior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Prior code § 27.6).  
5.16.070 - Liability insurance. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to operate any vehicle in this city as a taxicab unless and until the following conditions have been fulfilled: 
A.  There shall have been issued by a company or companies duly authorized to transact insurance business in the state, and maintained in full force and effect, a policy of automobile liability insurance covering taxicab operations and insuring the financial responsibility of the owner and the operator of such taxicab for claims, damages, or causes of action arising out of the operation of such taxicab in amounts not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any one (1) person, and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injuries or deaths arising out of any one (1) occurrence, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage or in such amounts, type, and/or form as set by resolution of the city council; and 
B.  There shall be filed with the city clerk a certificate issued by such insurance company as evidence that such insurance has been issued and is in effect, which certificate shall provide that the insurance evidenced shall not be cancelled for any cause without thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the city clerk. Upon request of the city clerk, the original policy of such insurance shall be made available for examination and review to determine compliance with the above conditions. 
(Ord. 1216 § 1, 1978: prior code § 27.7). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 11, 10-19-2009)  
5.16.080 - Taxicab stands—Nontransferable. 
The city council may locate and designate taxicab stands in addition to those established by Section 10.32.100. Such stands when so established shall be designated "Taxis Only," or same other appropriate designation. Such stands and the permits heretofore issued and hereinafter issued to any person, individual, company or association are nontransferable. One (1) stand only shall be issued to each taxicab company operating within the city. 
(Prior code § 27.9).  
5.16.090 - Taxicab stands—Parking in other than stands. 
It is unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to park or leave standing, or permit to leave standing his taxicab except in a regularly established taxicab stand on such streets of the city as are provided with parking spaces, or to stop or leave his taxicab along the curb or portion of street for the parking of vehicles on such streets as have been designated as the parking space for the parking of vehicles, for taking on or discharging passengers, except in the regularly established taxicab stand; provided, that between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. of the following day, such taxicab may stop, stand or park in any place where the parking of vehicles is otherwise permitted; provided, however, that the right to park during the hours of ten p.m. to eight a.m. of the following day shall not relieve the persons so parking the taxicab or causing the taxicab to be parked, from liability under any other provision of this code or any ordinance of the city now existing or which hereafter may be passed, referring to the parking of vehicles between such hours. 
(Prior code § 27.10).  
5.16.100 - Taxicab stands—Unattended cabs. 
It is unlawful for any taxicab to remain standing in any established taxicab stand unless the taxicab is attended by a driver or operator, except when assisting passengers to load or unload, or when answering his telephone. 
(Prior code § 27.11).  
5.16.110 - Most direct route to be taken. 
Any taxicab driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously. 
(Prior code § 27.12).  
5.16.120 - Soliciting fares. 
Unoccupied taxicabs shall not be operated over public streets in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
(Prior code § 27.13).  
5.16.130 - Maximum number of passengers. 
No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of his vehicle. 
(Prior code § 27.14).  
5.16.140 - Intoxicating liquor or drug use not permitted by drivers on duty. 
No driver of any motor vehicle described in this chapter shall drink or use any intoxicating liquor or take any controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations while he is on duty. 
(Ord. 1951 § 2, 1997: prior code § 27.15).  
5.16.150 - Maximum daily hours of drivers. 
No driver shall work as a driver for more than a maximum of ten (10) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(Prior code § 27.16).  
5.16.160 - Record of operation—Inspection by police. 
Every person licensed to operate taxicabs under this chapter shall keep a daily record of the operation of each taxicab in service. Such record shall be retained by the owner of the taxicab company for a period of no less than three (3) years and shall be open for inspection at all times by the chief of police or any person designated by him or the city council. The record shall contain the following facts: 
1.  Month, day and year; 
2.  Location and time of pickup; 
3.  Destination and time reached; and 
4.  Number of passengers carried. 
It shall be the duty of the driver to record the foregoing facts upon the completion of each trip or hiring. 
(Prior code § 27.17). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 12, 10-19-2009)  
Article II. - Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
5.16.170 - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of operating any taxicab within the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council. 
(Prior code § 27.18).  
5.16.180 - Application—Information to be shown. 
All persons applying to the city council for a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of one (1) or more taxicabs shall file with the city council a sworn application therefor on forms provided by the city council stating as follows: 
A.  The name and address of the owner or person applying. 
B.  The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of application, if any; 
C.  The number of vehicles for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity is desired; 
D.  The make, type, year of manufacture and passenger-seating capacity of each taxicab for which application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity is made; 
E.  The make and type of taximeter intended to be installed on each taxicab for which application for a certificate is made; 
F.  A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trade style and any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed taxicab design; 
G.  Such other information as the city council may require. 
(Prior code § 27.19).  
5.16.190 - Declaration of necessity by council. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be granted until the city council shall, after hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service. 
(Prior code § 27.20).  
5.16.200 - Determination and necessity—Public hearing. 
In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of a taxicab for which application is made, the city council shall hold such public hearing as may be necessary in its discretion to determine that fact. 
(Prior code § 27.21).  
5.16.210 - Investigation of application. 
Before any application under this article is acted upon, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made and shall report his findings, in writing, to the city council on the following: 
A.  The demand of the public for additional taxicab service; 
B.  The adequacy of existing mass transportation and taxicab service; 
C.  The financial responsibility and experience of the applicant; 
D.  The number, kind and type of equipment and the color scheme to be used; 
E.  The effect which such additional taxicab service may have upon traffic congestion and parking; 
F.  Whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater hazard to the public; 
G.  Such other relevant facts as the city council may deem advisable or necessary. 
(Prior code § 27.22).  
5.16.220 - Conformance with chapter prerequisite to issuance. 
No taxicab shall be granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity unless it conforms with all the provisions of this chapter, or unless the vehicle has been granted a license to operate as a taxicab in the city prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.23).  
5.16.230 - Inspection of vehicles prior to issuance. 
Before a certificate is issued to any owner, the taxicab, for which a certificate of convenience and necessity is requested, shall be delivered to a place designated by city council for inspection. The city council shall designate agents to inspect such taxicab, equipment and taximeters, to ascertain whether such taxicab complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.24).  
5.16.240 - Granting of certificates. 
Having declared that the public convenience and necessity require the additional taxicab service, the city council shall grant certificates of public convenience and necessity to those persons applying therefor who in its opinion are entitled thereto. The city council shall in its discretion determine the number of permits to be granted to any applicant. No certificate shall be issued to any person who shall not have fully complied with all of the requirements of this chapter necessary to be complied with before the commencement of the operation of the proposed service. 
(Prior code § 27.25).  
5.16.250 - Surrender of certificate upon discontinuance of business. 
After the service for which a certificate is granted is discontinued, or if the person sells or discontinues his business for a period of forty-five (45) days, the certificates granted under this article, shall be automatically cancelled and shall be reissued only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.26).  
5.16.260 - Sale or transfer of cabs—Purchase of new cabs. 
Whenever an owner sells or transfers the title to a taxicab for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been granted and within thirty (30) days after such sale or transfer purchases other taxicabs, the city council shall, as a matter of right, upon written request of the applicant within thirty (30) days of such purchase, issue a new certificate for the operation of no greater number of taxicabs than those sold or transferred; provided, that the owner has complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.27).  
5.16.270 - Destruction of taxicab—Issuance of new certificate. 
Any owner whose taxicab, for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been granted, has been destroyed in any manner, will as a matter of right, upon written application to the city council within thirty (30) days after such destruction, be issued a new certificate for the operation of no greater number of taxicabs than those so destroyed; provided, that the owner has complied with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.28).  
5.16.280 - Suspension or revocation—Grounds. 
Certificates maybe suspended or revoked by the city council at any time in case: 
A.  The city council finds the owner's past record to be unsatisfactory; 
B.  The owner fails to operate the taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  The owner shall cease to operate any taxicab for a period of forty-five (45) consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the city council; 
D.  The taxicab is operated at a rate of fare other than that approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 27.29).  
5.16.290 - Suspension or revocation—Surrender of certificate. 
Certificates which have been suspended or revoked by the city council shall immediately be surrendered to the city clerk and the operation of any taxicab covered by such certificates shall cease and be unlawful. 
(Prior code § 27.30).  
5.16.300 - Surrender of certificate upon retirement of cab. 
Any owner who permanently retires any taxicab from service and does not replace the same within forty-five (45) days thereof, shall immediately surrender any certificate granted for the operation of such taxicab to the city clerk. Such owner may not secure additional certificates for the operation of any taxicab without having first made application therefor in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.31).  
5.16.310 - Number of certificate to be designated on cab. 
Each taxicab shall bear, at such places on the outside of the vehicle as shall be prescribed by the city council, the number of the certificate of public convenience and necessity granted for its operation. Such designation shall be of the type and design as shall be prescribed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 27.32).  
Article III. - Driver's Permit 
 
5.16.320 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any of the vehicles mentioned in Section 5.16.010, without first obtaining a permit in writing to do so from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 27.33).  
5.16.330 - Restricted to name of owner appearing on cab. 
Permits issued will entitle the driver to work for only that owner whose name appears on the permit. A new permit will be required for each subsequent employment. 
(Prior code § 27.34).  
5.16.340 - Application—Expiration. 
Applicants for taxicab drivers' permits shall file applications therefor with the chief of police upon blanks to be furnished by the city. Each applicant shall pay to the chief of police an application fee of seven dollars ($7.00). Each permit shall expire one year from date of issuance and may be renewed on application. Renewal fee shall be one dollar. 
(Prior code § 27.35).  
5.16.350 - Permit to be in form of card—Photograph and fingerprints to be shown. 
The taxicab driver's permit shall be in the form of a card which shall bear signatures, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant. Such cards shall be issued in duplicate. 
(Prior code § 27.36).  
5.16.355 - Mandatory alcohol and drug testing before issuance or renewal of driver's permit. 
A.  No person shall be issued a taxicab driver's permit until they have taken a drug screening test and tested negative for alcohol and each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. Before the taxicab permit may be renewed, as required in Section 5.16.340, the permit holder shall take an additional drug screening test and shall test negative both for the above controlled substances and for alcohol. 
B.  The owner as identified in Section 5.16.330 shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to their drivers and potential drivers. Owners may require drivers who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing. Self-employed drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. 
C.  Procedures for the administration of the tests mandated by this section shall be in compliance with Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.l) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver shall show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of testing and except as otherwise provided in Section 53075.5 of the California Government Code. 
D.  In the case of a self-employed driver, all test results shall be reported directly to the chief of police. In all other cases, the test results shall be reported directly to the owner, who shall report all positive test results to the chief of police. In the event of a positive test, the owner shall comply with the requirements for rehabilitation, return-to-duty, fallow-up testing and other requirements specified in Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and in Section 53075.5 of the California Government Code. 
E.  The results of all tests taken pursuant to this section are confidential and may not be released without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law. 
F.  As used in this chapter, a negative test for alcohol means alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent. 
(Ord. 1951 § 1, 1997).  
5.16.360 - Permit card filed with police—Displayed in cab. 
One copy of the permit card referred to in the preceding section, with the fingerprints, photograph and signature of the applicant, shall be placed on file with the police department of the city. The other card shall be conspicuously displayed in the taxicab of the permittee during all times such taxicab is operated. 
(Prior code § 27.37).  
5.16.370 - Permits to be filed as part of application for license. 
Taxicab drivers' permits shall be filed with the chief of police as part of the application for a license. 
(Prior code § 27.38).  
5.16.380 - Issuance to certain persons restricted. 
No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued to any of the following persons: 
A.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
B.  Any person not a citizen of the United States or who has not lawfully declared his intention to become such; 
C.  Any person who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; 
D.  Any person who has been convicted within five years previous to issuance of a permit of driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics; 
E.  Any person not possessing a valid Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3 California driver's license. 
(Ord. 1380 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1340 § 1, 1980: prior code § 27.39).  
5.16.390 - Residence requirement—Temporary permits. 
No applicant may obtain a taxicab driver's permit to drive or operate any of the vehicles maintained in Section 5.16.010, unless and until he has been a continuous resident of the city for at least thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of such application; provided, however, that a temporary permit only may be granted for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days after which the license may be made permanent, if, after investigation, the applicant is found to be a fit and proper person. 
(Prior code § 27.40).  
5.16.400 - Examination by chief of police. 
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall be examined by a person designated by the chief of police as to his knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations and the geography of the city. If the result of the examination is unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall refuse to issue a permit. 
(Prior code § 27.41).  
5.16.410 - Grounds for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew permit. 
The chief of police may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a taxicab driver's permit if the driver or applicant has, since the granting of her permit: 
A.  Been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; pandering; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics; or imparting information for obtaining narcotics; 
B.  Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the influence of liquor or narcotics; 
C.  Had his state driver's or chauffeur's license revoked or suspended; 
D.  Been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in Sections 23152, 23103, 22350, 22352 of the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments, or any combination of either or any of such offenses occurring during any continuous period not exceeding twelve months; 
E.  When, for any reason, including or other than the above, in the opinion of the chief of police, the applicant is unfit to drive a taxicab; 
F.  Violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ordinance 1951 § 3, 1997: prior code § 27.42).  
Article IV. - Rates of Fare 
 
5.16.420 - Taximeter required. 
It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter of such type, style and design as may be approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 27.43).  
5.16.430 - Duty of operator to keep taximeter in good condition. 
It shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep the taximeter in perfect condition so that it will at all times correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for distance traveled and waiting time. 
(Prior code § 27.44).  
5.16.440 - Inspection of taximeters by chief of police. 
Every taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the chief of police of the city. The chief of police is authorized at his instance, or upon complaint by any person to investigate, or cause to be investigated, any taximeter. Upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in the meter, the chief of police shall remove, or cause to be removed, such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the streets of the city until such time as the taximeter has been correctly adjusted. 
(Amended during 11-05 supplement: prior code § 27.45).  
5.16.450 - Taximeters to register charge to nearest ten cents—Requirements as to flag. 
Every taximeter shall register the charge to the nearest ten cents ($0.10) and be equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words "For Hire" printed or stamped thereon. Such flag shall be so attached and connected to the mechanism of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism to operate when the flag is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for hire. The flag shall, when moved forward or downward, start the operation of the taximeter so that the same will operate in the manner defined in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 27.46).  
5.16.460 - Illegal use of flag. 
It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to display the flag or device attached to a taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is not for hire or is not employed, or to have such flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter from operating. It is unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other device of a taximeter into a position which causes the taximeter to record when such vehicle is not actually employed, or fail to throw the flag or other device of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. 
(Prior code § 27.47).  
5.16.470 - Charges based on meter. 
All charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the city must be based on the charges indicated on the taximeter. It is unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to charge any passenger any sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter and on the receipt printed thereby. It is unlawful to make any charge without delivering the receipt to the passenger. 
(Prior code § 27.48).  
5.16.480 - Location of meter in cab. 
The taximeter shall be so placed in a taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged is well lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding in the taxicab. 
(Prior code § 27.49).  
5.16.490 - Name of owner, address and schedule of rates to be posted. 
There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab in full view of the passenger, a card not less than two (2) inches by four (4) inches in size, which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which the owner operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 27.50).  
5.16.500 - Rates enumerated. 
It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab as defined in Section 5.16.010 to fix, charge, or collect a rate which is less than the maximum as set forth in this section. Rates are fixed as follows: 
A.  Three dollars ($3.00), for the first one-ninth ( 1/9 ) mile and thirty cents ($0.30) for each additional one-ninth ( 1/9 ) mile. 
B.  Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and six a.m., the fare charged, computed as above, shall not be less than two dollars and forty-five cents ($2.45). 
C.  No charge for extra passengers. This applies only to those passengers whose point of pickup and point of destination are the same. 
D.  When hauling passengers whose points of destination are different, the meter shall be turned back to the "For Hire" position each time a passenger is discharged and a fare collected. 
E.  For waiting time at the request of a passenger, the rate shall be calculated on the basis of a rate of twenty-seven dollars ($27.00) per hour. 
F.  For each piece of luggage in excess of fifty (50) pounds, average size traveling bag or equivalent, ten cents ($0.10) each. 
(Ord. 2314 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2198 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1934 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1777 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1427 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1381 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1341 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1251 § 1, 1979: Ord. 1219 § 1, 1978: Ord. 1185 § 1, 1977: Ord. 1159 § 1, 1976: prior code § 27.51).  
5.16.510 - Receipt upon payment of fare. 
Each taxicab driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare. 
(Prior code § 27.52).  
5.16.520 - Inspection of meters replacing broken or faulty meters. 
Taximeters placed upon taxicabs, to replace broken or faulty meters, shall under no condition, be operated more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to being inspected, tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the city council. 
(Prior code § 27.53).  
Chapter 5.20 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Bingo authorized. 
Any organization which could be authorized to conduct bingo games by an ordinance enacted pursuant to Article IV, Section 19 of the California Constitution is authorized to conduct bingo games in the city; provided, that such bingo games are conducted in conformity with Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state; and further provided, that no bingo game shall be conducted between midnight and ten a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. 1205 § 2, 1977: prior code § 15.120).  
Chapter 5.24 - LIQUIDATION SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Liquidation sale" means the sale, or an offer to sell, to the public, goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the determination, closing, liquidation, wind-up, discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale, including, but not limited to, sales advertised to be "retirement sale," "forced out of business sale," "removal sale," "lass of lease sale," "bankrupt sale," "fire sale," "sale of bankrupt stock," "liquidation sale" and any and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued. Without limiting the generality of the term "liquidation sale" such sale shall include a sale in which, instead of the bidders making increasingly higher bids for an article or articles of merchandise, the seller announces a price at which he will sell one or more articles of merchandise and then, if no sale occurs, increasingly adds additional articles of merchandise to those originally offered, with or without varying the previously announced price, until a buyer is finally induced to buy the accumulated articles at the price fixed. 
B.  "Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  "Publish, publishing, advertise, advertisement and advertising" means any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a sale, either by word of mouth, by newspaper advertising, by radio advertising, by magazine advertising, by handbills, by written notice, by printed notice and any and all means including oral, written or printed. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.020 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to publish or conduct a liquidation sale without first obtaining a permit therefor from the finance officer in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.025 - False or misleading statements. 
It is unlawful for any person to apply for a permit or for a liquidation sale, or advertise a liquidation sale, or conduct a liquidation sale with the intent not to cease and discontinue the business upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.030 - Permit—Application—Information to be shown. 
Application for a permit to conduct a sale as required by Section 5.24.020 shall be made to the finance officer at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the sale, upon forms to be supplied to the applicant for that purpose. The application shall contain a statement subscribed to under oath or affirmation by the person, or, if the applicant is a firm or corporation, a member of the firm or officer of the corporation, applying for a permit to conduct such sale, which statement shall contain: 
A.  Generally, the name and address of the applicant; a description, by sheet location, of the place where such sale is to be held; the length of time of its expected duration; and, the dates between which it is proposed to be conducted; 
B.  The name of any person who will conduct the sale, and whether any items of stack in fade have been added in expectation of such sale, and if so, a description of such items and when so added; 
C.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of the occupancy; 
D.  The means to be employed in publishing the sale, together with the proposed language content in any advertisement; 
E.  Inventory of Goods. An inventory of goods, wares and merchandise, item by item, to be sold at such sale, whether the article is new, used or rebuilt, the date of acquisition of such goods, wares or merchandise, and the persons from whom obtained and the place from which such goads were last taken. Each item must be numbered separately in the inventory and the number in the inventory must correspond to a number physically attached to such item. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.040 - Permit—Deposit and license fees. 
Upon filing an original application for a permit to conduct a sale, the applicant shall pay to the finance officer a deposit fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and in addition thereto, such other business license fee as may be at that time or thereafter become applicable. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.050 - Permit—Investigation of application—Cost. 
A.  Upon receipt of the application and deposit, under the two preceding sections, the finance officer shall cause an investigation to ascertain the truthfulness of the sworn statement submitted by the applicant, and to determine whether the items described in the inventory are a bona fide part of the applicant's stock in trade. The applicant shall be charged the sum of ten dollars for each hour required to make such investigation. Such amount shall be deducted from the deposit made by the applicant and the amount that remains in the hands of the finance officer after such deduction shall be repaid to the applicant. 
B.  If the deposit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is insufficient to pay the cost of making the investigation, the finance officer shall notify the applicant in writing of that fact and set forth the additional necessary expense for completing such investigation and the applicant shall deposit with the finance officer such additional amount. If such additional amount is not deposited within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice, the application shall lapse and any further proceedings for a permit must be pursuant to a new application. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.060 - Permit—Approval of application—Issuance. 
If the finance officer determines that a permit may be issued to the applicant, he shall indicate the days for which such permit shall be issued and shall then issue the permit. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.070 - Permit—Contents. 
Every permit issued under this chapter shall give the name of the person to whom it is issued, the name of the person who will conduct the sale, the dates of the sale and the place where such sale may be conducted. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.080 - Articles tagged with description and inventory number. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting a liquidation sale to sell or offer for sale at such liquidation sale any item of such stock to which there is not attached a tag, card, ticket or label containing a number referring to and corresponding with the number in the inventory as set forth in Section 5.24.030. Such tag, card, ticket or label shall remain securely attached to such article and shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct description by such reference of the article sold, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud in case such description referred to is not a true and correct description and representation of such article sold. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.090 - Display of permit and duplicate stock list. 
Upon commencement and throughout the duration of any liquidation sale, the permit issued shall be prominently displayed near the entrance to the premises. The duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant to which such permit was issued shall also be posted. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.100 - Books and records to be kept by permittee. 
Suitable books and records shall be kept by the permittee and shall at all times be available for inspection by the finance officer or his designee. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.110 - Stock list to be revised at end of each day. 
At the close of business each day, at a liquidation sale under this article, the stock list attached to the application shall be revised, and those items disposed of during such day shall be removed or stricken thereon, and no goods added to such list. 
(Ord. 1582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.24.120 - Exemptions—Waivers. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect sales conducted by sheriffs, constables or other public or court officials, or to any person acting under the direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods, wares and merchandise in the course of his official duties. 
(Ord. l582 § 2 (part), 1985).  
Chapter 5.28 - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections 
 
5.28.010 - Furniture and household goods defined. 
"Furniture and household goods," as used in this chapter, means and includes beds, bedding, tables, desks, chairs, stoves, floor coverings, crockery, glassware, kitchen and cooking utensils. 
(Prior code § 19.1)  
5.28.020 - Exemptions to chapter applicability. 
The provisions contained in this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the purchase or sale by junk dealers of rags, bottles, barrels or cans, or castoff clothing or shoes. 
(Prior code § 19.2).  
5.28.030 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer without first applying for and receiving a permit therefor in writing from the city council. 
(Prior code § 19.3).  
5.28.040 - Permit—Application—Information to be shown. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit, as required by the preceding section, to conduct or carry on any business mentioned therein, shall file an application in writing therefor with the city clerk specifying by street number, the place where such business is proposed to be conducted or carried on, which application shall contain the name and address of the applicant. 
(Prior code § 19.4).  
5.28.050 - Permit—Revocation. 
In the event that any person holding a permit to conduct or carry on any business mentioned in Section 5.28.034 of this code, shall violate or cause or permit to be violated, any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall conduct or carry on such business in an unlawful manner, the permit so granted shall be revoked by the city council after notice given to the permittee to appear before the council at a time and place to be fixed by it, to show cause why such permit should not be revoked. 
(Prior code § 19.5).  
5.28.060 - Record to be kept—Inspection by police. 
Every person dealing in secondhand goods, wares, merchandise or articles of any description, other than furniture and household goods, either as pawnbroker, junk dealer or otherwise, shall keep a record of all such articles sold or purchased, which articles and record shall at all times during business hours be opened to the inspection of the chief of police or any other police officer in the city. Such record shall show the hour of the day when each article was received on deposit, pledged or purchased, and the true name and address, as nearly as the same is known to or can be ascertained by such person, of the person by whom such article was left on deposit, pledged or sold, together with a description of such person, which description shall show the style of dress, height, age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard, or both, where the same are worn, and if neither is worn, such fact shall be noted. Such report shall also show the number of the pawn ticket, amount loaned, amount purchased and a complete description of each article left on deposit, pledged or purchased. If any article so left on deposit, pledged or purchased has engraved thereon any number, word or initial or contains any settings of ally kind, the description of such article in such report shall refer to the same. Blanks for such reports shall be obtained from the chief of police and shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with proper captions for the furnishing of the information required in this section. 
(Prior code § 19.6).  
Chapter 5.32 - WRECKING ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Automobile wrecking establishment" means a place where used machinery or automobiles are dismantled and the usable parts thereof are offered for sale. 
B.  "House wrecking establishment" means a place where used lumber, used building materials and used plumbing or electrical equipment of the type recovered from dismantled houses or buildings are collected and kept or offered for sale. 
C.  "Junk business" means a place where pieces of old metal, paper, glass, rubber and other old materials commonly known as junk are collected and kept or offered for sale. 
(Prior code § 30.1).  
5.32.020 - Compliance with building code—Exception. 
No automobile wrecking establishment, junk business or house wrecking establishment shall be conducted, carried on or maintained in the city unless the same is conducted, carried on or maintained in a building conforming to the requirements of the building code of the city for the zone or locality in which such building may be situated; provided, however, that any such business may be conducted, carried on or maintained upon a lot or plot of land where such lot or plot of land is entirely surrounded by a solid, tight fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
(Prior code § 30.2).  
5.32.030 - Requirements where business carried on within fenced or walled area. 
Any fence or wall used for the purpose referred to in the preceding section must be painted with a fire-retardant paint and shall not have more than one (1) opening upon any public street, and each opening shall be not more than twelve (12) feet in width and shall be equipped with a substantial, solid, tight gate or door of the same height as such fence or wall, and the same shall be kept securely closed at all times when such business or establishment is not open for business. No more than one (1) sign of any kind whatever shall be painted or placed upon such fence or wall, fronting on any street. Such sign shall not exceed forty feet in length. 
(Prior code § 30.3).  
5.32.040 - Maintaining establishments partly in building and partly upon lot or plot of land. 
It is permissible to conduct, carry on or maintain any business or establishment partly in a building such as provided for in this chapter and partly upon a contiguous lot or plot of land; provided, that such contiguous lot or plot of land is enclosed by a fence or wall as provided in Sections 5.32.020 and 5.32.030. 
(Prior code § 30.4).  
5.32.050 - Compliance prerequisite to license. 
No license or permit shall be granted or issued to any person to conduct, carry on or maintain in the city any of the businesses or establishments defined in Section 5.32.010, unless the same is conducted, carried on or maintained in or upon buildings or premises conforming to the requirements of the three (3) preceding sections of this code. 
(Prior code § 30.5).  
5.32.060 - Operating business without compliance a misdemeanor. 
The conducting, maintaining or carrying on in the city of any automobile wrecking establishment, junk business or house wrecking establishment without securing a license or permit therefor from the city, or in or upon a building or premises other than as required by this chapter, is declared to be a misdemeanor and punishable as such. 
(Prior code § 30.6).  
Chapter 5.36 - POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Billiards," as used in this chapter, means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge or cushions, with balls which are impelled by cues and includes all forms of a game known as pool. 
B.  "Billiard room" and "poolroom" are synonymous and mean any public place wherein the game of billiards is permitted to be played and includes any place where a fee is charged, which is directly or indirectly conditioned upon or related to the playing of the game of billiards. 
(Prior code § 21A.l).  
5.36.020 - Copy of chapter to be posted in billiard rooms. 
A copy of this chapter shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the premises where the billiard room is conducted. 
(Prior code § 21A.2.).  
5.36.030 - Hours of operation. 
No person shall operate a billiard room between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m., or permit or allow any person to remain in any billiard room between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. This section, however, shall not be construed to prevent regular employees from performing necessary work within the premises. 
(Prior code § 21A.3).  
5.36.040 - Restrictions on attendance of minors. 
A.  No person under the age of eighteen years shall be in, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room, unless accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
B.  No person having charge or control of any billiard room shall permit or allow any such person under the age of eighteen to be in, remain in, enter or visit any such billiard room, unless such minor person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
C.  No person shall represent himself to have reached the age of eighteen years in order to obtain admission to such billiard room or to be permitted to remain therein when such person in fact is under eighteen years of age. 
(Prior code § 21A.4)  
5.36.050 - Family billiard rooms. 
The provisions of Sections 5.36.010 through 5.36.04 shall not apply to a family billiard room, subject to each and all of the following conditions: 
A.  The applicant for a permit, or a permittee, shall apply in writing to the chief of police for permission to allow minors in such billiard room, and agree to comply with the following additional roles and regulations applicable to such billiard room: 
1.  No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be sold, consumed, or possessed by any person on the premises of the billiard room or on any other premises having access (other than by means of a public street) to the premises of the billiard room. 
2.  No gambling, betting or wagering of any kind shall be suffered, allowed or permitted on the premises of the billiard room. 
3.  No profanity of any kind shall be used, suffered, allowed or permitted on the premises of the billiard room. 
4.  The curfew hours for minors shall be strictly observed and enforced on the premises of the billiard room. 
5.  The owners, managers and operators, and each of them, of the billiard room, shall be strictly responsible for the enforcement of all rules and regulations, and shall not permit any person violating any rule or regulation to remain in such billiard room, and shall not permit any habitual violator to enter such billiard room. 
6.  At least four signs shall be posted and maintained at conspicuous places in and about the billiard room, printed in bald one-inch high letters placed on a contrasting background, and setting forth the substance of the rules and regulations of this section. 
B.  The chief of police, after investigation, and after determining that the premises of the billiard room are suitable for minors, may endorse the permit issued under this chapter as follows: "Minors allowed." 
C.  Whenever a permit has been endorsed, as provided in subsection B, the permit may be suspended or revoked for the violation of the rules and regulations, 
(Prior code § 21A.5).  
5.36.060 - Gambling prohibited. 
No owner, proprietor, manager or employee of any billiard room shall permit the use of a pea-ball or dice, or the playing of games of chance in such billiard room, or give any checks or tokens which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. No paraphernalia for playing pea-ball, dice or any other betting game will be allowed in any billiard room. 
(Prior code § 21A.6)  
5.36.070 - Manner of construction. 
A billiard room operating under the provisions of this chapter shall be so constructed and maintained that a clear and unobstructed view of the entire interior thereof may at all times be had from any entrance to such room. Billiard rooms must provide a minimum general illumination of fifty foot candles in addition to any special lights over the table. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures where the public congregates shall be permitted. This provision, however, shall not be construed to include the maintenance of washrooms or toilet rooms for proper purposes or the maintenance of closets for storing purposes exclusively. All billiard rooms shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 21A.7).  
5.36.080 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall conduct, manage, operate or maintain a billiard room in the city without having first obtained a permit from the city so to do in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2lA.8).  
5.36.090 - Permit—Posting and display. 
The permit rewired in the preceding section shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the premises where such billiard room is located. 
(Prior code § 21A.9).  
5.36.100 - Permit—Application—Fee. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain the permit shall file a verified application therefor with the chief of police. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
1.  Name, age and residence address of the applicant, if a natural person; 
2.  If a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of all of its officers, together with, their respective addresses; 
3.  If a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of partners, or persons comprising the association, together with their respective addresses; 
4.  Name, age and residence address of the person who is to manage the billiard room, if other than applicant; 
5.  The address at which the billiard room is to be conducted; 
6.  A statement as to whether or not an application for similar permit has been refused, suspended or cancelled by this or any other public agency in the state and, if so, a full statement of the reason therefor. 
B.  At the time of filing such an application, the applicant or person making application upon behalf of any arm or corporation, and the person who is to manage the billiard room, if other than applicant, shall be photographed and fingerprinted and such photographs and fingerprints shall be made a part of the application provided for in this chapter. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of five dollars to defray the expense of acting upon such application. Such fee shall be in addition to any permit or license fee which is now or may hereafter be required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 21A.l0).  
5.36.110 - Permit—Issuance and denial. 
The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made. After investigation, the chief of police shall issue a permit, which shall be effective for a period of one year from date of issuance, unless he finds that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to conduct a billiard room or that the conduct of such billiard room at the location specified in the application would be detrimental to the public peace, morals, health or safety, in which event he shall deny the application; provided, that any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk within five days from the date of native of such action. The decision of the city council after a public hearing on the appeal, shall be final. No permit shall be issued until the permit fee has been paid. 
(Prior code § 21A.11).  
5.36.120 - Permit—Renewal. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed from year to year upon application, as presently required by this code. If not made within thirty days of expiration of this permit, the permit shall be null and void and not renewable. A fee of five dollars shall be charged for any application for a change of location of the billiard room for which a permit has been granted. 
(Prior code § 21A.12).  
5.36.130 - Permit—Suspension and revocation. 
Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police when it shall appear that the billiard room for which the permit was granted is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any statute of the state or ordinance of the city or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, or that the person conducting the billiard room is of an unfit character to conduct the same or the purpose for which the permit has been issued is being used to the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose wholly foreign to that for which the permit was issued. 
(Prior code § 21A.13).  
5.36.140 - Permit—Revocation—Hearing. 
A permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not by virtue of this section, be revoked, cancelled or suspended until a public hearing has been had by the chief of police relative to so doing. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, cancelling or suspending such permit. 
(Prior code § 21A.14 (part)).  
5.36.150 - Permit—Revocation—Notice. 
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by a deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address appearing upon the application for such permit; provided, that any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk within five days of the date of the notice of such action. The decision of the city council, after a public hearing on such appeal, shall be final. 
(Prior code § 21A.14 (part)).  
5.36.160 - Permit—Transferability. 
No permit granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner transferred or assigned, nor shall it authorize any person other than is therein mentioned or named, to carry on the billiard room for which the permit was granted. 
(Prior code § 21A.15).  
Chapter 5.40 - PRIVATE PATROL 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Patrol service defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "patrol service" means any service or system which furnishes to members, subscribers or private individuals or residents, for a consideration, any patrolman, guard or watchman, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol or guard any district, or to act to salvage, guard to protect any property from theft, damage, fire or other hazard. 
(Prior code § 21.3).  
5.40.020 - Certificate of public convenience and necessity required. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, or otherwise, to engage in the business of operating a private patrol service or to engage in employment as a patrolman of such private patrol service, unless there has been issued to such person engaged in such business a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the city council. 
(Prior code § 21.4).  
5.40.030 - Application to council—Information to be shown. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a private patrol service shall make an application in writing for a certificate of public convenience and necessity addressed to the city council, signed personally by each individual possessing any interest in the proposed private patrol service. The application shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The business or occupation for the five years last past of each person signing the application, giving the name and address of each employer, the date of the commencement and termination of employment and the nature of the services performed by each such person; 
B.  The territory of the city in which it is desired to operate the proposed private patrol service; 
C.  The hours during which it is proposed to patrol such territory or render guard or watchman service; 
D.  The address of the principal place of business of the applicant, or the proposed principal place of business and all existing or proposed branch offices; 
E.  Whether or not the applicant holds a license issued by the state under the provisions of the Private Investigator and Adjuster Act. 
F.  Whether any person signing the application has ever been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony, or a charge involving moral turpitude, at any time, or arrested for any reason within the five years last past, giving full details; 
G.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the resolution or minutes authorizing the application. 
(Prior code § 21.5).  
5.40.040 - Investigation of application—Report to council. 
The city clerk shall, upon receipt of the application referred to in the preceding section, forward it to the city manager, who shall cause an investigation to be made concerning the conditions prevailing within the district designated in any such application, as to whether such district is already supplied with sufficient patrol service, guard or watchman. The city manager shall make a further investigation as to the truthfulness of the facts set forth in the application and the reputation, character, competency and integrity of each person signing the application. Upon the completion of such investigation the city manager shall file a written report with the city clerk for presentation to the city council setting forth the results of the investigation and recommending approval or disapproval of the application. 
(Prior code § 21.6).  
5.40.050 - Hearing on application by council. 
Upon receipt of the written report, referred to in the preceding section, the city council shall forthwith set the application for public hearing before the council at a date not less than ten days after its receipt by the council. The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be published at least one time in the official newspaper of the city, which publication must be at least three days prior to the aforesaid public hearing. Any person, including the applicant, may appear at the public hearing and state his views as to the application to the city council. Such public hearing may be continued over from time to time as the circumstances may require. 
(Prior code § 21.7).  
5.40.060 - Application not granted until after resolution. 
No certificate of public convenience or necessity shall be granted until the council, after the public hearing, declares by resolution that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed private patrol service. 
(Prior code 21.8).  
5.40.070 - Granting of certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
Having declared that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed private patrol service, the city council shall grant a certificate of public convenience and necessity to the person applying therefor, who in its opinion is entitled thereto. 
(Prior code § 21.9).  
5.40.080 - Sale, assignment or transfer of certificate. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity, granted under this chapter, shall be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person, without the prior consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 21.10).  
5.40.090 - Grounds for refusal to issue certificate. 
The city council may refuse to issue a certificate of public convenience and necessity if it finds: 
A.  Former Convictions. That any person signing the application or who has a financial or other interest in the proposed private patrol service has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
B.  Reputation for Honesty. That any person signing the application or who has a financial or other interest in the proposed private patrol service does not have a good reputation for honesty, character, integrity or sobriety, or is not a responsible person; 
C.  Other Reasons. For any reason within the discretion of the council that a private patrol system is not needed within the territory set forth in the application or for any other reason would not comfort with the public welfare. 
(Prior code § 21.11).  
5.40.100 - State license prerequisite to issuance of certificate. 
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued to any person who does not possess a valid and existing private investigator or private patrol operator's license issued by the state under the provisions of the Private Investigator and Adjuster Act. 
(Prior code § 21.12).  
5.40.110 - Supervision and regulation by chief of police. 
Every person lawfully engaged under this chapter in the business of private patrol service, or his agents, servants or employees, shall be subject to the general supervision of the chief of police of the city and such regulations as the latter may prescribe to implement this chapter. In the event that regulations under this section are prescribed which are claimed to be oppressive by the person engaged in the business of private patrol service, an appeal in writing may be filed with the city manager. If the city manager concurs in whole or in part with the regulations as set down by the chief of police, an appeal in writing may be had to the city council. 
(Prior code § 21.13).  
5.40.120 - City license required. 
A.  Every person who under this chapter has been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity to engage in a private patrol service shall pay a quarterly business license fee to the city. 
B.  The procedure for payment of such fee shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.04, relative to licenses. 
(Prior code § 21.14).  
5.40.130 - Filing certificate of valid bond. 
Every person who under this chapter has been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity to engage in a private patrol service in this city shall file, with the city clerk every six months thereafter, a written statement, in duplicate, under penalty of perjury, certifying that said person has a valid bond filed with, and a valid license issued by the Bureau of Private Investigators and Adjusters of the state as required by Chapter 11 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 21.14.1).  
5.40.140 - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
A.  The business of private patrol service regulated by this chapter, is one which is affected with the public interest and therefore requires the certificate of public convenience and necessity and other regulations in this chapter set forth. Such business is one requiring honesty, trustworthiness, dependability, proper conduct and loyalty between it and the public it serves. The business is under the general supervision of the chief of police of the city. If such honesty, trustworthiness, dependability, proper conduct and loyalty as above indicated are not maintained in the highest degree, it is the declared position of the city council that the public interest, the city government and its police department are adversely affected. This is the intent and policy of the city council in enacting this section. 
B.  The city council may suspend or revoke the permit to engage in such business if in the judgment of the city council any person engaged in the business under the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Violates, or causes or permits to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any ordinance, state or federal law, or suspends or discontinues service; 
2.  In any manner or by any means, directly or indirectly, harasses, annoys, molests, bothers or interfere with any other person lawfully engaged in such business; 
3.  Makes untrue or unfounded statements or reports concerning any other person lawfully engaged in such business; 
4.  Becomes involved in any altercations of any kind with any other person lawfully engaged in such business; 
5.  Engages in any conduct which may bring discredit upon the city or its police department; 
6.  Commits any act which is a ground for refusal to issue a certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
(Prior code § 21.15).  
Chapter 5.44 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2451, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 2015, amended Ch. 5.44 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.44, §§ 5.44.010—5.44.420, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 15.200—15.229; Ord. 1150, § 1, adopted 1975; Ord. 1534, § 6, adopted 1984; Ord. 2093, § 1—3, adopted 2002; Ord. 2316, §§ 1—11, adopted 2008; and Ord. No. 2343, § 13, adopted Oct. 19, 2009. 
 
5.44.050 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Merced "Massage Establishments Ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.010 - Findings and Purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The city is authorized to regulate massage establishments pursuant to Government Code Section 51030 et seq., Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and Section 200 of the City of Merced Charter. 
B.  The city wishes both to recognize the practice of massage as a valid professional field and to discourage unlawful activity that otherwise may become associated with some massage establishments. 
C.  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.015 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Sections 5.44.020 to 5.44.090. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.020 - Massage or bodywork techniques. 
"Massage techniques" and "bodywork techniques" mean any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of another human body with the use of the hands, arms, or other portions of the body, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.030 - Massage/bodywork establishment and massage establishment. 
"Massage/bodywork establishment" and "massage establishment" mean any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any of the massage techniques and bodywork techniques described in Section 5.44.020 for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.040 - On-site therapy. 
"On-site therapy" means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar preparations, when the client remains fully clothed and at a location other than a massage/bodywork establishment, and is limited to business offices, sports complexes, convention centers, and public events. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.050 - Outcall massage. 
"Outcall massage" means the engaging in or carrying on of massage techniques or bodywork techniques for a fee or consideration at a location other than at a duly licensed massage/bodywork establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.060 - Masseur or masseuse—Massage/bodywork practitioner. 
"Masseur or masseuse-massage/bodywork practitioner" and "massage/bodywork practitioner" mean any natural person, other than a medical practitioner licensed by the State of California, who practices or administers any massage technique or bodywork technique in exchange for a fee, income, or anything of any value whatsoever within the City of Merced unless otherwise excepted. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.070 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, copartnership, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.080 - Health officer. 
"Health officer" means that person designated by the City of Merced as health officer or the authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.090 - Bona fide nonprofit club. 
"Bona fide nonprofit club" means any fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent or any other nonprofit organization having a regular membership association primarily for mutual social, mental, political and civic welfare to which admission is limited to the members and guests and revenue accruing therefrom is to be used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of said organization and which organization or agency is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Laws of the United States as a bona fide fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent, or nonprofit organization and in which massage techniques are provided incidental to its primary operation. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.100 - Permit required. 
A.  Except as provided by Section 5.44.290 of this chapter, no person shall perform massage or bodywork techniques for a fee or any other consideration at a location outside a massage establishment as defined in this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city the operation of a massage establishment as defined in this chapter without first having obtained a permit from the city after approval by the requisite city officers. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code for any person to act as a masseur, masseuse, massage/bodywork practitioner or to take any other position of employment involving the performance of massages with a massage establishment, without having a valid and active certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
D.  Notwithstanding any language in Section 5.44.100(C) to the contrary, if a person had a valid, unexpired massage technician permit from the City of Merced as of January 1, 2016, he or she may continue to act as a masseur, masseuse, massage/bodywork practitioner or take any other position of employment involving the performance of massages with a massage establishment as long as the massage technician permit from the City of Merced remains in full force and effect. An individual who had an unexpired massage technician permit from the City of Merced as of January 1, 2016, and who continues to meet all the requirements for the massage technician permit that existed as of January 1, 2016, shall be eligible to annually renew the massage technician permit upon the payment of the necessary fees; provided, however, that on and before January 1, 2026, all such individuals must have a valid and active certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist in order to continue to provide massage services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.110 - Application fee—Operator. 
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the finance officer upon a form provided and shall pay a filing fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) which shall not be refundable. "Applicant" includes an individual owner, managing partner or corporate manager. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.120 - Application—Massage establishment. 
A.  An application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered and the proposed place of business and facilities therefor. 
B.  If the applicant is a natural person who does not have a valid certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist, then the application shall include the following information regarding that person: 
1.  The name and residence address including any other names by which the applicant has been known; 
2.  The two (2) previous residence addresses immediately prior to the present residence address of the applicant; 
3.  Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
4.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
5.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
6.  Two (2) recent portrait photographs of the applicant, which photographs shall not exceed two (2) inches square in size and shall be full front views of the face and head only; 
7.  The applicant's social security number and driver's license number, if any; 
8.  The massage or similar business license or permit history of the applicant; whether such person has previously operated in this or another city or state under license or permit; whether such person has had such license or permit revoked or suspended and the reason therefor; and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
9.  Whether the applicant has ever been arrested for or convicted of: 
i.  An offense involving conduct which required registration as a sex offender pursuant to Penal Code Section 290, 
ii.  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony, 
iii.  An offense involving sexual misconduct with children, 
iv.  An offense as defined in California Penal Code Sections 220, 261, 266, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 311,314,315,316,318, 647 subdivision (a), 647 subdivision (b) or 647 subdivision (d); 
v.  Conspiracy to violate any of the aforesaid sections of the California Penal Code, or 
vi.  The commission of the equivalent of any of the aforesaid crimes in a jurisdiction outside the State of California; 
10.  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement must be made giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution; 
11.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; 
12.  The application shall be referred to the chief of police or his or her designee who shall have the right to confirm the identity of the applicant by taking fingerprints and additional photographs and shall have the right to confirm the criminal record of the applicant. 
C.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation together with the names and addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. The information specified in subsection (B) shall be provided for each officer, director, stockholder owning ten (10) percent or more of the stock and/or partner who does not currently have a valid certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
D.  If the massage establishment is proposed to be located at a location that is not owned or leased by the applicant, then the application shall state the name of the person that owns property and, if not the same as the property owner, the name of the person that is leasing or will be leasing the property to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.130 - Verification. 
Every application for a permit under this article shall be verified by affidavit or by declaration, or certification under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.140 - Referral to other departments. 
Copies of an application for a massage establishment permit shall be referred to the building official, the fire chief, the health officer, the planning manager and the chief of police. These persons or their designated representative shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written recommendations to the finance officer concerning compliance with the codes that they administer. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.150 - Issuance, refusal, revocation or suspension of permit. 
The finance officer or his or her designee shall issue or renew the massage establishment permit after the application has been reviewed and approved, except that for good cause the finance officer may refuse, revoke or suspend a permit for a massage establishment, with the grounds for action to be set forth in writing and delivered to the applicant or permittee: 
A.  That the operation as proposed by the applicant if permitted will not or does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, ordinances relating to building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire protection, and other applicable codes which the city has a responsibility to administer including the regulations adopted by the health officer; 
B.  That the applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been arrested or convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Subsection 5.44.120(B)(9) or convicted of an offense in another jurisdiction that is equivalent to the statutorily defined elements of the offenses listed in Subsection 5.44.120(B)(9); 
C.  A permit may be issued to any person arrested or convicted of any of the crimes described if such arrest or conviction occurred more than seven (7) years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony arrests or convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor arrests or convictions for crimes mentioned in Subsection 5.44.120(B)(9); 
D.  That the applicant has been licensed or registered in any state as a prostitute; 
E.  In any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where the permittee or any employee including a masseur or a masseuse is engaged in any conduct at a massage establishment which violates any federal, state or local law or ordinances; 
F.  In any case where the permittee of a massage establishment has actual or constructive knowledge of any violation of any state or local law or ordinances at the massage establishment; 
G.  In any case where such permittee or any other person acting on the permittee's behalf refuses to allow any duly authorized building inspector, police officer, fire inspector, health officer, or their designated representative to inspect the premises or the operations therein to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Merced Municipal Code; or 
H.  Upon the recommendation of the health officer that such business is being managed, conducted, or maintained without regard for the public health, or for the health of patrons or customers, or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. 
Any refusal to issue a permit, renew a permit, suspend a permit or revoke a permit under the provisions of this section is appealable to the city council. Any person aggrieved by said action shall file written notice of such appeal with the city clerk and pay designated fee no later than ten (10) days after the action by the finance officer or his or her designee. Such matters shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council that is at least ten (10) days after the filing of the appeal, at which time the city council shall hear and receive written and oral evidence upon all matters involved. The decision of the city council shall be final upon all parties concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.160 - Term of permit. 
Permits issued under the provisions of Section 5.44.120 shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually. The fee for the issuance and renewal of the permit shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.170 - Sale, transfer, or change of location. 
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the massage establishment permit therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three (3) months, to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit. No such permittee shall operate under any name or conduct the business under any designation or at any location not specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.180 - Massage establishment—Generally. 
A.  No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued until an inspection has been made by a building inspector, fire chief, health officer and chief of police of the city or their designated representative. 
B.  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made in accordance with the state and city building codes. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with said codes. 
C.  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. 
D.  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either room or the vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
E.  All portions of massage establishments shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation as approved by the health officer. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the total required window area shall be able to be opened. 
F.  All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the city electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.190 - Massage establishment—Hours. 
No person shall conduct or operate a massage establishment or service between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. of the next day. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.200 - Outcall prohibition. 
Outcall massage/bodywork shall not be performed unless authorized in writing by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the State of California. Violation of this section shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.210 - Locations—Prohibited. 
Outcall massage or on site therapy shall not be conducted in the following locations: 
A.  A hotel/motel room or any other similar location used primarily for transitory habitation purposes. 
B.  The residence of the outcall or on-site massage/bodywork practitioner. 
C.  A private residence, apartment, or similar living facility. 
D.  Any location not otherwise specifically authorized by this chapter or by Title 20 of this code. 
E.  Violation of this section shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.220 - Operating requirements. 
A.  Each person providing massage or bodywork techniques at a massage establishment shall display at that establishment his or her original certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. If that person has an unexpired valid massage technician permit from the City of Merced instead of a certificate from the State of California, then that permit shall be displayed. 
B.  Upon the request from a member of law enforcement, each person providing massage or bodywork techniques at a massage establishment shall provide his or her full name and certificate number from the State of California or a copy of the unexpired massage technician permit from the City of Merced as a masseur or masseuse-massage/bodywork practitioner. 
C.  Every portion of a massage establishment shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
D.  Each massage establishment shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved and sanitary manner. Each massage table shall be provided with clean sheets and towels prior to each use. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linen and paper towels. 
E.  Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms located at a massage establishment shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and shower compartments shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant after each use. 
F.  No massage establishment, whether located in any building originally constructed for residential or sleeping purposes or not, shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. 
G.  Each massage establishment and its employees and independent contractors shall fully comply with the requirements of the Massage Therapy Act (California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.). 
H.  Any person operating a massage establishment shall be responsible for the activities that occur at the massage establishment, including those performed by any employee and/or independent contractor working at the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.230 - Off-premises massage/bodywork. 
No person shall perform or administer massage or bodywork techniques as either on-site therapy or outcall massage/bodywork, as those terms are defined herein, for money or other consideration, without obtaining a valid certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist in conjunction with a valid City of Merced business license. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.240 - Register and certificate numbers. 
The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of all persons working on the premises and their state certificate numbers as either a massage practitioner or massage therapist. If an employee or individual providing massage or bodywork services on the premises has an unexpired valid massage technician permit from the City of Merced instead of a certificate from the State of California, then the permit number shall be provided upon request. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any city police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.250 - Persons employed under age eighteen not permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.260 - Notices. 
Every permittee of a massage establishment shall post the following signs in a conspicuous place printed in bold letters not less than one (1) inch in height: 
A.  A statement of the rates to be charged for all massage services to be performed. No sum shall be charged for such massage services greater than that shown on the rate card; 
B.  A statement that the premises are subject to inspection without notice by authorized officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.270 - Inspection. 
The police department, building inspector and the health officer shall from time to time make an inspection of each massage establishment in the city for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.280 - Persons without certificates not allowed. 
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage establishment to ensure that each person employed has a valid certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist or an unexpired massage technician permit from the City of Merced. Persons without such valid certificates or unexpired permits shall not provide massage or bodywork techniques at a massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.290 - Exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, hospices, retirement or rest homes, community care facilities, and the like, or to any person holding a valid certificate, that has not been revoked or suspended, to practice the healing arts, chiropractic, or physical therapy under the laws of the state when lawfully carrying out their particular profession, or persons working under the direction of any persons in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to barbers or cosmetologists when lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid license or certificate of registration, that has not been revoked or suspended, issued by the State of California. 
B.  Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletes or athletic teams while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes; and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic events such as road races, track meets, triathlons, biathlons or similar single occurrence athletic or recreational events. 
C.  A bona fide nonprofit club or organization as defined in Section 5.44.100 or its employees shall be required to obtain a permit, and must conform to all applicable building, health, fire and zoning laws and regulations of the city. The fees for the permits may be waived by the finance officer or his or her designee. 
D.  On-site therapy is allowed if performed by an individual with a certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist or a valid massage technician permit from the City of Merced. 
E.  Students at an educational facility deemed by the California Massage Therapy Council to be an approved school shall be allowed to provide massage techniques and bodywork techniques at the campus or facilities at which they are receiving their education; provided, however, that such students shall not provide massage techniques or bodywork techniques at a massage establishment or as an outcall massage until they have obtained a certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.300 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No massage establishment or any employee thereof shall sell, serve, furnish, keep or possess any alcoholic beverage on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.310 - Violation—Penalty—Person with valid certificate or permit. 
Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs any person who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked certificate from the State of California as a massage practitioner or massage therapist or an unexpired massage technician permit from the City of Merced or who allows such a person to practice within such a place of business is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
5.44.320 - Violation—Penalty—Generally. 
Every person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction such person shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2451, § 1, 1-4-2016)  
Chapter 5.48 - DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct a dance on city property, or at any place in the city where an admission is charged, or to permit or allow dancing in any place of business conducted by him within the city, without first securing a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1317 § 2, 1980: prior code § 17.3A).  
5.48.020 - Application for permit. 
Every person desiring to conduct a dance requiring a permit as provided in Section 5.48.010 shall first present a written application to the police department for such permit, said application or applications, to be upon a printed form provided by the city. Permits for the conducting of a dance shall be limited to the conduct of one dance for each application, and permits for the permission of dancing in places of business may be granted to continue until revoked by action of the city council. 
(Ord. 1317 § 3, 1980: prior code § 17.3B).  
5.48.030 - Contents of permit. 
All permits for dancing shall be in writing and issued by the police department after previous approval of the fire department and building department and shall set forth, among other things, the following: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the permit is granted; 
B.  The location of the premises upon which such dance or dancing is to be conducted or permitted; 
C.  That all dancing and music shall cease at the hour of one thirty a.m.; 
D.  That no person under the age of twenty-one years shall be permitted upon or within the premises where, and during the time when, such dance or dancing is conducted, if any spirituous liquor is sold, served or given away upon such premises; 
E.  Such other terms, conditions and restrictions as may in the discretion of the city departments seem proper under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 1317 § 4, 1980: prior code § 17.3C).  
5.48.040 - Refusal or revocation of permit. 
Failure to comply with any law, rule or regulation applicable to dances, or the conduct thereof, or the place or building in which they are conducted, shall be grounds to refuse any permit applied for, or grounds to revoke any such permit and, in such circumstances, the police department shall immediately revoke said permit. The applicant or permit holder in such case shall have the right to appeal said revocation to the city council at its next meeting. 
(Ord. 1317 § 5, 1980: prior code § 17.3D).  
5.48.050 - Permit fee. 
A fee of ten dollars shall be paid in advance for each event covered by the permit. Notwithstanding the above, no fee shall be required for a nonprofit or charitable organization. 
(Ord. 1317 § 6, 1980: prior code § 17.3E).  
Chapter 5.50 - TAX ON CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
5.50.010 - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  "Residential unit" is a structure or part thereof designed for residential use. 
B.  "Construction" includes construction of new units as well as alteration to existing units which would increase the square footage of the unit. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.020 - Imposition of tax—Rate—Due date—Computation—Delinquency. 
A.  Imposition—Rate. A business license tax is hereby imposed solely for revenue purposes, in addition to any other business license tax imposed in this title, upon every person transacting and carrying on the business of the construction of a residential unit or units in the city. The rate of such tax shall be ninety-one cents for each square foot of residential construction. 
B.  Due date—Computation. The amount of the tax shall be determined and paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for the construction applied for. 
(Ord. 1772 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1761 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1728 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1699 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1668 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1647 § 1, 1987: Ord.1607 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.025 - Imposition of tax—Rate—Due date—Computation—Delinquency—Alternate provisions. 
If the tax imposed by Section 1 of Ord. 1668 as codified in Section 5.50.024 is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, then such decision shall revive Section 5.50.020 as it read prior to the effective date of Ordinance 1668 
(Ord. l668, 1987: Ord. 1647 § 2, 1987).  
5.50.030 - Exceptions. 
The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  The construction of a residential unit which is equal or smaller in size for a unit being removed from the same parcel of land; 
B.  The construction of any building or unit by a bank, including national banking associations; 
C.  The construction of a building by an "insurer," as that term is defined in Article XIII, Section 14-4/5, of the California Constitution; 
D.  The construction of a building on property which qualifies for tax exemption under Sections 206, 207, and 214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, State of California, if the applicant for the building permit indicates that the building when constructed an the property shall be used for the same purposes for which said property is granted exemption. 
E.  The construction of a building by the federal or state government or any political subdivision of the state. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.040 - Credit against tax. 
In the event that a residential unit is constructed upon land covered by an agreement with the city and such agreement provides for the payment of a cost revenue impact fee (CRIS fee) payable at the time of the issuance of the building permit and such fee is paid pursuant to the terms of such agreement, then the fee so paid shall be credited toward the payment of the tax herein provided. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.050 - Tax liability and enforcement. 
The tax shall be due from the person by whom a residential unit is constructed. The finance officer or his designee shall collect the tax as set forth in Section 5.50.020 above. The amount due shall constitute a debt payable to the city, and an appropriate city official may bring action in the name of the city for the collection of such debt. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.060 - Construction or occupancy without permit. 
Should a person construct a residential unit without having obtained a building permit therefor and/or without having paid the tax required by this chapter, if the unit is not abated by the city, the tax imposed by this chapter shall become immediately due and payable by the person originally liable for such tax, his successors or assigns. In addition to such tax, there shall be added a penalty of twenty-five percent of the tax, which shall become immediately payable in the same manner as the tax. The tax and penalty shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid. No occupancy permit may be issued for, and it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or offer for occupancy a residential unit in the city unless the tax imposed upon the construction of such unit by this chapter is paid. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.070 - Refunds. 
The tax paid to the city under this chapter for a unit which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and a showing to the satisfaction of the finance officer that the unit has not been constructed or construction begun and that the building permit issued for the unit is cancelled or surrendered. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
5.50.080 - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of the tax received pursuant to Section 5.50.020 shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. 1569 § 2 (part), 1985).  
Chapter 5.52 - MOTION PICTURE FILMING 
Sections: 
 
5.52.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows, or commercials without first applying for and receiving a permit from the finance officer. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.020 - Permit—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest, nor shall it apply to the filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private family use. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.030 - Permit—Application. 
Application for a permit shall be made to the finance officer at least three working days in advance upon forms to be supplied to the applicant for that purpose. The application shall contain: 
A.  The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted; 
B.  The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire; 
C.  A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity; 
D.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity; 
E.  The exact number of personnel to be involved; 
F.  Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and 
G.  The exact amount and type of vehicles and equipment to be involved 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.040 - License fees and costs. 
No fees are required for the permit; however, the production company shall reimburse the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, fire, traffic) for the purpose of assisting the production. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.050 - Liability insurance. 
A certificate of insurance shall be required in the sum of one million dollars naming the city, its officers, employees and agents as a coinsured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths and property damage before a permit is issued. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days' written notice to the city. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.060 - Worker's compensation insurance. 
An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.070 - Hold harmless agreement. 
An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement approved by the city attorney prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.080 - Faithful performance bond. 
To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant shall be required to post a faithful performance bond or other acceptable security in the amount of one thousand dollars at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.090 - Cleanup. 
An applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.100 - Filming on private property. 
An applicant shall obtain the property owner's permission, consent and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.52.110 - Traffic control. 
For activity that would impair traffic flow in the city, an applicant must use local law enforcement personnel and comply with all traffic-control requirements deemed necessary, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  An applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic-control devices in conformance with the Manual of Traffic Controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken. 
B.  Traffic may be restricted to one twelve-foot lane of traffic and/or stopped intermittently. The period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the city. 
C.  Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior approval of the appropriate department representative. 
D.  Unless authorized by the city, camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws. 
E.  Any emergency road work or construction by city crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate department, shall have priority over filming activities. 
(Ord. 1654 § 1 (part), 1987).  
Chapter 5.54 - STREET AND SIDEWALK VENDORS 
Sections: 
 
5.54.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
A.  "Sidewalk vendor" means every person engaged in the business of selling goods, merchandise, food or drink on any sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot, park or square in the city. 
B.  "Street vendor" means every person engaged in the business of selling goods, merchandise, food or drink on any street or alley in the city. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.020 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any street vendor or sidewalk vendor to operate in the city without having first obtained a permit to do so from the city manager or his designee. Permits shall be issued if all the requirements of this chapter are met and the city manager or his designee finds that granting such permit will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or significantly contribute to traffic or other safety hazards. 
B.  All permits shall expire on December 31st of each year. Permits may be renewed on an annual basis. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.030 - Application for permit. 
Applications for permits shall be submitted to the city manager. Every application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, address, social security number, driver's license number, and date of birth of every owner and employee of the business. This information must be kept current: 
B.  The number, type, and description of vehicles, wagons or carts to be used, their desired locations (if they are to remain in one location), and whether the permit is for a street vendor or sidewalk vendor; 
C.  In addition, every street vendor and sidewalk vendor must comply with the application requirements contained in Sections 5.08.830 through 5.08.890. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.040 - Insurance. 
Every street vendor and sidewalk vendor operation shall be required to furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with coverage of five hundred thousand dollars for property damage and five hundred thousand dollars for liability or a minimum combined single limit coverage of five hundred thousand dollars naming the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured. The certificate shall provide that thirty days' written notice of cancellation will be given to the city. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.050 - Hold harmless agreement. 
Every street vendor and sidewalk vendor shall resign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability, costs, damages, or injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in any way be connected with the business. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.060 - Public property use fee. 
For the privilege of using public property for a commercial enterprise, an annual public property use fee shall be paid in advance, in the sum of fifty dollars per vehicle, wagon, cart or location. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.070 - Business license tax. 
For the business of conducting or carrying on a street vendor or sidewalk vendor operation, the license tax shall be based upon average gross receipts as specified in Section 5.08.020. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.080 - Designated location—Sidewalk vendors. 
A.  Sidewalk vendors shall only operate at a designated fixed location approved by the city manager or his designee. Pushcarts are prohibited from traveling along the sidewalks of the city. A sidewalk vendor operation shall not be conducted in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of any sidewalk nor shall it obstruct the free passage into or from any business, office or other establishment. 
B.  Public safety shall be the principal factor considered when determining allowable locations. In addition, a designated location shall not be: 
1.  Within ten feet of a perpendicular line drawn from the curb to a doorway or entry opening of a building; 
2.  Within twenty feet of any driveway; 
3.  Within twenty feet of any crosswalk; 
4.  Within twenty feet of the intersection of property lines of property an a street corner; 
5.  Within twenty feet of an alley approach; 
6.  Within five hundred feet of another sidewalk vendor: 
7.  Within fifty feet of the entrance to any business which has as its primary source of income the sale of food and drink; 
8.  Within any residentially zoned district (unless within a park); 
9.  Within three hundred feet of any park during the time of operation of any concessionaire under contract with the city. 
C.  The total number of sidewalk vendors in a park shall be limited to one, except that a park over three acres shall be limited to three sidewalk vendors. 
D.  In the event that applications are received for more than the allowed total number of vendors within a given area, the first completed application shall be given preference if received after January 1st of a given year, otherwise applicants shall be chosen by lot each January for a given area. 
E.  No wagon or cart shall remain in its designated location overnight. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.090 - Stopping and parking—Street vendors. 
A.  Street vendors may use any street or alley in the city so long as they stop or park only next to the curb in a permitted parking space and only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, street vendors shall not stop or park adjacent to any school between the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m. on any school day; or adjacent to any church on Sunday prior to twelve noon; or adjacent to any hospital; or adjacent to any park during the time of operation of any concessionaire under contract with the city. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.100 - Hours of operation. 
Street vendors and sidewalk vendors shall only operate between the hours of ten a.m. and eight p.m. daily. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.110 - Products sold. 
Street vendors and sidewalk vendors shall only sell food and nonalcoholic drinks. The sale of goods and/or merchandise is prohibited. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.120 - Shouting wares. 
Sidewalk vendors shall not shout or call out their wares, nor ring bells, play music or produce any forms of electronic or mechanical sounds to attract customers. Street vendors shall not shout or call out their wares. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.130 - Sidewalk vendor carts. 
Sidewalk vendor carts shall not be wider than five feet nor longer than ten feet. Any power used shall be contained wholly within the cart. A trash receptacle shall be provided and the vendor shall keep the area around the cart free of all garbage, litter and trash. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.140 - Temporary relocation. 
The city reserves the right to temporarily relocate or modify a designated location of a sidewalk vendor to the extent necessary for any city-sponsored event or for any health and safety reasons. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.150 - Exemptions. 
Except for Sections 5.54.050 and 5.54.080A, this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Persons who have a fixed place of business on private property who conduct a sale on public property not more than six days per year; 
B.  Persons who have obtained an exclusive use permit for a park or portion thereof pursuant to Chapter 14.08 of this code; 
C.  Nonprofit, charitable organizations which conduct a sale on public property not more than six days per year; 
D.  Persons who have concession agreements with the city; 
E.  Persons who conduct a sale on public property at an event that is sponsored by the city; 
F.  Organizations conducting sales on public property for the purpose of raising funds to be donated to the city. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.160 - Revocation of permit. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any federal, state, county or local health regulation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. Also, a permit may be revoked if not used during a period of sixty consecutive days. In addition, any conduct of a street vendor or sidewalk vendor which is a threat to public health and safety shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit. 
B.  Notice of a revocation hearing before the city manager shall be given to the street vendor or sidewalk vendor by mail at least five days before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the street vendor or sidewalk vendor may show cause why such permit should not be revoked. The city manager shall mail his determination on the revocation to the street vendor or sidewalk vendor within five days after the hearing. 
(Ord. 1677 § 1 (part), 1987).  
5.54.170 - Appeal. 
Any decision by the city manager to issue, revoke or deny a permit may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten days of the mailing of the city manager's decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting provided that the appeal is received at least seven days before the meeting date. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1677 § (part), 1987).  
Chapter 5.56 - PAINTING OF CURBS 
Sections: 
 
5.56.010 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful to paint house numbers on curbs within the city without obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager or his designee. 
B.  Permits shall be issued if all requirements of the chapter are met and the city manager or his designee finds that granting such permit will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or significantly contribute to traffic or other safety hazards. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.020 - Application for permit. 
Applications for permits shall be submitted to the finance department. Every application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, address, social security number, driver's license number, and date of birth of every owner and employee of the business. This information must be kept current. 
B.  A plan detailing the method to be used by the permittee to solicit and collect donations and a statement that the plan complies with regulations thereon promulgated by the city manager. 
C.  In addition, every applicant must comply with the application requirements contained in Sections 5.08.830 through 5.08.890. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.030 - Insurance. 
Every permittee shall be required to furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with coverage of five hundred thousand dollars for property damage and five hundred thousand dollars for liability or a minimum combined single limit coverage of five hundred thousand dollars naming the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured. The certificate shall provide that thirty days' written notice of cancellation be given to the city. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.040 - Hold harmless agreement. 
Every permittee shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability, cost, or injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in any way be connected with the business. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.050 - Public property use fee. 
For the privilege of using public property for a commercial enterprise, an annual public property use fee shall be paid in advance, in the sum of fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.060 - Business license tax. 
The business license tax to be paid by each permittee shall be based upon average gross receipts as specified in Section 5.08.020. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.070 - Revocation of permit. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any federal, state, county or local regulation shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
B.  Falsification of the application for a permit shall be grounds for revocation. 
C.  If from the investigation of the police chief pursuant to Section 5.8.880 or from fingerprint records (Section 5.08.870) it is determined that the applicant's character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, such determination shall be grounds for revocation. 
D.  Notice of a revocation hearing before the city manager shall be given to the permittee by mail at least five days before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may show cause why such permit should not be revoked. The city manager shall mail his determination on the revocation to the permittee within five days after the hearing. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
5.56.080 - Appeal 
Any decision by the city manager to issue, revoke or deny a permit may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten (10) days of the mailing of the city manager's decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting provided that the appeal is received at least seven days before the meeting date. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1780 § 1 (part), 1991).  
Chapter 5.58 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES 
Sections:  
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
5.58.010 - Legislative purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate adult oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  Adult entertainment businesses. "Adult entertainment businesses" means any one of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade. The term "adult arcade," as used in this chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. The term "adult bookstore," as used in this chapter, is an establishment that has thirty (30) percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret. The term "adult cabaret," as used in this chapter, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which regularly features live performances thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel. The term "adult hotel/motel," as used in this chapter, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six (b) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period. 
5.  Adult motion picture theater. The term "adult motion picture theater," as used in this chapter, is a business establishment where for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
6.  Adult theater. The term "adult theater," as used in this chapter, means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration features live performances thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
7.  Escort bureau. The term "escort bureau," as used in this chapter, means a business which, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward furnishes or offers to furnish escorts. 
8.  Modeling studio. The term "modeling studio," as used in this chapter, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purpose of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. "Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities." 
B.  Adult entertainment business operator. "Adult entertainment business operator" (hereinafter "operator") means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult entertainment business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises hereof. 
C.  Applicant. A person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an "adult entertainment business." 
D.  Bar. For the purposes of this chapter, a bar is defined as any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
E.  Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. As used in this ordinance, the term "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal.App.3d 151 (1981). 
F.  Escort. "Escort" means a person who, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, (i) escorts or accompanies others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or (ii) keeps company with others about any place or public resort or within any private quarters, or (iii) who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person, or (iv) who agrees to provide any service which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
G.  Figure model. "Figure model" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
H.  Health officer. The police chief of the City of Merced or his or her duly authorized representative. 
I.  Nudity or a state of nudity. "Nudity or a state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
J.  Operate an adult entertainment business. As used in this article "operate an adult entertainment business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult entertainment business or activities within an adult entertainment business. 
K.  Permittee. "Permittee" means the person to whom an adult entertainment business permit is issued. 
L.  Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
M.  Police chief. The chief of the City of Merced or the authorized representatives thereof. 
N.  Regularly features. The term "regularly features" with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred and eighty (180) day period shall, to the extent permitted by law, be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
O.  Semi-nude. Means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
P.  Specified anatomical areas. As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or public region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Q.  Specified sexual activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision (1) through (3) of this subsection. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.030 - Permits required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Merced, the operation of an adult entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of Merced as herein required. (Adult Business Regulatory Permit). 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the City of Merced as herein required. (Adult Entertainment Business Performer Permit). 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort, figure model, or to take any other position of employment with an escort bureau or modeling studio in the City of Merced unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of Merced as herein required. (Escort Permit, Figure Model Permit). 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
Article 2. - Application and Permits 
 
5.58.040 - Adult entertainment business regulatory permit required. 
A.  Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult entertainment business in the City of Merced shall file an application with the police chief upon a form provided by the City of Merced and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.050 - Applications. 
A.  Adult entertainment business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 5.58.080. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
B.  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. 
C.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
D.  A description of the type of adult entertainment business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult entertainment business site. 
E.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
F.  The names of all employees required by Section 5.58.090 to obtain an adult entertainment business performer license (for ongoing reporting requirements see Section 5.58.090). 
G.  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult entertainment business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
H.  A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult entertainment business, and: (1) the property line of any other adult entertainment business within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult entertainment business for which a permit is requested; and (2) the property lines of any church, school, park, residential zone or use within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult entertainment business. 
I.  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult entertainment business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 5.58.180C. 
J.  If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten (10) days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
K.  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult entertainment business regulatory permit. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.060 - Investigation and action on application. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult entertainment business regulatory permit. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
(1)  The police chief shall write or stamp "granted" or "denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
(2)  If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
(3)  If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult entertainment business regulatory permit. 
(4)  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
C.  The police chief shall grant tile application and issue the adult entertainment business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Section 20.90.030; and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 5.58.180, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 5.58.070, the permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult entertainment business premises. 
D.  If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within thirty (30) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 5.58.050J, the applicant may begin operating the adult entertainment business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 5.58.180. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.070 - Permit denial. 
The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult entertainment business regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city and the State of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations. 
B.  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material act in the application for an adult business regulatory permit. 
C.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
D.  The required application fee has not been paid. 
Each adult entertainment business regulatory permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.080 - Transfer of adult entertainment regulatory permits. 
A.  A permittee shall not operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of an adult entertainment business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult entertainment business stated in the application for the permit. 
B.  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult entertainment business or transfer an adult entertainment business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the police chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the police chief in accordance with Sections 5.58.040 and 5.58.050, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and the police chief determines in accordance with Section 5.58.060 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit. 
C.  No permit may be transferred when the police chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.090 - Adult entertainment business performer permit. 
A.  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult entertainment business, without a valid adult entertainment business performer permit issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult entertainment business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by Section 5.58.040, with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult entertainment business performer permit, within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult entertainment business regulatory permit. 
B.  The police chief shall grant, deny and renew adult entertainment business employee permits. 
C.  The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the police chief. 
D.  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(4)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(5)  whether the applicant has ever been convicted of: 
(i)  Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered. 
(ii)  The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California. 
(6)  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the lace of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution; 
(7)  State driver's license or identification number; 
(8)  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(9)  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; 
(10)  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application. 
G.  If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten (10) days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten (10) days, of the time for the city manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.100 - Investigation and action on application. 
A.  Within five (5) days after receipt of the properly completed application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows: 
(1)  The police chief shall write or stamp "granted" or "denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
(2)  If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
(3)  If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult entertainment business employee permit. 
(4)  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application. 
B.  The police chief shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection D. of this section. 
C.  If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within five (5) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 5.58.090G), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought. 
D.  The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application. 
(2)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
(3)  The adult entertainment business employee permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law. 
(4)  The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in Section 5.58.080D(5) or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the date of the application. 
E.  Each adult entertainment business performer permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration date of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided for herein for applications for permits. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.110 - Suspension or revocation of adult entertainment business regulatory permits and adult entertainment business performer permits. 
An adult entertainment business regulatory permit an adult entertainment business employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
A.  On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the police chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the police chief, but at a minimum shall include the following: 
(1)  All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and crass-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued or a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The police chief s decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 5.58.120. 
B.  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business: 
(1)  In the case of a permittee of an adult entertainment business regulatory permit only, the building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult entertainment business fails to comply with all applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Merced City Code, all applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature which are customarily enforced by the city, and all provisions of these regulations and this code relating to adult entertainment businesses, including the adult entertainment business development and performance standards contained in Section 5.58.180. 
(2)  The permittee knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city. 
(3)  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult entertainment business, or in the case of an adult entertainment business performer, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult entertainment business: 
(i)  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation. 
(ii)  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur. 
(iii)  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code. 
(iv)  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or subdivision b. of Section 647 of the California Penal Code. 
(v)  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4. 
(vi)  Any conduct prohibited by this chapter. 
(4)  Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official. 
C.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the police chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the police chief shall impose one of the following: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
(3)  Revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.120 - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
After denial of an application for an adult entertainment business regulatory permit or an adult entertainment business performer permit, or after denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such administrative action by the city council by filing a written appeal with the police chief within ten (10) days of the mailing of the decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting, at least seven (7) days after filing of the appeal. If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant, permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The court shall promptly review the action taken by the city council. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.130 - Additional permits required. 
A.  No person shall act as an "escort" unless an escort permit is first obtained. 
B.  No person shall act as a "figure model" in a modeling studio unless a figure model permit is first obtained. The issuance of a business license shall not authorize acting as an "escort" or as a "figure model" in a modeling studio until the necessary regulatory permit has been lawfully granted. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.140 - Application for escort or figure model permit. 
A.  An applicant for an "escort" or "figure model" permit shall make an application under penalty of perjury to the police chief or his authorized representative upon a form provided by the City of Merced. A non-refundable fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, shall be paid to the City of Merced to reimburse the city for the cost of the investigation. A copy of the receipt issued by the City of Merced finance department shall accompany the application. The permit fee required under this section is in addition to any other license or permit fee required by the Merced Municipal Code. 
B.  The application for permit does not authorize the applicant to act as an "escort" or as a "figure model" until such permit has been granted. 
C.  Every application submitted to the police chief shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, any other names used, date of birth, California driver's license number or California identification number, social security number, present residence address, telephone number, sex, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes. 
(2)  Previous two (2) residence addresses of the applicant and the inclusive dates at each address. 
(3)  The applicant's business, occupation, and employment history for five (5) years preceding the date of application and inclusive dates of same. 
(4)  The permit history of the applicant; whether such person ever had any permit or license issued to him or her by any other public entity in this state; the date of issuance of any such permit or license, whether any such permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended; and if any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended, the reason therefor. 
(5)  All convictions for any crimes involving conduct which requires registration under any state law similar to and including California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of any state laws similar to and including California Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 262, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 267, 309, 311.2, 311.3, 311.4, 311.5, 311.6, 311.10, 311.1, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647.6. 
(6)  Any offense requiring registration under provisions of Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California health and Safety Code, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered. 
(7)  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution. 
(8)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(9)  A complete set of fingerprints acceptable to the police chief. 
(10)  The applicant shall make himself or herself available to the Merced police department in order to be photographed. 
(11)  Authorization for the City of Merced, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.150 - Issuance and denial of permits. 
A.  The police chief or his authorized representative shall have thirty (30) days from the date the application is accepted as complete in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the police chief or his designated representative shall approve or deny the permit. The police chief may refuse to issue a permit for "escort" or "figure model" for any of the following reasons, which reasons will be set forth fully in writing and delivered to applicant: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in the paragraphs C(5) and (6) of Section 5.58.140, or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses it committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of any of the crimes described if such conviction occurred more than five (5) years prior to the date of the application. 
(2)  The applicant has been licensed or registered in any state as a prostitute. 
(3)  Any false statements made in the initial application for "escort" or "figure model" permit. 
(4)  That the applicant has had an "escort" or "figure model" permit denied or revoked for cause by this city within the last five (5) years. 
(5)  That the applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(6)  That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the City of Merced finance department. 
B.  Any refusal to issue a permit pursuant to this section or the suspension, or revocation of a permit under the provisions of Section 5.58.160 is appealable to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.58.120 of the Merced Municipal Code. After denial of any such appeal, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.160 - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
After following the procedure in Section 5.58.080, the police chief may revoke or suspend an "escort" or "figure model" permit for conviction of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.58.140C(5) and (6). The decision of the police chief shall be in writing and shall be mailed postage prepaid to the escort or figure model. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.170 - Term of permit. 
A.  Permits issued under the provisions of the section shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually. 
B.  An application for renewal for an "escort" or "figure model" permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
Article 3. - Facilities and Employees 
 
5.58.180 - Adult entertainment business development and performance standards. 
A.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Merced. 
B.  No adult entertainment business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at anytime while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
C.  All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
D.  The premises within which the adult entertainment business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
E.  Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage control, an adult entertainment business shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any particular day. 
F.  No window signs or displays shall be allowed. 
G.  The building entrance to an adult entertainment business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development director or designee. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. 
H.  All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
I.  The adult entertainment business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out the duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult entertainment business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
J.  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult entertainment businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities: 
(1)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult entertainment business except upon a stage at least twenty-four (24) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult entertainment business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult entertainment business. 
(2)  The adult entertainment business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
(3)  The adult entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
(4)  The adult entertainment business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three foot (3') wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(5)  No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult entertainment business. 
(6)  Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. 
(7)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
K.  Adult entertainment businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
(1)  Adult entertainment businesses shall provide one (1) security guard for each ten (10) parking spaces, or portion thereof, at all times the business is open after 5:00 p.m. 
(2)  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult entertainment business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.190 - Register and permit number of employees. 
A.  Every permittee of an "adult entertainment business" which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health officer of the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.200 - Display of permit and identification cards. 
A.  Every "adult entertainment business" shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such "adult entertainment business" in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the "adult entertainment business." 
B.  The police chief shall provide each adult entertainment business performer required to have a permit pursuant to the chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer. 
C.  The police chief shall provide each "escort" or "figure model" granted a permit with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit number of the "escort" or "figure model." D. An "escort" shall carry such card at all times while providing escort services. 
E.  A "figure model" shall have such card available for inspection at all times during the hours of operation of the model studio. 
F.  An adult entertainment business performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.210 - Employment of persons under the age of eighteen (18) years prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any "adult entertainment business" to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
Article 4. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
5.58.220 - Inspection. 
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, county of Merced health department, fire department, planning division, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult entertainment businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.230 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this article regulating adult entertainment businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.240 - Employment of persons without permits unlawful. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an "adult entertainment business" which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult entertainment business performer permit. 
B.  No permittee or operator of an escort service shall allow or permit a person to act as an "escort" for such service unless said person possesses a valid escort permit under the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each such person employed as an "escort" shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article. 
C.  No permittee or operator of a model studio shall allow or permit a person to act as a "figure model" for such studio unless the person possesses a valid figure model permit under the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each such person employed as a "figure model" shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.250 - Time limit for filing application for permit. 
All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an "adult entertainment business" and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult entertainment business performer permit, or an escort permit, or a figure model permit must apply for and obtain such a permit within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an "adult entertainment business," or continued employment as an "escort" or "figure model," or the continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an "adult entertainment business" after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.260 - Certain conduct in bars prohibited. 
The city council of the City of Merced finds that barroom nudity is a direct cause of increased demand for police services in and about such establishments, and finds further that the activities commonly engaged in by both employees and patrons of such establishments are inimical to the public welfare in that nudity in such establishments has been demonstrated to increase the occurrence of illegal activity in and occurring around such establishments. Accordingly, the following acts or conduct on the premises of any bar are deemed contrary to the public interest and welfare and the best interests of the community and, therefore: 
A.  No bar owner or operator or an employee thereof shall permit any person on the premises to display or expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anal region, or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
B.  No bar owner or operator or employee thereof shall permit any person on the premises to perform "specified sexual activities" as defined in Section 5.58.020. 
C.  Any bar owner, operator or employee thereof who permits any of the above while alcoholic beverages are being sold or in the presence of anyone who has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the premises at any time during the four (4) hours immediately preceding the act or display referred to above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  Any person who exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anal region, or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof on the premises while alcoholic beverages are being sold, or on the premises and in the presence of anyone who has consumed any alcoholic beverages on the premises at any time during the four (4) hours immediately preceding the act or display referred to above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.270 - Additional regulations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any adult entertainment business in a state of nudity. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a person to appear in a semi-nude condition in any adult entertainment business unless the person appearing while semi-nude is on a stage at least twenty-four (24) inches above the level of the floor and at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in or participates in any live performance which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult entertainment business, or who appears semi-nude in an adult entertainment business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any such person. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
5.58.280 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. 1984 § 3 (part), 1998).  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the words defined in this section shall have the meanings prescribed in this section. 
A.  Animal. "Animal" means any member of the kingdom Animalia exclusive of homo sapiens, poultry, birds, reptiles, or fish. 
B.  Animal control. "Animal control" or "animal control division" means the division of the police department of the city of Merced or the city's contractor designee charged with administering this title. 
C.  Animal control center. "Animal control center" means the facilities provided by the county of Merced for the impoundment, relinquishment, quarantine, and adoption or sale of animals. 
D.  Animal nuisance. Within the meaning of Title 6, "animal nuisance" shall mean such actions or behaviors of an animal which interfere with the rights of persons to the enjoyment of life or property by creating chronic annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept, harbored or maintained, and shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Causing fouling of the air by the unpleasant odor of accumulated fecal waste or urine; 
2.  Causing unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings; 
3.  Making excessively loud or disturbing noise; or 
4.  Causing offense or danger to public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number or types of animals maintained. 
E.  At large. "At large" means an animal off the premises of its owner and either: 
1.  Not under the control and in the immediate presence of the owner; or 
2.  If a dog or a cat, not under physical restraint. 
F.  Animal at large causing injury. "At large causing injury" means an animal off the premises of its owner as outlined in subsection E of this section which through direct or indirect action causes or inflicts injury to any person. The injury is described as a wound or other type of injury which requires medical treatment. 
G.  Animal control manager. "Animal control manager" means the management head of animal control and his or her duly authorized staff. 
H.  Cattery. "Cattery" means an enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area in or on which five (5) or more cats of at least six (6) months of age are kept, harbored, or maintained. 
I.  Curb. "Curb" means to restrain or control an animal that it does not defecate on property other than that of its owner except by the expressed consent of the owner of such other property. 
J.  Dangerous animal. "Dangerous animal" means any animal including a dog (except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties) which can be categorized in any one (1) or more of the following manners: 
1.  Any animal which behaves in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should know that the animal poses a threat to public safety. 
2.  Any animal which because of its size, training, behavior, physical nature, or vicious propensity would threaten public safety were it not controlled as prescribed in this chapter. 
3.  Any animal which threatens or attacks any person in a manner which requires substantial defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury. 
4.  Any animal which threatens or attacks any other animal belonging to another when such other animal is confined upon private property or otherwise lawfully restrained and controlled. 
K.  Dangerous behavior. "Dangerous behavior" means any acts committed by an animal as defined in subsection J herein. 
L.  Director. "Director" means the police chief of the city of Merced. 
M.  Dog license. "Dog license" as used in this title, means a metallic tag which will be firmly affixed to the animal's collar on which is imprinted the phone number and name of the issuing agency, and a serial number unique to the individual tag. These tags are issued as outlined in Section 6.04.260 of this chapter. 
N.  Domestic animal. "Domestic animal" means dogs and cats, except as limited in subsection (A)(C) herein, as well as horses, donkeys, mules, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, camels, rabbits and fowl commonly kept or raised in the county as farm or livestock animals. 
O.  Feral animal. "Feral animal" means any domestic animal which is known to live in a wild or semiwild state without benefit of an owner or any domestic animal which has escaped for a substantial period of time from the care of its owner and is existing in a wild state without benefit of domestication. 
P.  Health department. "Health department" means the health department of the county of Merced. 
Q.  Health officer. "Health officer" means the director of the health department of the county of Merced or other person duly authorized by the director of the health department or designated by the board of supervisors to act as the health officer. 
R.  Hearing. For the purposes of this chapter, "hearing" means the process prescribed in Section 6.04.300 herein for the redress of issues relating to or arising from the enforcement of this chapter including, but not limited to, dangerous and vicious animals, animal nuisances, pets, or such other administrative matters as pertain to the application of this chapter. 
S.  Hearing officer. "Hearing officer" means the person appointed by the director to preside at and render judgments from hearings transacted under the authority of this chapter. 
T.  Impoundment. "Impoundment" means the taking up and confining of an animal by the animal control manager in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law or regulation. 
U.  Kennel. "Kennel" means any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area in or on which five (5) or more dogs of at least four (4) months of age are kept, harbored or maintained. 
V.  Lawful fence. "Lawful fence" as used in this chapter means a fence of sufficient height, strength, and capacity; and which is maintained in good repair, to prevent the ingress and egress of the animals housed, controlled or grazed on the property. 
W.  Owner. "Owner" means the primary or responsible person who possesses, has title to or an interest in, harbors, provides care, or has control, custody or possession of an animal, and the verb of "to own" includes all these shades of meaning. 
X.  Person. "Person" means fictional entities such as corporations, estates, associations, partnerships and trusts, as well as one or more individual human beings or responsible members of the household. 
Y.  Vaccination. "Vaccination" means the inoculation of an animal with a vaccine approved by and in the manner prescribed by the state of California, department of health services. 
Z.  Veterinarian. "Veterinarian" means a person licensed by the state of California to practice veterinary medicine. 
AA.  Vicious animal. "Vicious animal" means any animal including a dog (except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties) which has, on one or more occasions, committed any one or more of the following acts: 
(1)  Physically attacked, mauled, or physically injured by biting any person, without provocation, at a place other than upon the private property where the animal is maintained by the owner. 
(2)  Physically attacked, mauled, or physically injured by biting any person, without provocation, when the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal poses a meat to public safety and has made no substantial effort to prevent the attack or when the owner has purposefully encouraged or commended the animal to attack, maul, or physically injure any person. 
(3)  Physically attacked and injured by biting any animal, without provocation, which is lawfully maintained on private property not belonging to the owner of the offending animal. 
(4)  Physically attacked and injured by biting any animal, without provocation, which is lawfully maintained or controlled upon public property. 
AB.  Vicious behavior. "Vicious behavior" means any acts committed by an animal as defined in subsection AA herein. 
AC.  Wild animal. "Wild animal" means any of the following: 
(1)  Following members of the Class Reptilia: 
—Order Ophidia (such as, but not limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) over eight (8) feet in length; and 
—Order Loricata (such as, but not limited to, alligators, caymans and crocodiles) over tie (3) feet in length; —Order Sauria (excepting iguanas) over three (3) feet in length. 
(2)  Following members of the Class Aves: 
—Order Falconiformes (such as, but not limited to, hawks, eagles and vultures, which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit); and 
—Subdivision Ratitae (such as, but not limited to, ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, emus). 
(3)  Following members of the Class Mammalia: 
—Order Carnivora, expressly excepting the domestic dog (cannis familiaris) and the domestic cat (felis catus), but including, but not limited to, the fly Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), the family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals); and 
—Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and opossums); and 
—Order Chiroptera (bats); and 
—Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos); and 
—Order Proboscidea (elephants); and 
—Order Primata (including, but not limited to, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas); and 
—Order Ungulata (expressly excluding any animal which would be included within the definition of "domestic animal" in subsection O herein), including, but not limited to, antelope, deer and bison. 
(4)  Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the propel of human beings. 
(5)  Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings whether its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means, except honey-producing bees. 
(6)  Any hybrid animal which is part wild animal and is capable of transmitting rabies, except livestock hybrids, and for which no rabies prophylaxis is recognized or authorized by the state of California. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.1).  
6.04.020 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the "animal control ordinance." 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.2).  
6.04.030 - Legal effect of license. 
The issuance by animal control and the acceptance by the owner of any license or permit to keep an animal as provided for herein is prima facie evidence that the owner agrees to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and that the owner has satisfied the basic licensing requirements under this chapter. Such issuance shall be given no evidentiary weight to indicate that the owner has conformed to zoning regulations, building regulations, health and safety regulations or to any other applicable rule, regulation or statute. For purposes of the administration of this chapter, if, pursuant to the issuance of official written notice, approval has been given by the office or agency responsible for the administration of the rule, regulation or statute in question, such approval shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the matter approved is in conformance with the rule, regulation or statute in question. 
A.  Exemptions. The licensing regulations in this chapter are not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Owners of animals kept as all or part of the stock of (a) nonprofit zoological gardens open to the public, (b) pet shops, (c) circuses, or (d) animal exhibits when such enterprises are operated under business licenses granted by the city and otherwise comply with all other laws and regulations. 
(2)  Service dogs that have been trained and certified to assist the blind, deaf, or physically challenged. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.9).  
6.04.040 - Prohibited conduct. 
No owner of any animal, wild or domestic, shall permit or suffer the animal to do any of the following: 
A.  Be at large; 
B.  Bite, scratch, or claw any human being or other animal without provocation; 
C.  Make loud or disturbing noises without provocation, including, but not limited to, chronic howling, yowling, barking, whining, or other utterances; 
D.  Act or be kept in such a manner as to constitute an animal nuisance within the meaning of this chapter; 
E.  Endanger the life or health of others; 
F.  Damage the property of others; or 
G.  Be afflicted with and not be receiving medically accepted treatment for zoonotic or other communicable disease. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.25).  
6.04.050 - Animals in vehicles. 
A.  No person shall transport or carry on any public highway or public roadway, any animal, wild or domestic, in or by a motorized vehicle unless the animal is as follows: 
1.  Safely enclosed within the vehicle; 
2.  Protected within a secured container carried within, upon, or by such a vehicle; or 
3.  Securely cross-tethered or secured to such vehicle by rope, chain, or other device in a fashion which prevents injury to the animal from falling from, being ejected from, or jumping from such vehicle. 
B.  No person shall leave an animal, wild or domestic, in any unattended motorized vehicle without adequate ventilation, in unhealthful conditions which adversely affect its health, safety or well-being. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.26).  
6.04.060 - Fouling. 
It shall be the duty of any person having custody of a dog to curb said dog and to immediately remove any feces deposited by said dog on public property to a proper receptacle. Unsighted persons while relying on a guide dog shall be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.28).  
6.04.065 - Maximum number of domestic animals by lot size. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the number of cats and dogs raised and kept in any single-family dwelling shall be limited to the maximum number allowed based on parcel size as set forth in the table of this section: 
Lot Size 	Maximum Number 
6,000 sq/ft. or greater 	Any combination of dogs and cats not to exceed 5 each unless with a valid kennel or cattery permit. 
Less than 6,000 sq/ft. but more than 5,000 sq/ft. 	Any combination of dogs and cats not to exceed 4 each. 
Less than 5,000 sq/ft. but more than 4,000 sq/ft. 	Any combination of dogs and cats not to exceed 3 each. 
Less than 4,000 sq/ft. but more than 3,000 sq/ft. 	Any combination of dogs and cats not to exceed 2 each. 
Less than 3,000 sq/ft. 	A maximum of 1 dog and 1 cat. 
 
B.  The number of cats and dogs raised and kept in any multifamily dwelling shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) cat and one (1) dog. 
(Ord. 2225 § 1, 2006).  
6.04.070 - Dogs at large. 
A.  No person shall permit or suffer a dog to stray from private property owned or legally possessed by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog unless the dog is restrained by a leash or lead not exceeding eight (8) feet in length, except in the following situations: 
1.  When the dog is assisting a peace officer who is engaged in law enforcement duties or when the dog is participating in a search and rescue effort at the specific request of a law enforcement authority; 
2.  When the dog is enrolled in and actually participating in a dog training or obedience course, exhibition, or competition conducted by an organization on private or public property with the permission of the owner or operator of the grounds of facilities; 
3.  When the dog is assisting the owner or person in charge of livestock in the herding or control of such livestock; 
4.  When the dog is accompanying and under the direction of a person engaged in hunting on land which is within a restricted shooting district; or 
5.  When the dog is within the perimeter fence of a designated city dog park. 
B.  Dog at Large Causing Injury. Any owner of any dog which is running at large that causes injury through indirect or direct action is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2317 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1322 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.29).  
6.04.071 - Rules of the Merced city dog park. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section the words and phrases set forth below shall mean the following: 
1.  "Dog park" means the city of Merced dog park located at the northwest corner of R Street and Yosemite Avenue. 
2.  "Handler" means the dog owner's friend, relative, agent, or employee having custody or control over the dog while at the dog park. 
3.  "Small dog area" is that area designated and posted in the dog park as the small dog area. 
B.  Prohibited Activities at Dog Park. The following shall be prohibited at the dog park: 
1.  Dogs unaccompanied or unsupervised at any time in the dog park by either the dog owner or handler; 
2.  A dog owner or handler who is physically or otherwise unable to control or restrain their dog; 
3.  A dog owner or handler under thirteen (13) years of age unaccompanied by a parent or guardian; 
4.  A dog owner or handler having more than two (2) dogs in the dog park at any one (1) time; 
5.  Unlicensed or unvaccinated dogs in the dog park; 
6.  Dogs with any communicable illness or disease; 
7.  Dogs in heat; 
8.  Puppies less than four (4) months old; 
9.  Bringing any non-canine animal into the dog park; 
10.  Smoking; 
11.  Entering or exiting the dog park with an unleashed dog; 
12.  Failure by a dog owner or handler to immediately pick up and properly dispose of any feces deposited in the dog park by any dog under their custody or control; 
13.  Dogs over twenty (20) inches tall entering or remaining in the designated small dog area; 
14.  Failure of a dog owner or handler to remove a dangerous dog as defined in Section 6.04.010(J). 
C.  Dog Bites. All dog bites occurring within the dog park shall be immediately reported to the Merced city animal control division. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any dog owner or handler to suffer or permit their dog to attack or bite any person or any other dog. Failure to report a dog bite is declared to be an infraction and subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
D.  Dog Park Hours. The dog park operating hours are established as from six a.m. to ten p.m. daily. The dog park is subject to closure due to repair or maintenance or for special events. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to be in the dog park without authorization at other than operating hours or when the dog park is closed for repair, maintenance, or special events. It shall not be unlawful for anyone associated with the repair, maintenance, or attending a special event to be in the dog park while such repair, maintenance, or special event activity is occurring. 
E.  Penalty. Except as otherwise specifically noted, any violation of this section shall be infraction subjecting the violator to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2317 § 2, 2008).  
6.04.072 - Signs at Merced city dog park. 
The public works operations department of the city of Merced is directed to post and maintain signs at all publicly owned dog parks within the city providing notice of the rules pursuant to Section 6.04.071 of this code, and that any person failing to comply with the rules will be subject to citation under Section 6.04.071 for either a misdemeanor or an infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2317 § 3, 2008).  
6.04.080 - Livestock and poultry. 
A.  No person shall permit or suffer livestock or poultry to stray from private property owned by the owner of such livestock or poultry, or from private property to which such owner has a right of possession. 
B.  The owner of any livestock or poultry found at large in violation of this section shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed, be liable for the salaries, costs, and other expenses incurred in restraining, capturing, or rescuing such livestock or poultry. The salaries, costs and expenses of the division shall be determined by the director. 
C.  Except for educational purposes conducted by a governmental agency, no person shall keep or maintain any hog pen or pigsty within the city, nor keep or maintain in pens, sties or otherwise, any live hogs within the city longer than may be necessary for shipment, which in no event shall be more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
D.  No person shall keep or maintain or allow to run at large any horses or cows in any yard, corral or other similar enclosure within the following described district in the city: that portion thereof bounded on the north by Bear Creek, on the east by Parsons Avenue extended, on the south by Eighth Street extended and on the west by V Street. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person to permit any animal to be herded or picketed in any street or alley in the city, either in the daytime or nighttime. 
F.  Except for educational purposes conducted by a governmental agency, no person shall keep or maintain within the city, any sued of bees. 
G.  No person shall keep or maintain livestock or poultry for the purpose of slaughter or for the use of any product associated with the livestock or poultry. 
H.  No person shall slaughter livestock or poultry within the city except as may be permitted in commercial or industrial areas zoned for such purpose. 
I.  No person shall keep or maintain more than two (2) livestock or poultry on any residential lot within the city. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1599 § 1, 1985).  
6.04.081 - Exception to livestock and poultry regulations. 
Notwithstanding Section 6.04.080 of this code, the keeping of livestock and poultry is permitted in the following areas: 
A.  The area generally bounded by McKee Road to the west, Yosemite Avenue to the north, the Merced Irrigation District's Fairfield Lateral "A-1" (approximately six hundred sixty (660) feet east of McKee Road) to the east, and the south property line of APN 8-010-013 to the south, including thirteen (13) parcels also known as Assessor's Parcel Numbers 8-310-037, 8-310-038, 8-310-039, 8-310-040, 8-010-005, 8-010-006, 8-010-007, 8-010-008, 8-010-009, 8-010-010, 8-010-011, 8-010-012, 8-010-018 (2.8 acres) on the north side of Black Rascal Creek, approximately three hundred (300) feet east of McKee Road (the bounded area) and formerly zoned as "A-R," Agricultural-Residential, under the Merced County Code, as to any parcel of property within the bounded area subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The parcel of property is at least one (1) acre in size. 
2.  The parcel of property is not further subdivided or developed for urban uses. For example, if a parcel of property currently has one (1) residential dwelling unit on it and the owner seeks to develop the parcel of property with two (2) to six (6) residential dwelling units, that parcel of property if approved for such development would thereafter be subject to Section 6.04.080 of this code. 
3.  On and after March 5, 2003, the type and number of animals kept on any parcel of property in the bounded area was lawful under Merced County ordinances, standards, and regulations. 
4.  On and after March 5, 2003, the parcel of property was and continues to be maintained consistent with the health, environmental, and property maintenance requirements and standards under the Merced County Code, county standards, or county requirements. 
5.  Any parcel of property without animals as of March 5, 2003 shall not be precluded from having them so long as the restrictions and limitations of this subsection are met by the owner or tenant of such parcel of property. 
6.  Any parcel of property with animals may change or exchange the type and/or number of animals on such parcel of property as long as the requirements of this subsection are met and the limitations and restrictions of this subsection are not exceeded. 
7.  The raising and keeping of specific types of animals shall be allowed in the bounded area on any parcel of property as set forth in Table 6.04.081A below: 
Table 6.04.081A 
Allowed Animal Raising Activities 
Key 
X 	Activity allowed 
Activity not allowed 
 
Animal Raising 
Activity 	Permitted/Not 
Permitted 1 
Bee raising (apiaries) 	
Birds (aviaries) 	X 
Cattle 	X 
Stables (boarding and training) 	
Fowl and poultry 2 	X 
Goats and sheep 	X 
Hogs and swine 	X 
Horses 	X 
Household pets 	X 
Llamas, ostriches and other exotics 3 	X 
Other small animals 	X 
Fish farms 	
 
1 Up to two (2) large animals (i.e., horses, cows, ostriches, and swine) or up to five (5) birds, other than household pets, are permitted per acre parcel. More require approval of the director of development services. No commercial operations are allowed. 
2 Up to two (2) roosters are permitted. An exception may be made by the director of development services for FFA, 4-H and other educational poultry projects. 
3 Wild animals may require state and/or federal permits. 
B.  The area generally bounded by San Augustine Drive (extended) to the west, the north property lines (listed below) to the north, the east property lines of APN 206-010-009 to the east, and the south property line of APN's listed below to the south, inclusive of five (5) parcels also known as Assessor's Parcel Numbers 206-010-005, 206-010-006, 206-010-007, 206-010-008, and 206-010-009 on the north side of Pettinotti Road, (the bounded area) and formerly zoned as "A-1," General Agricultural, under the Merced County Code, as to any contiguous parcels under same ownership within the bounded area subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The contiguous acreage of all parcels under the same ownership shall be at least three (3) acres in size. 
2.  The parcel of property is not further subdivided or developed for urban uses. For example, if a parcel of property currently has one (1) residential dwelling unit on it and the owner seeks to develop the parcel of property with two (2) to six (6) residential dwelling units, that parcel of property if approved for such development would thereafter be subject to Section 6.04.080 of this code. 
3.  On and after February 16, 2006, the type and number of animals kept on any parcel of property in the bounded area was lawful under Merced County ordinances, standards, and regulations. 
4.  On and after February 16, 2006, the parcel of property was and continues to be maintained consistent with the health, environmental, and property maintenance requirements and standards under the Merced County Code, county standards, or county requirements. 
5.  Any parcel of property without animals as of February 16, 2006 shall not be precluded from having them so long as the restrictions and limitations of this subsection are met by the owner or tenant of such parcel of property. 
6.  Any parcel of property with animals may change or exchange the type and/or number of animals on such parcel of property as long as the requirements of this subsection are met and the limitations and restrictions of this subsection are not exceeded. 
7.  The raising and keeping of specific types of animals shall be allowed in the bounded area on any parcel of property as set forth in Table 6.04.081B below: 
Table 6.04.081b 
Allowed Animal Raising Activities 
Key 
X 	Activity allowed 
Activity not allowed 
 
Animal Raising Activity 	Permitted/Not Permitted 1 
Bee raising (apiaries) 	X 
Birds (aviaries) 	X 
Cattle 	X 
Stables (boarding and training) 	X 
Fowl and poultry 2 	X 
Goats and sheep 	X 
Hogs and swine 	X 
Horses 	X 
Household pets 	X 
Llamas, ostriches and other exotics 3 	X 
Other small animals 	X 
Fish farms 	X 
 
1 Up to two (2) large animals (i.e., horses, cows, ostriches, and swine) or up to five (5) birds, other than household pets, are permitted per acre parcel. More require approval of the director of development services. No commercial operations are allowed. 
2 Up to two (2) roosters are permitted. An exception may be made by the director of development services for FFA, 4-H and other educational poultry projects. 
3 Wild animals may require state and/or federal permits. 
C.  All seventeen (17) properties on either side of Mather Road located north of Mission Avenue and South of Winder Avenue, also knows as Assessor's Parcel Numbers 259-140-001 to 259-140-017, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The parcel of property is not further subdivided or developed for urban uses. For example, if a parcel of property currently has one (1) residential dwelling unit on it and the owner seeks to develop the parcel of property with two (2) to six (6) residential dwelling units, that parcel of property if approved for such development would thereafter be subject to Section 6.04.080 of this code. 
2.  As of October 1, 2008, the type and number of animals kept on any parcel of property in the bounded area of Mather Road was lawful under Merced County ordinances, standards and regulations. If this is true, then the types and numbers of animals on said parcel may continue after annexation to the city. 
3.  On and after October 1, 2008, the parcel of property in the bounded area of Mather Road was and continues to be maintained consistent with the health, environmental and property maintenance requirements and standards under the Merced County Code, county standards or county requirements. 
4.  Any parcel of property in the bounded area of Mather Road without animals as of October 1, 2008 shall not be precluded from having them as long as the restrictions and limitations of this subsection are met by the owner or tenant of such parcel of property. 
5.  Any parcel of property in the bounded area of Mather Road with animals may change or exchange the type and/or number of animals on such parcel of property as long as the requirements of this subsection are met and the limitations and restrictions of this subsection are not exceeded. 
6.  The raising and keeping of specific types of animals shall be allowed in the bounded area of Mather Road as set forth in Table 6.04.081C of this section: 
Table 6.04.081c 
Allowed Animal Raising Activities 
Key 
X 	Activity allowed 
Activity not allowed 
	
 
Animal Raising Activity 	Permitted/Not Permitted 1 
Bee raising (apiaries) 	
Birds (aviaries) 	X 
Cattle 	X 
Stables (boarding and training) 	
Fowl and poultry 2 	X 
Goats and sheep 	X 
Hogs and swine 	X 
Horses 	X 
Household pets 	X 
Llamas, ostriches and other exotics 3 	X 
Other small animals 	X 
Fish farms 	
 
1 Up to two (2) large animals (i.e., horses, cows, ostriches, and swine) or up to five (5) birds, other than household pets, are permitted per acre parcel. More require approval of the director of development services. No commercial operations are allowed. 
2 Up to two (2) roosters are permitted. An exception may be made by the director of development services for FFA, 4-H and other educational poultry projects. 
3 Wild animals may require state and/or federal permits. 
D.  In the event of noncompliance with any condition in subsection A, B or C, as applicable, the parcel or property subject to either subsection A, B or C under this section shall be immediately and thereafter subject to the regulations and requirements contained in Section 6.04.080 of this code. 
(Ord. 2319 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2225 § 2, 2006: Ord. 2111 § 1, 2003).  
6.04.090 - Lawful fence. 
Any person who owns or is responsible for the care, custody or control of livestock or chickens must maintain the animals within a lawful fence. A lawful fence is good, strong, substantial and sufficient to prevent the ingress and egress of the animals housed. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.100 - Proper care. 
The owner of any animal, wild or domestic, shall provide proper and adequate food, water, shelter, qualified medical care and attention for such animal at a level which insures the animal's safety, good health, and well-being. The owner shall maintain any encloses or surroundings where the animal is kept in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.110 - Obstruction. 
Any person who prevents, resists, threatens, or obstructs an attempt by the animal control manager pursuant to this chapter to inspect or impound an animal or any person who conceals or secretes any animal subject to inspection or impoundment or any owner who fails to relinquish upon lawful demand any animal to be impounded shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.120 - Misrepresentation. 
No person shall wilfully make a false or misleading statement or representation to the animal control manager acting in his or her official capacity, regarding the ownership or right to custody or control of an animal for which a permit or license is required, or regarding the ownership of an animal redeemed from, relinquished to, impounded by, or taken up by the animal control manager pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.130 - Unfounded emergency visit. 
A.  The animal control manager is authorized to charge and collect a fee from any person who calls the animal control manager to his/her residence requesting emergency assistance and, upon his arrival, the animal control manager determines either (1) that the emergency is unfounded, or (2) that the person requesting the assistance is not at the residence. 
B.  The amount of the fee authorized under this chapter shall be weighted average hourly rate for the costs to the animal control division of such services. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.140 - Duty to report bite. 
It is the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal capable of transmitting rabies has bitten or otherwise exposed to rabies a human being within the city to immediately report that fact to the health officer or the animal control manager and to furnish complete information thereof, including, but not limited to, any knowledge of the whereabouts of said animal. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.150 - Notice of escape. 
Any person keeping, harboring, maintaining, or owning a dangerous, vicious, or wild animal that escapes from its confinement shall immediately notify the animal control manager of such escape. Notification shall first be by phone and shall be followed with written notification which includes the following information, as known: 
(1)  The date, place, and time of the animal's escape; 
(2)  A description of the animal and its condition at the time of escape; and 
(3)  The name, address, and residential and occupational telephone numbers of the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.160 - Authority to set fees. 
Unless a fee amount is specifically provided within this chapter, the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, establish fees including but not limited to, fees for impoundment, licensing, kenneling, adoption, and boarding of animals. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.170 - Incidental fee. 
The animal control manager is given the authority to charge fees for services regarding transporting, receiving, surrendering, tranquilizing, and cremating of animals. In addition to the foregoing, the animal control manager may charge fees to recover the costs of services not specifically mentioned or required by this section up to a maximum of $25.00. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.180 - Jurisdiction. 
The animal control manager, under direction, shall supervise the animal control center and all animal control personnel. 
A.  Responsibility. The animal control manager is responsible for the regulation and the enforcement of this chapter and other laws dealing with animals existing within the city. The duties of the animal control manager shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To administer the animal control center and keep such records as may be required; 
(2)  To take up and impound animals which are in violation of this chapter; 
(3)  To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any county roadway, street, alley or other public place; 
(4)  To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the county health officer; 
(5)  To administer licensing and permit programs as provided for in this chapter; and 
(6)  To abate animal nuisances. 
B.  Rules and regulations. The animal control manager may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with, and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter. Compliance with such rules and regulations shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any license or permit provided herein. 
C.  Authority to carry fires. The animal control manager may hereby authorize such animal control officers as he or she may specifically designate to carry firearms when acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to Section 12031 of the Penal Code of California. 
D.  Authority to arrest and to issue citations. In the performance of his or her duties, the animal control manager and each animal control officer shall have the authority and immunities of public officers and employees as set forth in California Penal Code Section 836.5 to make tests without a warrant or to issue citations pursuant to Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code whenever he or she has probable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of this title or of any ordinance or statute which he or she has the duty to enforce. 
E.  Authority to pursue. In the performance of his or her duties, the animal control manager and each animal control officer shall have the authority, when in pursuit of an animal which is in violation of a provision of this code, to go upon the property of the owner or a third person for the purpose of impounding the animal, provided that in the course of such pursuit he or she shall exercise reasonable care to avoid causing damage to the propel and shall comply with Section 6.04.190A of this chapter. 
F.  Authority to use tranquilizer equipment. In the performance of his or her duties, the animal control manager and each animal control officer shall have the authority to employ the use of tranquilizer equipment and all other animal control devices commonly used by other animal control agencies located within the state of California. 
G.  Authority to destroy. The animal control manager shall have the authority, when a clear and present danger to public safety exists and reasonable means of capture have failed, to direct the humane destruction of an animal in the field. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.190 - Animals subject to impoundment. 
Any animal shall be taken up and impounded at the animal control center (or at such other place as may be approved by the director) if, to the knowledge of the animal control manager, any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Said animal is engaged in an activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter; 
(2)  Said animal is, or will be, without proper care due to the injury, illness, death, incarceration, or other involuntary absence of the owner or person responsible for the care of such animal; or 
(3)  Said animal is required to be quarantined. 
A.  Impoundment on private property. An animal which has become subject to impoundment while off the property of its owner and has returned to the same shall not be impounded if the owner is present to accept a citation for the offense, unless, except as provided in Section 53074 of the California Government Code, a clear and present danger to public safety exists by virtue of the animal remaining upon the property. 
B.  Notice of impoundment. When an animal wearing a current city license is impounded, the animal control manager shall attempt to notify the owner of record by telephone or by mail of the date and place of impoundment or removal. 
C.  Duration. 
(1)  All impounded dogs found wearing a current city dog license tag shall be kept in the animal control center or other authorized place of impoundment for a period of not less than five (5) calendar days after the day of impoundment, mess redeems wig such period except as provided in Section 6.04.190E of this chapter. 
(2)  All impounded dogs not wearing a current dog license tag shall be kept in the animal control center or other authorized place of impoundment for a period of not less than three (3) calendar days after the day of impoundment unless redeemed within such period except as provided in Section 6.04.190E of this chapter. 
(3)  Any animal impounded pursuant to Section 6.04.190(2) of this chapter shall be kept in the animal control center or other authorized place of impoundment for at least ten (10) calendar days. 
(4)  Any other impounded animal shall be kept in the animal control center for at least three (3) calendar days after the day of impoundment unless it is redeemed within such period. 
(5)  Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control manager by the owner shall not be deemed to be impounded and need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. 
(6)  Any feral animal shall not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. 
(7)  Any impounded animal which is of a type referred to in Section 17003 of the California State Agriculture Code shall be kept in the animal control center or other authorized place of impoundment for at least five (5) calendar days unless it is redeemed within that period. 
D.  Redemption. 
(1)  The owner of any animal impounded may, at any time before the expiration of the period of impoundment, redeem the animal by paying all fees and charges accrued provided, however, if the animal is one which is subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter, the licensing requirements must be satisfied before the animal is released. 
(2)  If the impounded animal is not currently vaccinated against rabies as required, and the owner has not previously been cited for fail to license, or the animal has not been previously impounded within the preceding the (30) days, the animal may be released to the owner upon payment of all fees rewired (including the license fee and penalty fee, if applicable) on condition that the owner shall: 
(a)  Have the animal vaccinated for rabies in accordance with Section 6.04.210 of this chapter within fourteen (14) calendar days; and 
(b)  Exhibit a valid certificate of such vaccination to the animal control manager within fourteen (14) calendar days, at which time the license will be issued. Otherwise, the subject animal must be vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian designated by the animal control manager prior to redemption and the cost of the vaccination and any other costs accrued accomplishing the vaccination, including additional impoundment fees, must be satisfied before the animal is released. 
E.  Disposition of impounded and surrendered animals. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal which is not redeemed within the applicable holding period specified in this chapter or an animal voluntarily surrendered to the animal control manager, except an animal that has been impounded for quarantine or is known to have bitten a human or to have demonstrated dangerous or vicious propensities, may, at the discretion of the animal control manager, be sold for its fair market value as determined by the animal control manager and upon reasonable conditions as the animal control manager finds appropriate or may be destroyed. 
(2)  When any unsterilized dog or cat is to be sold pursuant to this section, prior to the delivery of the animal there shall be deposited by the purchaser with the animal control manager an amount of money which shall be a deposit for spaying or neutering of the purchased animal pursuant to Food and Agriculture Code Sections 3053 and 31751. The amount of said deposit shall be designated by the animal control manager and shall cover the approximate average cost of spaying or neutering. It shall not exceed the maximum fee set forth in Food and Agriculture Code Sections 3053 and 31751. The deposit shall be refunded to the purchaser of the animal upon presentation of written proof of spay or neuter to the animal control manager. The written proof must be provided within sixty (60) days, in the case of a dog or cat over the age of six (6) months and within six (6) months for dogs and cats under six (6) months of age. All refunds are processed through the county auditor's office. Failure to provide written proof of sterilization within the required time period will result in the forfeit of the deposit. Those funds that have been deemed forfeited may be deposited in the county treasury for uses set forth in Sections 3053 and 31751 of the Food and Agriculture Code. Further, it shall constitute an infraction to fail to sterilize any dog or cat adopted from the county animal shelter and the unsterilized animal may be impounded. 
(3)  When an animal is sold, the receipt issued by the animal control manager shall be valid title to the purchaser. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, an impounded animal which is determined by the animal control manager or the health officer to constitute a health hazard or which is critically injured or ill may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the animal control manager upon the concurrence of the health officer or a licensed veterinarian. 
F.  Livestock hauling fee. 
(1)  When it is necessary for the impoundment of livestock or large quadruped animals to utilize specialized hauling equipment, the owner of the animals shall be charged a livestock hauling fee. 
(2)  A schedule of fees for hauling livestock shall be established by the animal control manager. Such scheduling of fees shall reflect the approximate cost of impounding and hauling the livestock or other large animals including labor and transportation. 
G.  Impoundment fees. The animal control manager shall charge and collect fees for every impounded animal when claimed and before release. The amount of said fees shall be established as provided in Section 6.04.160 of this chapter. 
H.  Absence of liability. No liability shall be incurred for the disposition of any animal made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
I.  Relief from fees. Upon the recommendation of the animal control manager to the director, the fees provided for by this chapter may be waived when animals have been impounded because of civic disorganization, disruption or other conditions of civil emergency or because of devastation due to fire, flood, earthquake, storm or other natural calamity. 
J.  Waiver of fees. The director may authorize the animal control manager to waive, in full or in part, fees, exclusive of licensing or permit fees, if necessary to accomplish the protection of animal or public health, safety, or welfare or if the owner provides satisfactory evidence that he or she was not at fault, explicitly, for the impoundment or keeping of the animal at the animal control center. 
K.  Rental of traps. Traps for live-trapping of animals may be maintained and rented to the public by the animal control manager. A deposit shall be collected for each trap and shall be refunded upon return of the trap in good condition. The period of use shall be seven (7) calendar days. A schedule of fees for trap deposit and rental shall be established by the animal control manager. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.200 - Quarantine. 
A.  The animal control manager shall ensure that all animals falling into the following categories shall be isolated or quarantined or destroyed and a rabies specimen taken at the animal control center or at such other place and under such conditions as are prescribed by the health officer or authorized according to other applicable California state laws and regulations: 
(1)  Known rabid animals; 
(2)  Suspected rabid animals; 
(3)  Animals that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies; and 
(4)  Animals of a species subject to rabies which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a known rabid animal or suspected rabid animal. 
In those circumstances where the bit or exposure to rabies occurred while the victim was on the property of the owner of the animal or when the victim is a member of the fly or household of the owner, and when the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies and, as applicable, licensed as required by the provisions of this chapter, the animal may, at the discretion of the animal control manager, be quarantined on the property of the owner provided the following: 
(1)  The owner of said animal can and does agree to ensure its confinement for the period of quarantine, and 
(2)  The owner agrees, upon demand of the health officer or the animal control manager during the period of quarantine, to surrender the animal to the animal control manger. 
(3)  The owner agrees to immediately notify the animal control manager if the animal escapes, becomes ill, or dies. 
It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of an animal to violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the health officer. 
B.  Non-vaccinated biting animals fee. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the owner of any animal which is required by law to be vaccinated for rabies and which has not been so vaccinated and which bites or wounds any person or other animal shall be subject to a fee as established by resolution. 
C.  Delivery of carcass. Upon the death of any known rabid animal, suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the animal control manager shall obtain and hold for the health officer the carcass of the animal or an adequate specimen thereof, except that the animal control manager is not responsible for the gathering of a specimen from the carcass of an animal. 
D.  Epidemics. The health officer may determine and declare that a rabies epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation exists among dogs or other animals in the city, or in any part thereof. Upon making of such a declaration, the health officer shall prepare and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of all persons within the area where the dangerous condition exists, and the dogs and other animals within the area. These rules and regulations of the health officer may include, but are not limited to, quarantine, vaccination and destruction of diseased or suspected rabid or stray animals by humane methods. Such rules and regulations shall be effective when filed with the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the animal control manager to comply with all directives of the health officer in the enforcement of the rules and regulations. A violation of any such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.210 - Vaccination. 
A.  Every dog over four months of age shall have a medically current vaccination with an appropriate anti-rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Health Service. 
B.  Every cat over four months of age shall have a medically current vaccination with an appropriate anti-rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Health Services. 
C.  Every person who owns or comes to own an unvaccinated dog or cat over four months of age shall have thirty (34) calendar days in which to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog or cat for rabies, shall issue a certificate to the owner. The certificate shall include the following information: 
(1)  The owner's full name, address, and telephone number; 
(2)  The breed, age, sex, and color or markings of the animal; 
(3)  The date of immunization; 
(4)  The type of vaccine administered; 
(5)  The name of the vaccine manufacturer; 
(6)  The lot number of the vaccine used; and 
(7)  The signature of the veterinarian administering the vaccination of his or her agent. 
E.  If a copy of the certificate is on file with the animal control manager, a duplicate copy may be provided when requested by the owner of the animal. An administrative fee shall be charged for each duplicate certificate issued. 
F.  The owner must maintain the certificate of vaccination, or a copy thereof, and must, upon demand of a public or peace officer acting within the course and scope of his or her employment, display said certificate for examination. 
G.  Upon written proof provided by a veterinarian that an animal has a medical condition which would cause it to be endangered by receiving anti-rabies vaccination and upon written acceptance of such proof by the health officer, the animal control manager may exempt the animal from the vaccination requirements herein so long as the animal is confined at all times and so long as the medical condition is proven to exist. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.220 - Duty of veterinarians to furnish rabies vaccination certificates. 
Upon request by the animal control manager, every veterinarian practicing veterinary medicine within the city shall furnish the animal control manager with a copy of every rabies vaccination certificate prepared by him or her. Said certificates may be mailed to the animal control manager or made available to him or her at the veterinarian office. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.230 - Unlicensed vaccinated animals. 
Whenever any agent or staff of the division of animal control discovers through a vaccination certificate obtained from any veterinarian that an animal named thereon is unlicensed, the owner of such animal will be notified by mail that such animal is unlicensed and that such animal must be licensed within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. The owner of any such dog which has been previously licensed by the city shall be subject to a delinquent fee as set forth in Section 6.04.260 of this chapter. The owner of any such dog which has never been previously licensed in the city who obtains a license within fifteen (15) days of the date of said notice shall be subject to an administrative fee plus the license fee or any other applicable fee. The owner of such dog which has never been previously licensed in the city who does not obtain a license within fifteen (15) days of the date of said notice shall be subject to a delinquent fee as set forth in Section 6.04.260 of this chapter, plus the license fee or any other applicable fee. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.240 - Unlicensed dogs. 
Every owner of an unlicensed or untagged dog shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and is guilty of an infraction except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.250 - Unvaccinated dogs. 
Every owner of a dog which does not have a cent vaccination for rabies as evidenced by an official certificate therefor, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and guilty of an infraction except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.260 - Dog license. 
A.  Every dog over four months of age shall be subject to a dog license fee, due and payable by its owner not later than when the dog is five (5) months of age or, if the dog is mature when acquired, within the (30) calendar days of the acquisition of or entry into the city. Thereafter, such license fee shall become due and payable on the date of expiration on any license previously issued to the owner for the dog. The amount of such fee shall be established in accordance with Section 6.04.160 of this chapter. For dogs which are new acquisitions and have a rabies vaccination that is valid for less than twelve (12) months, a partial year license may be issued. The license fees will be one-half the regular one (1) year license fee. The license will expire with the rabies vaccination and is subject to renewal as outlined above. 
B.  Upon the written certification of a veterinarian that a dog has been surgically sterilized, the amount of the license fee shall be not more than one-half the fee established for intact dogs. 
C.  No dog license shall be issued for any dog vaccinated with a vaccine not authorized by the State of California. Should a rabies vaccination not be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of application, the owner may elect to either: 
(1)  Be issued a license at one-half the regular one year rate as outlined in subsection A above; or 
(2)  Revaccinate and be issued a license at full price which would be valid for at least twelve (12) months. 
D.  A dog license fee shall become delinquent the (30) calendar days after it becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee as established in accordance with Section 6.04.160 of this chapter shall be added to the regular fee. An unpaid delinquent fee shall be added to the succeeding year's license fee. 
E.  The animal control manager shall procure and issue serially numbered tags stamped with the name of the city. This tag is a lifetime tag and will be unique to the animal it was issued to. The tag shall only be issued upon the application of owners who have complied with the vaccination and fee provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Upon presentation by the dog owner of a properly completed license application form, including proof that the rabies vaccination will be valid throughout the licensing period, and the proper license fee, and if applicable, a delinquent fee, the animal control manager shall issue a dog license. The owner shall retain the dog license form for inspection by the animal control manager upon request. 
G.  Every dog shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar, harness, or other device to which the dog tag can be affixed. The dog owner shall ensure that the dog wears such license tag at all times except when the dog is being prepared for an exhibit at a dog show. 
H.  A license tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached to any other dog. 
I.  A license issued to one owner shall not be transferred to another owner. 
J.  Whenever a license tag is lost, stolen, or damaged the owner shall apply for and obtain a replacement tag from the animal control manager upon payment of the prescribed replacement fee. 
K.  A fee shall not be levied for any dog license issued for a seeing eye dog owned by a blind or partially blind person or for any service dog in training or one that has been duly trained and registered with a training agency to assist a disabled person when such dog is actively used for the purpose trained, or for any dog primarily used to assist a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties. 
L.  Despite anything in this chapter to the contrary, when an owner brings into the city a dog which has been licensed in another jurisdiction, the dog shall be licensed within thirty (30) calendar days as outlined in this chapter. If the license from the other jurisdiction is valid for at least twelve (12) months, a one (1) year license may be obtained for replacement tag fees upon the surrender of the other jurisdiction's license and the proper completion of a license application. If the dog owner elects to purchase a two (2) or three (3) year license, it shall be issued at the applicable fee and procedure as outlined in subsection A of this chapter. 
M.  Kennel permit exemption. Any person or place of business that has properly applied for and received a valid kennel permit as outlined in Section 6.04.270C is exempt from licensing each individual dog as described in Section 6.04.260. This exemption does not relieve the permit holder of the responsibility of vaccination as outlined in Section 6.04.210. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.270 - Kennels or catteries. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish special regulations applicable to the following: 
(1)  The operation of kennels as defined in subsection U of Section 6.04.010 of this chapter; 
(2)  The keeping of wild animals as defined in subsection AC of Section 6.04.010 of this chapter; and 
(3)  The operation of catteries as defined in subsection H of Section 6.04.010 of this chapter. 
The operation of kennels or catteries and the keeping of wild animals constitute types of activity which require special investigation, review and regulation to ensure that both public and animal health, safety, and welfare are protected. The necessity to conduct such investigation, review and regulation arises for reasons which include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: (i) the fact that such activities create health or safety risks which require special regulation and (ii) the tendency of such activities to create, whether intentionally or unintentionally, a public nuisance. 
B.  Permits. Within the context of this chapter and unless otherwise stated, "permits" shall include licenses issued by the animal control manager pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which authorize either the maintaining and operating of a kennel or cattery (a kennel/cattery permit) or the keeping of a wild animal (a wild animal permit) but shall not include licenses issued by the animal control manager pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.260 which authorize the keeping of a dog. 
C.  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall maintain or operate a kennel or cattery or keep, harbor, or maintain a wild animal within the geographic area of the city without first, being appropriately zoned for such activity and second, applying to and receiving from the animal control manager an annual permit to do so. 
(2)  A person shall be deemed to maintain or operate a kennel if the person keeps, harbors, or maintains more than five (5) dogs over four (4) months of age. 
(3)  A person shall be deemed to maintain or operate a cattery if the person keeps, harbors, or maintains more than five (5) cats over six (6) months of age. 
(4)  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; 
(a)  Persons keeping wild animals solely and exclusive as part of a bona fide rehabilitation or educational activity sanctioned by the State of California, Department of Fish and Game; and 
(b)  Non-profit enterprises recognized by the State of California as animal shelters or humane societies which shelter animals. 
(5)  If a person operates more than one kennel or cattery or maintains wild animals at more than one address, a separate permit shall be required for each location where the person maintains a kennel or cattery or keeps a wild animal. 
D.  Special regulations. The operation of kennels or catteries in appropriately zoned areas and the keeping of wild animals are subject to special regulations governing their operations as set forth in Section 6.04.270 of this chapter. Any such regulations not specifically set forth herein shall be promulgated by the appropriate officer and shall be effective when approved by the animal control director. 
The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed to relieve or excuse the owner from the provisions and requirements of Chapter 6.04 in its entirety; nor from any other applicable requirement as set forth in existing federal, state, or local zoning codes, health and safety codes, business codes or other laws, ordinances, or requirements governing the operation of such a kennel or cattery enterprise or the keeping of such wild animals. 
E.  Application filing. All applications for a permit shall be filed, with the required fees, with the animal control manager. Applications for a kennel/cattery permit shall be accompanied by copies of the rabies vaccination certificates for all dogs or cats to be kept pursuant to the kennel/cattery permit. The animal control manager shall receive any fee required for the application, assure that the application is complete, and conduct such investigation and review as is necessary for action. The application for a permit shall contain such information and be filed on a form as is prescribed by the animal control manager. 
F.  Fees. 
(1)  The fee for the issuance of a permit shall be due and payable by the owner prior to the establishment of the kennel or cattery or the keeping of the wild animal within the city and thereafter on the same date each calendar year, the amount of which shall be established pursuant to Section 6.04.160 of this chapter. 
(2)  The fee for a permit becomes delinquent fourteen (14) calendar days after it becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee as established pursuant to Section 6.04.160 of this chapter shall be added to the regular fee. 
G.  Investigation. The animal control manager shall conduct such investigation of the background of the owner and the applicant and the history and physical condition of the kennel or cattery or keeping of the wild animal, including physical inspection of the premises, as is deemed appropriate. The animal control manager shall consider as evidence of disregard for the purposes of this chapter any revocation of prior permits or conviction on charges directly related to animal cruelty involving the applicant or owner. Such character evidence may be used as cause for denying the application for a permit. 
H.  Issuance. The animal control manager shall issue the permit within ninety (90) days after the date of application unless either: 
(1)  The animal control manager finds in writing that applicant fails to provide information requested with the application which is essential to making a determination; 
(2)  The animal control manager finds in writing that any of the statements made in the application or supplement information submitted are incorrect or untrue; 
(3)  The animal control manager finds in writing an authorized basis for denial of the permit; 
(4)  The animal control manager finds in writing that the applicant does not satisfy any requirement applicable to the permit; or 
(5)  The animal control manager finds in writing that the applicant or enterprise does not conform to existing federal, state, or local zoning codes, health and safety codes, business codes, or other laws, ordinances or requirements governing operation of such a kennel or cattery enterprise or the keeping of such wild animal. 
I.  Conditions. The animal control manager may issue a permit upon such conditions relating to the method or manner of operation of the kennel or cattery or the keeping of wild animal as he or she deems necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or the animals kept. 
Any condition imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section, whether established at the time of issuance, at the time of renewal or during the term of a permit shall be embodied, together with the reasons therefore, in a written notice which is served upon the applicant or holder. The condition shall become effective fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of service of the notice thereof; provided that in the event an appeal therefrom is filed within the time and in the manner prescribed, the condition shall not become effective until the appeal is finally determined. 
J.  Contents of permits. The permit shall contain a complete description of the kennel or cattery or place of keeping authorized by the permit; the business name (if applicable), address, and telephone number of the location so permitted; the name, address, and business and home telephone numbers of the owner of the kennel or cattery or the keeper of the wild animal, the number of animals to be kept pursuant to the permit, and any conditions upon which the permit is issued. The kennel/cattery permit or the wild animal permit or a copy thereof shall be made available for inspection upon demand by any public or peace officer acting within the scope and course of his or her employment. 
K.  Changes in status. During the term of any permit issued pursuant to this section, the holder of the permit shall immediately file, in writing with the animal control manager, notice of any changes in the kennel or cattery or the location of keeping of the animal which relate to changes in the information given in the application for the permit. The animal control manager shall issue an amended permit which shows any changes in the permit. 
L.  Renewal of permits. Approximately forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the expiration of the term of a permit, the animal control manager shall transmit to the permit holder by mail an application for renewal. The application for renewal shall be on such a form and include such information as is required by the animal control manager and as is consistent with the information required in subsections E and G of this section, with the exception that the animal control manager shall act upon the application for renewal not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date a valid application for renewal is filed. 
The animal control manager shall extend the term of the immediately preceding permit during the period of any investigation or examination required to determine whether the permit should be renewed. 
M.  Standards. The animal control manager shall, with the approval of the director, set minimum standards for the proper care and maintenance both of a kennel or cattery or a place of keeping of wild animals and of the animals kept therein which are, at a minimum, consistent with applicable state and federal standards. A copy of such standards shall be provided in writing to the applicant with each initial application for or application for renewal of permit. 
The animal control manager shall notify each permit holder no less than ninety (90) calendar days in advance of any proposed change in the standards and shall advise the permit holder that comments regarding any change may be submitted to the director for review and consideration within thirty (30) calendar days of notification. No change in the standards may be put in force without authorization of the director given at least thirty (30) calendar days in advance of the proposed effective date of the change. 
N.  Compliance with standards. Each applicant or permit holder must demonstrate that the premises, facilities, cages, vivariums, aquariums and equipment addressed in the permit comply with the standards on an ongoing basis. Upon request of the animal control manager, and during normal business hours or by a mutually agreed time for appointment, the applicant or permit holder must make the premises, facilities, cages, vivariums, aquariums and equipment available for inspection by the animal control manager. Failure to allow visual inspection as required shall be deemed failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter and shall be considered cause for denial of application or revocation of the permit. 
O.  Failure to comply with standards. If the applicant or permit holder fails to meet the requirements set in the standards, the animal control manager shall so notify the applicant or permit holder in writing within three (3) calendar days of discovery of the failure to comply with the standards. The written notice shall advise the applicant or permit holder of any existing deficiency and the corrective measures that must be taken and completed to bring the premises, facilities, cages, vivariums, aquariums and equipment into compliance with the standards. 
The applicant or permit holder shall be given no more than thirty (30) calendar days and no less than fourteen (14) calendar days to complete the corrective measures, except that if any deficiency threatens the health or welfare of the animals kept or of the public, such corrective measures shall be made immediately or no later than one (1) day after the discovery of the deficiency. 
Failure to correct the noted deficiencies as required shall be deemed failure to comply with the standards and shall be considered cause for denial of application or for revocation of the permit and may be considered cause for animal nuisance. 
P.  Grounds for denial or revocation. The animal control manager may deny an initial application for or application for renewal of a permit or may revoke a permit during its term if written findings described by subsections N and O of this section of this chapter are made. 
Q.  Method of denial or revocation. A denial of an initial application for or application for renewal of a permit or revocation of an existing permit made by the animal control manager shall be in writing, with the reasons for denial or revocation stated. Written notice of the denial or revocation, together with a copy of the provisions of this section and the standards and any other provisions of Chapter 6.04 which are applicable to the permit, shall be served either in person or by mail to the applicant or permit holder. 
Denial of an initial application for or application for renewal of a permit or revocation of an existing permit shall prohibit operation of the kennel or cattery or keeping of the wild animal at any location which is governed by this chapter. 
With respect to denial of an application for renewal of a permit or revocation of an existing permit, the immediately preceding permit shall be deemed to be in full force and effect for a period of fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of service upon the applicant or permit holder of the notice of denial or revocation. In the event the applicant files an appeal from the denial or revocation in the manner and within the time prescribed by Section 6.04.270R, the immediately preceding permit shall continue in full force and effect during the pendency of the appeal, until the date of final decision by the appellate authority. 
R.  Appeals. The holder of a permit or applicant therefor may file an appeal from the following: 
(1)  The denial of an initial application for or application for renewal of a permit pursuant to the provisions of subsection Q of this section; 
(2)  The imposition of conditions at the time of issuance of an initial or renewed permit, pursuant to the provisions of subsection I of this section; or 
(3)  The revocation of an existing permit pursuant to the provisions of subsection Q of this section. 
Any such appeal shall be in writing in the form of an affidavit, shall state the specific reasons therefor and grounds asserted for relief, shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be filed with the animal control manager no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of the notices prescribed by subsections I and Q of this section, as may be applicable. If an appeal is not filed with the time or in the manner prescribed above, the right to review the denial, conditions, or revocation shall be deemed to have been waived. 
Upon receipt of the appeal, a hearing shall be set in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.04.300 of this chapter. 
S.  Effect of revocation. The revocation of a permit shall terminate the right of the holder of the permit to engage in the enterprise or activity authorized by the permit for a period specified in the order of the hearing officer. 
In the event of revocation of a permit, no other person shall be entitled to any rights or interests under the revoked permit, nor shall any such person be entitled to issuance of a permit for the enterprise except upon written application filed with the animal control officer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
T.  Removal of animals. Upon revocation of the permit, the permit holder shall have fourteen (14) calendar days in which to remove from the city or otherwise dispose of the animal kept pursuant to the permit or to appeal the decision of the hearing officer. Should the owner fail to take such action, the animal control manager shall have the authority to seize the animal in a manner provided by law and dispose of it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.280 - Animal nuisances. 
A.  Declaration. The keeping, harboring, maintaining, or owning of any animal committing an animal nuisance as defined in Section 6.04.010D of this chapter, in addition to being a violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance subject to abatement proceedings conducted in a similar, but not necessarily identical, manner as proceedings for abatement of other public nuisances. 
B.  Authority to abate. Upon a determination after a hearing held in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.04.300 of this chapter, the animal control manager shall have the authority to take whatever measures are specified in the determination to abate the animal nuisance including, but not limited to, impoundment and destruction of the nuisance animal. 
C.  Complaint. Any person aggrieved by an animal nuisance may file a complaint, signed under penalty of perjury, with the animal control manager. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form of an affidavit and shall contain the following facts: 
(1)  A description of the offending animal including, to the extent known, the color, size, sex, breed, and name of the animal, and the name and address of the owner of the animal; 
(2)  An assertion that the animal described creates an animal nuisance within the meaning of Section 6.04.010D of this chapter, together with a statement of facts upon which the assertion is based, including the name and address of any person who has been aggrieved by the animal, a description of the animal nuisance, the names and asses of any witnesses thereto, the time, date, and location of any incident related to the assertion; and 
(3)  The name, residential and occupational addresses and telephone numbers of the affiant. 
D.  Timely fling. Unless otherwise provided, the filing of an animal nuisance complaint must be made within the (30) days of the most recent event or circumstances occasioning the complaint. Upon evidence that good cause exists that the complaint could not be filed within the (30) calendar days, the animal control manager may extend the deadline for filing of the complaint. 
E.  Impoundment of animal. Upon receipt by the animal control manager of a complaint filed in compliance with Section 6.04.280C and Section 6.04.280D, the animal control manager shall initiate an investigation of the incident or incidents described in the complaint for the purpose of verifying the facts stated or obtaining other information. If, after an investigation, the identified facts show the existence of an animal nuisance within the meaning of Section 6.04.280D, the animal control manager shall cause a hearing to be conducted. If such nuisance poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, the animal control manager shall immediately locate and impound the animal which is the subject of the charges. 
F.  Notice of hearing. Not later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the impoundment of a purported nuisance animal or, if the animal is not impounded but a determination has been made to hold a hearing to abate an animal nuisance, at such time as determined by the animal control manager, the animal control manager shall either personally serve upon or mail to the residential address of the owner of the animal and affiant the following: 
(1)  A written notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing prescribed by Section 6.04.300 of this chapter; 
(2)  A copy of the complaint filed pursuant to Section 6.04.280C and Section 6.04.280D of this chapter; and 
(3)  A copy of the provisions of this chapter. Conversely, if, or after an investigation, the identified facts show the cause to conduct a hearing has not been shown, the animal control manager shall so notify the affiant and the animal owner in writing. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.44.290 - Dangerous and vicious animals. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the keeping of animals which are potentially dangerous or vicious or involve a threat to the safety of people and other animals on stets, sidewalks, and private property where the animals are not properly maintained as such animals constitute a serious hazard within the city. The increasing tendency to maintain dogs which, by virtue of breeding or training, have a propensity to attack others compounds the hazard. 
Every owner of an animal is held strictly accountable for the exercise of such control over the animal as necessary to insure that the animal does not injure innocent human beings or other animals who are not on the premises where the animal is maintained. Such strict accountability is hereby imposed whether or not the injury results from the negligence or fault of the owner, and regardless of the degree of precaution or control exercised by the owner. 
B.  Owner responsible. Any owner of any animal is deemed responsible for the acts committed by that animal when the owner has failed to comply with the legal requirements for the keeping of that animal as defined in this chapter. No person shall permit or suffer an animal to act in such a manner as constitutes dangerous or vicious behavior as defined in Sections 6.04.010K and 6.04.010AB of this chapter. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this section is punishable as follows: 
(1)  Any animal owner who maintains an animal in such a manner as to permit or suffer it to exhibit dangerous behavior shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(2)  Any animal owner who maintains any animal in such a manner as to permit or suffer it to exhibit vicious behavior shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Nothing in this section shall prevent prosecution for violations of other statutes or codes which may deal with other or more specific offenses, including but not limited to, penal and civil statutes. 
C.  Sale prohibited. No animal held in custody by the animal control manager which is known to have exhibited dangerous or vicious behavior as defined in this chapter shall be released for sale to any member of the public, but rather shall be destroyed upon exhaustion of the required period of impoundment unless legally reclaimed by the owner. 
D.  Quarantine. No animal which has been declared dangerous or vicious or against which dangerous or vicious animal affidavit has been filed may be impounded or quarantined at any place other than the animal control center unless authorized by the animal control manager. 
E.  Filing of charges. Any person, including employees of animal control, possessing personal knowledge of facts that there exists a dangerous or vicious animal within the city may file with the animal control manager a written affidavit, signed under the penalty of perjury, which contains the following facts: 
(1)  A description of the offending animal including, to the extent known, the color, size, sex, breed and name of the animal, and the name and address of the animal owner; 
(2)  An assertion that the animal described is a dangerous or vicious animal within the meaning of Sections 6.04.010K or 6.04.010AB, together with a statement of the facts upon which the assertion was based, including the name and address of any person who has been victimized or injured, including a description of the extent of the injuries, the names and addresses of the witnesses thereto, the time, date, and location of the incident related to the assertion, and an explanation of how the personal knowledge of the affiant was acquired; and 
(3)  The name, residential and occupational addresses and telephone numbers of the affiant. 
F.  Timely filing. Unless otherwise provided, the filing of a dangerous or vicious affidavit must be made within the (30) calendar days of the most recent event or circumstances occasioning the affidavit. Upon evidence that good cause exists that an affidavit could not be filed within the (30) calendar days, the animal control manager may extend the deadline for filing the affidavit. 
G.  Impoundment of animal. Upon receipt by the animal control manager of an affidavit filed in compliance with Section 6.04.290E and 6.04.290F of this chapter, the animal control manager shall initiate an investigation of the incident or incidents described in the affidavit for the purpose of verifying the facts stated and obtaining other information. If, after an investigation, the identified facts show the existence of a vicious animal within the meaning of Section 6.04.010AA of this chapter, the animal control manager shall immediately locate and impound the animal which is the subject of the charges. If, or after an investigation, the animal control manger identifies facts which show the existence of a dangerous animal within the meaning of Section 6.04.010J of this chapter, he or she shall cause a dangerous animal hearing to be conducted. 
H.  Notice of hearing. Not later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the impoundment of a purportedly vicious animal or, if the animal is not impounded but a determination has been made to hold a hearing concerning a purported dangerous animal, at such time as is determined by the animal control manager, the animal control manager shall mail to the residential address of the owner of the animal and affiant the following: 
(1)  A written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing prescribed in Section 6.04.300 of this chapter, the date of the said hearing to be scheduled not earlier than fourteen (14) calendar days following personal service or deposit in the United States mail of the notice; 
(2)  A copy of the affidavit filed pursuant to Section 6.04.290E and 6.04.290F; and 
(3)  A copy of the provisions of this chapter. Conversely, if, or after an investigation, the identified facts show that cause to conduct a dangerous or vicious animal hearing has not been shown, the animal control manager shall so notify the animal owner in writing. 
I.  Bond required. At the discretion of the animal control wager, any animal impounded or quarantined pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be returned to the custody of its owner pending the conduct of the dangerous or vicious animal hearing and the rendering of a decision by the hearing officer provided such return is determined to pose no threat to public health and safety. 
The owner, if authorized by the animal control manager, may gain custody of the animal by posting a cash bond in the amount of one thousand dolly ($1,000) or such greater amount as is justified in writing and approved by the director as necessary to assure the return of the animal or by fishing other security upon review and approval by the city attorney, which bond or other security shall be forfeited in the event the animal is not delivered into the custody of the animal control manager if so ordered in the decision rendered by the hearing officer. 
J.  Registration. Any animal which has been declared by the hearing officer to be dangerous or vicious win the meaning of Section 6.04.010(J) or Section 6.04.010(AA) shall be subject to special registration requirements as follows: 
An owner of a dangerous or vicious animal is required to pay, in addition to any licensing or permit fee, an annual special registration fee (as applicable) which shall be valid and renewable concurrent with the effective dates of the licensing of the animal. Late registration is subject to a penalty fee equal to two times the annual registration fee. 
K.  Keeping of a dangerous or vicious animal. Except as otherwise provided in the decision rendered by the hearing officer, the keeping of an animal which has been declared dangerous or vicious shall, at the minimum, be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The animal must at all times, when not under restraint by leash on public property, be securely confined under lock within a lawful fence. Except as provided by Section 17121 of the California Food and Agriculture Code, a lawful fence means any fence which is good, strong, substantial and sufficient to prevent ingress and egress of the animal. No fence is a lawful fence within the meaning of this section unless it is a height of at least five (5) feet, is securely affixed at its base and maintained in good repair; 
(2)  The animal must, at all times when kept in any part of a house or structure, be confined in such a manner that the animal cannot exit such building on its own volition; and 
(3)  The animal must, at all times, be licensed and registered as required by this chapter and must be kept in compliance with all the regulatory provisions of this chapter in its entirety; 
(4)  The animal owner must notify the animal control manager in writing within three (3) calendar days if the location of the animal is to be permanently changed. An administration fee will be charged to modify the issued permit. 
(5)  The owner must allow the animal control manager on the propel at such time as reasonable to insure the provisions ordered by the hearing officer are being complied with. 
All costs associated with these provisions or any other or additional provisions ordered by the hearing officer shall be borne by the owner of the animal which has been declared to be dangerous or vicious. 
L.  Mitigating circumstance. In considering whether an animal is dangerous and/or vicious, the hearing officer may hear and consider evidence of any of the following mitigating circumstances: 
(1)  That the injury or damage complained of was sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(2)  That the animal was protecting or defending a person within the mediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(3)  That the injury or damage complained of was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time the injury or damage was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal which is the subject of the hearing. 
(4)  The injury or damage complained of was to a domestic animal and was sustained while the animal in question was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner and the damage or injury complained of was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
M.  Right to destroy. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the animal control manager from destroying an animal which is in the act of dangerous or vicious behavior towards any person or other animal as set forth in Sections 6.04.010K and 6.04.010AB, if such immediate destruction is reasonably necessary to protect public safety. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.300 - Hearings. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to create special procedures to assure full access to administrative remedies in the application of enforcement of this title and for the mediation of disputes involving any animal governed by this chapter. Such procedures shall be administered by the director and conducted by the hearing officer. 
B.  Cause for hearing. Hearings may be held to determine the following: 
(1)  That an animal is a nuisance animal within the meaning of this chapter; 
(2)  That an animal is a dangerous animal within the meaning of this chapter; 
(3)  That an animal is a vicious animal within the meaning of this chapter; 
(4)  That a permit has been denied, issued conditionally, or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  That the decision of the hearing officer has been breached; or 
(6)  That cause for an order no longer exists and the owner may be relieved of the conditions imposed by said order. 
A person shall be deemed to have shown cause for a hearing to be held when he or she complies with the applicable appeal, complaint or charge filing provisions specified in Sections 6.04.270, 6.04.280, and 6.04.290 of this chapter. 
As requested by the director, hearings may be held in order to attempt mediation of other such matters as may arise from the keeping of animals. 
C.  Authority of hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be authorized within the scope of authority given by Title 6 to the director, to conduct hearings to resolve conflicts arising from the application and enforcement of this title, to make binding determinations, and to mediate disputes related to the keeping of animals pursuant to this title. 
D.  Oaths and subpoenas. The hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths of affirmations. At the request of either the animal control manager or the animal owner, the city clerk shall, on behalf of the city, issue subpoenas for attendance of witnesses at the hearing. 
E.  Hearing. 
(1)  Not later than the (30) calendar days following the date of filing either an appeal as prescribed by Section 6.04.2748 or a complaint as prescribed in Sections 6.04.2840 and 6.04.284D or charges as prescribed in Sections 6.04.290E and 6.04.290F of this chapter, the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the requested action should be granted or denied. Written notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be served upon the director, the affiant and the animal owner not later than fourteen (14) calendar days preceding the date of the hearing. 
(a)  During the hearing, the burden of proof shall rest with the affiant and such proof shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The provisions of the California Administrative Procedure Act (commencing at Section 11500 of the Government Code) shall not be applicable to such hearing nor shall formal rules of evidence in civil or criminal judicial proceedings be applicable. The affiant and the animal owner may appear, present evidence, and examine and cross-examine witnesses. 
(b)  Absent extraordinary circumstances as determined by the hearing officer, no animal may be presented as evidence or be present during the hearing. 
(c)  In the event the affiant or the animal owner fails to appear at the time, date and place appointed for the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in the absence of the affiant or animal owner and the hearing officer shall render a decision based upon evidence presented during the hearing. 
(d)  For the convenience of the hearing officer only, the hearing shall be tape recorded and the tape recordings and all documents presented as evidence shy be maintained for a period of wee (3) years as a part of the record of hearing. 
(2)  Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions relative to the following: 
(a)  Whether, based upon the evidence during the hearing, the action requested is granted or denied; and 
(b)  What disposition should be made as a consequence. 
(3)  The hearing officer shall make a disposition based upon consideration of all of the facts and circumstances revealed by the evidence presented in the hearing and may order either: 
(a)  That the animal control manager destroy the animal in question; 
(b)  That the animal control manager release the animal in question to the owner subject to such conditions or special registration requirements as may be specified in this chapter or required to ensure public safety and animal welfare; 
(c)  That the animal control manager remove the animal in question for disposition in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter; 
(d)  That the animal control manager release the animal in question to the owner subject to payment of such fees and expenses as may be applicable according to the provisions of this chapter, or 
(e)  That animal control manager issue, deny, or revoke the subject permit. 
(4)  Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, notice of the written decision, including a copy thereof, shall be filed with the animal control manager and shall be personally served upon or deposited in the United States mail to the affiant and the animal owner not later than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date on which the hearing was concluded. 
(5)  Failure to comply with any procedural requirements or time limits of this chapter shall not deprive the hearing officer of jurisdiction over the issue or shall not vitiate any hearing conducted or order made pursuant to this chapter unless such failure constitutes a denial of due process of law. 
F.  Finality of determination. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and there shall be no appeal. 
G.  Disposition of animal. Except as otherwise provided, in the event that the hearing officer orders destruction of an animal, the animal control manager shall immediately impound or continue to impound said animal until fourteen (14) days following the date of personal service upon or deposit in the United States mail of notice of the hearing officer's decision to the owner. In the event that the animal control manager is personally served with summons or other legal process in connection with a lawsuit which seeks review of the hearing officer's decision, the animal shall not be destroyed and shall continue to be impounded at the owner's expense while the lawsuit is pending. 
H.  Release of animal. No animal impounded pursuant to Section 6.04.280 or 6.04.290 shall be released to any person other than the owner of such animal. Should the owner fail to redeem the animal by the date specified in the decision of the hearing officer, unless for good cause as determined by the animal control manager, the animal shall be destroyed. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or a decision or order by the hearing officer to the cones, the animal control manager shall not release an animal impounded pursuant to Section 6.04.280 or 6.04.290 to the owner absent compliance with the provisions relating to redemption prescribed by Section 6.04.190D of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the payment by the owner of all fees and charges for impoundment. 
I.  Notification of change. At such time as an animal declared to be dangerous, vicious, or a nuisance dies or the location where the animal is kept changes, either through change of residence or of ownership, the person owning the animal so declared must notify, in writing within five (5) calendar days, the animal control manager of the change. Such notification must include the date of the animal's death and the place of burial or disposal of the animal or the name and the residential and occupational addresses and telephone numbers of the new owner and the new address and telephone number where the animal is to be kept. 
J.  Failure to comply. Failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the order of the hearing officer is a misdemeanor unless otherwise specifically made an infraction. 
K.  Breach of conditions. Jurisdiction shall continue in the hearing officer to order the removal and destruction of any animal which has been declared dangerous, vicious, or a nuisance should any of the conditions imposed by the order of the hearing officer be breached. Such action shall be taken pursuant to a hearing initiated by the animal control manager and scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.04.300E except that once prima facie evidence of the breach of conditions has been established, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner to show cause as to why the animal should not be removed and destroyed. 
L.  Relief. If, after a period of two (2) years from the date of the determination of the hearing officer that the animal is dangerous, vicious, or a nuisance, it can be demonstrated that the owner has complied with the order of the hearing officer and that no further cause exists for the order to stay in force, the owner may apply to the hearing officer, in writing, for relief from the conditions for keeping or the provisions for special registration of the animal. Upon investigation by the animal control manager and concurrence by the hearing officer, relief may be granted and the owner so notified in writing or a hearing may be conducted to determine if cause for relief exists. 
M.  The cost of a hearing held pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the animal's owner unless the hearing officer rules in favor of the owner. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.310 - Violation of a public nuisance. 
The maintenance of any animal in violation of any provision of this chapter or any order of a hearing officer issued pursuant to this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
6.04.320 - Penalties. 
A.  A violation of any of the regulatory requirements of Title 6 shall be punishable as follows: 
1.  A first violation shall be an infraction subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.030 of this code; and 
2.  A second or subsequent violation committed within the thirty (30) calendar days of the previous violation shall be a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 hereof. 
B.  Exception as set forth in subection A., above, every other violation of Chapter 6.04 constituting an infraction is punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance provisions within one (1) year; or 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance provision within one (1) year. 
C.  Every violation of Chapter 6.04 constituting a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months or by both. 
D.  Assessment of other penalties as prescribed herein notwithstanding, violations of this title may result in revocation of license or permit. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 14, 10-19-2009)  
6.04.330 - Protection of police dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, sere, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by (1) the police department, (2) any other law enforcement agency while engaged in mutual aid assistance to the city, or (3) the designated handlers of such animals, or to willfully interfere with or obstruct any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the duties or functions of the police department or other law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 1880 § 1 (part), 1994).  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH 
Sections:  
Article I. - Rules and Regulations 
 
8.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Garbage. "Garbage," as used in this chapter, means and includes table refuse and offal, swill and every accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits and other foods of whatsoever character and includes all animal and vegetable refuse from kitchens and all household waste that has been prepared for or intended to be used as foods or has resulted from the preparation of food. Dead animals over ten pounds in weight, dish or waste water are not included under garbage. In addition, garbage shall consist of rubbish and other waste materials, including tin cans, bottles, chips, wooden ware, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, shoes, clothing, sawdust, packing material, broken crockery, broken glass, broken bottles, ashes, cinders, shells and metals. 
B.  Green waste. "Green waste," as used in this chapter, means any plant material that is separated at the point of collection. Green waste includes, but is not limited to, yard trimmings, plant wastes and untreated wood wastes. Green waste does not include treated wood waste, mixed demolition or mixed construction debris. 
(Ord. 2073 § 3, 2001: prior code § 13.1).  
8.04.015 - Use of city's collection and disposal service. 
Every person who owns or occupies, or is in possession or control of, any property in the city that is developed or used such that garbage and green waste are produced or accumulate thereon shall discard such materials through the regular collection service of the city. 
(Ord. 2073 § 1, 2001).  
8.04.020 - Rules established. 
The following rules, as contained in this chapter, covering the handling of accumulations of garbage, green waste and other waste matter to be observed by the occupants of places of residence and places of business in the city are established. In addition, the director of public works operations for the city is authorized to establish administrative guidelines for the implementation of the requirements and standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2073 § 4, 2001: prior code § 13.2).  
8.04.025 - Exemptions from use of services provided by the city. 
A.  No person shall be required to use the collection services provided by the city if that person can establish to the city's satisfaction that any one (1) of the following conditions are met: 
1.  That the property the person owns, occupies, possesses, or controls is undeveloped and/or does not produce or accumulate any garbage or green waste; 
2.  That all garbage or green waste produced or accumulated at the property is disposed of by agreement with and through the use of the approved garbage or green waste container of a person subscribing to the service provided by the city; or 
3.  That the person self-hauls all garbage or green waste produced on the property, as provided for in this section. 
B.  Any person subject to the requirements of this chapter who opts to self-haul garbage or green waste that is produced or accumulates on the person's property, as permitted by subsection (A)(3), shall do so subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The owner, occupant, or manager of a residential property may collect and transport garbage or green waste generated on the property to an authorized disposal facility. Owners, occupants, and managers of residential properties who self-haul such materials, as provided for in this section, may not contract with anyone other than the city for transport services; 
2.  The owner or manager of a commercial or industrial establishment, or the employee of such a person, may collect and transport garbage or green waste generated by the establishment to an authorized disposal facility. Owners and managers of commercial and industrial establishments who self-haul such materials, as provided for in this section, may not contract with anyone other than the city for transport services; and 
3.  A landscaping or gardening contractor hired by the owner, occupant, or manager of a property may remove green waste materials from the property where that contractor is working, if the removal is an incidental part of the gardening, landscaping, tree trimming, cleaning, maintenance, construction, or other similar service such contractor is providing. 
C.  No person exempt from use of the city's garbage or green waste collection service pursuant to this section shall be subject to the rates and charges for services set forth in Article II of this chapter or be billed for those rates and charges as provided for in Section 8.04.130. 
D.  With the exception of those who self-haul garbage or green waste from their property in compliance with this section, it is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person other than the city to collect and dispose of garbage and green waste. Except as provided for in this section, it is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to solicit or attempt to obtain from the owner, occupant, or manager of any property in the city permission to remove garbage or green waste therefrom. The city may revoke any exemption granted pursuant to this section upon a determination that the factual basis for it no longer exists. 
(Ord. 2316 § 23, 2008: Ord. 2073 § 2, 2001).  
8.04.030 - Garbage containers. 
Property owners and tenants shall deposit all garbage and putrescible matter or mixed garbage and rubbish in containers which are provided or approved by the city. Containers for garbage and rubbish should be of an adequate size and in sufficient numbers to contain without overflowing all the refuse that a household or other establishment generates within the designated removal period. Containers when filled shall not exceed sixty pounds in weight except where mechanical loading systems are used. Containers shall be maintained in a clean, sound condition free from putrescible residue. 
(Ord. 1725 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1614 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1170 § 1, 1976: prior code § 13.3).  
8.04.035 - City containers. 
Containers which are provided by the city shall be the exclusive containers for deposit of garbage and putrescible matter and shall be kept in good repair by the customer, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
The cost to replace a city container which is lost, damaged, or not returned to the city upon cessation of service shall be charged to the customer. 
(Ord. 1725 § 2, 1988).  
8.04.040 - Oversized garbage and rubbish. 
Garbage, rubbish or waste matter, except as in this section provided, shall be kept in receptacles provided therefor between the times when the same shall be removed. Items which cannot conveniently be placed in containers, shall be disposed of by special pickup arranged with the refuse collection division. Special pickup charges will be billed at the actual cost of labor, materials, equipment, and landfill charges incurred by the city in providing the service. 
(Ord. 1725 § 3, 1988: prior code § 13.9).  
8.04.050 - Placement of receptacles. 
All receptacles for garbage, rubbish or waste matter, and all rubbish and waste matter, upon the day or days designated by the city for the collection thereof, shall be placed by the occupant at the alley in all blocks where a city alley runs through the block, whether or not the occupant's premises abut such alley, for the convenient collection of such garbage, rubbish or waste matter. All receptacles for garbage, rubbish or waste matters, upon the day or days designated by the city for collection therefor, shall be placed in a location on such premises designated by the city for the convenient collection of such garbage, rubbish or waste matter in those blocks in the city where no city alley runs through the block. 
Residential curbside refuse collection customers shall place container(s) provided by city at the curb on the designated day of collection and in a location accessible to refuse collection trucks. 
(Ord. 1725 § 4, 1988: prior code § 13.10).  
8.04.055 - Designated locations and days. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to place, keep, or cause, or suffer or permit to be placed or kept, any receptacle for garbage, rubbish, green waste, other waste matter or recyclables upon the any public street, curb, sidewalk, alley or public way except in the location that has been designated by the city, and then only after four p.m. on the day preceding the day designated, and on the day designated by the city for the collection thereof until nine p.m. No aforementioned receptacle shall be stored between collection days in such a manner that it is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2181 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1725 § 5, 1988: Ord. 1467 § 1, 1982).  
8.04.060 - Scattering, burying or burning garbage. 
No person shall throw, place or scatter any garbage upon the surface of any premises or bury or burn the same thereon. 
(Prior code § 13.11).  
8.04.070 - Depositing rubbish on another's premises. 
No person shall permit or allow any rubbish or waste matter to be scattered about in his yard or upon the premises occupied by him or to throw or deposit any rubbish or waste matter upon the premises of any other person, or upon any of the streets, alleys or other public places of the city. 
(Prior code § 13.12).  
8.04.080 - Use of another's receptacle. 
No person shall place any rubbish or waste matter or permit or allow any rubbish or waste matter to be placed in the city's or any other person's receptacles without the consent of the city or such other person. No consent is given by the city for the any person to place rubbish or waste matter in city receptacles intended for use of others. 
(Ord. 1348 § 1, 1980: prior code § 13.12.1).  
8.04.090 - Manure—Special receptacle. 
No person shall permit or allow any manure to accumulate, be or remain in or about any stable, barn, shed or corral in the city for a longer period than three days; provided, that manure may be kept in a tight box or receptacle with a close-fitting top or cover so that flies or insects cannot get into or have access to such receptacle. The keeping of manure contrary to the provision of this section is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 13.13).  
8.04.100 - Manure—Removal. 
The manure kept in any box or receptacle under the provisions of Section 8.04.090 shall be removed and disposed of at least once each month. Any manure so removed must not be stored or gathered into piles within the city unless for immediate use upon the soil therein and when so stored or gathered must be used within two days thereafter. 
(Prior code § 13.14).  
8.04.110 - Disposition of dead animals. 
Whenever any horse, cow or other animal dies within the limits of the city, the owner or person in whose possession the same may be at the time of its death shall dispose of its carcass in such manner that the same shall not become a nuisance; provided, that the mode and manner of its disposal is to be at all times subject to sanitary regulations and control of the council of the city and the health officer thereof. All such carcasses must be removed within four hours after the death of the animal, or the public works manager - solid waste must be notified where such carcass may be found and he shall remove the same. It shall be the duty of the public works manager-solid waste to remove such carcass within twenty-four hours after receiving notice thereof; provided, however, that at the discretion of the city manager, the duty of collecting and disposing of the carcasses of dead animals may be delegated to the poundmaster or any other city employee instead of the public works manager - solid waste. 
(Ord. 2073 § 8, 2001: prior code § 13.16).  
8.04.120 - Collection is duty of director of public works operations. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public works operations of the city and his assistants to collect all garbage, green waste and waste matter from the places of residence and places of business in the city and to dump and deposit such matter so collected as soon after collection as is reasonably possible at the place provided for by the city. 
(Ord. 2073 § 9, 2001: Ord. 1614 § 2, 1986: prior code § 13.17).  
8.04.130 - Billing and collection of fees. 
The finance officer shall bill all fees for garbage and refuse disposal to the person liable therefor, in advance, at monthly, bimonthly or such other intervals as he shall determine in his discretion; except that fees determined on an hourly or volume basis shall be billed in arrears. Such billing shall be included with the utility bill established by the city for sewer and water charges, where the party liable for such refuse collection bill is the same as the party liable for such sewer and water bill. Utility bills shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by the twentieth day from the bill date, in the case of monthly or other interval bills, or the twentieth of the second month from the bill date in the case of bimonthly bills. In the event of delinquency of the utility bill or any part thereof, the city shall exercise the enforcement procedures set forth in Section 15.32.160. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as affecting the personal obligation of the person liable for payment of such charges, nor as limiting the right of the city to commence and prosecute a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of such sums owned to the city, nor as limiting or affecting the right of the city to perfect and foreclose upon any lien on real property which may be created by this section. Each remedy provided in this code for enforcement of payment of fees or charges or compliance with the terms of this code is separate and cumulative to each other provision for enforcement, and the same may be exercised separately or cumulatively. If any action is brought by the city to recover any fees or charges owned to the city pursuant to this code, including but not limited to the collection of utility bills for refuse collection, sewer service or water service, such action shall include attorney's fees in a reasonable amount to be determined by such court, but not less than fifty dollars for each such action. 
(Prior code § 13.19).  
8.04.135 - Deposits for refuse service. 
The decision of the city to require a new residential applicant for refuse service to deposit a sum of money with the city prior to establishing an account and furnishing service shall be based solely upon the creditworthiness of the applicant as determined by the city in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Section 15.32.165. 
(Ord. 1958 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1752 § 5, 1990).  
8.04.140 - Private collections of garbage and green waste material prohibited. 
The city, its duly authorized servants, officers or employees, or any person with whom the city has executed a written contract therefor, shall have the exclusive right to gather and collect garbage and green waste material within the city. Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.04.025, it is unlawful for any other person to collect or gather or remove garbage or green waste material within the city. 
(Ord. 2073 § 10, 2001: prior code § 13.20).  
8.04.150 - Enforcement of chapter—Right of entry. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, the finance officer, the director of public works operations and the health officer, or any of their assistants, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they shall have the power and authority to enter all premises at and during reasonable hours for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being obeyed. 
(Ord. 2073 § 11, 2001: prior code § 13.21).  
8.04.160 - Garbage accumulation prohibited. 
No person shall have or permit upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any nuisance detrimental to health or any accumulation of garbage, rubbish or waste matter or manure or any carcass of any animal, contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13.22).  
8.04.170 - Condemnation of receptacles—Notice. 
In the event any garbage, rubbish or waste matter can or receptacle is found by the enforcement officer, or officers specified in this chapter, not in compliance with the provisions as set forth in this chapter, or detrimental to the public health, after an inspection by such enforcement officer, a notice shall be served upon the owner, resident or tenant on the premises on which such can or receptacle is located by the enforcement officer stating that the can or receptacle is condemned and must be removed and replaced by one which complies with the provisions of this chapter within a period of five days. 
(Prior code § 13.12 (part)).  
8.04.180 - Condemnation of receptacles—Removal. 
The notice shall also state that if the can or receptacle is not removed and replaced within the same time, the enforcement officers shall remove the can or receptacle from the premises. The enforcement officer is empowered to condemn and remove from the premises such can or receptacle and upon such removal the owner, resident or tenant shall be liable to the city for the sum of fifteen dollars to defray the cost of removal thereof, which amount may be added to any fees otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1752 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1614 § 3, 1986: prior code § 13.23 (part))  
8.04.190 - Condemnation of receptacles—Notice of destruction. 
In the event the can or receptacle is removed by the enforcement officers, a notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises stating that the can or receptacle shall be destroyed. If such can or receptacle shall be held for a period of thirty days after posting and, if no action is commenced to recover possession of such can or receptacle, the same shall be summarily destroyed. If such can or receptacle is held by a court in any such action to be detrimental to the public health the same shall be summarily destroyed immediately after the decision of the court has become final. 
(Prior code § 13.23 (part)).  
8.04.200 - Condemnation of receptacle—Not a bar. 
The exercise of any power under this section is not to be construed as an exclusive remedy or as an election to proceed under it only and shall not be a bar to any other procedure or prosecution under any section of this chapter, the Charter or the laws of the state. 
(Prior code § 13.23 (part)).  
8.04.220 - Buildings—Design requirements. 
The design of any new, substantially remodeled or expanded building or other facility shall provide for proper storage or handling which will accommodate the solid waste loading anticipated and which will allow for efficient and safe waste removal or collection. The design shall demonstrate to local land use and building permit issuing authorities that it includes the required provisions. 
(Ord. 1170 § 3, 1976: prior code § 13.25).  
Article II. - Rates and Charges 
 
8.04.230 - Residential—Generally. 
The fees and charges for collection of garbage, street trees, refuse, green waste and other wastes from residences is established as follows: 
	01/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
1. Per single-family dwelling unit provided with collection from three hundred gallon containers in an alley or apartments with two units or less and drive through access per unit per month 	$17.33 	$17.93 	$18.56 	$19.21 	$19.88 
2. Per each apartment unit with total units of three or more and drive through access provided with collection from three hundred gallon containers per unit per month 	$17.18 	$17.78 	$18.40 	$19.05 	$19.72 
3. Per single-family dwelling unit provided with packout service per unit per month 	$83.79 	$86.73 	$89.76 	$92.90 	$96.16 
4. Per single-family dwelling unit provided with curb line service per unit per month 	$22.58 	$23.37 	$24.19 	$25.04 	$25.92 
5. Per single-family dwelling unit with disabled/senior citizen occupant provided with packout service per month 	$22.58 	$23.37 	$24.19 	$25.04 	$25.92 
6. Per mobile home dwelling unit provided with packout service per unit per month 	$80.65 	$83.47 	$86.39 	$89.41 	$92.54 
7. Per mobile home dwelling unit provided with curb line service per unit per month 	$17.23 	$17.84 	$18.46 	$19.11 	$19.77 
8. For additional curb line containers furnished by the city for a dwelling unit per unit per year or part thereof 	$171.65 	$177.66 	$183.88 	$190.32 	$196.98 
9. Per dwelling unit provided with green waste service per container per month 	$4.85 	$5.02 	$5.20 	$5.38 	$5.57 
 
(Ord. 2309 § 1, 2008: editorially amended during 11-07 Supplement; Res. 2005-125, 2006; Ord. 2073 § 5, 2001: Ord. 1974 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1791 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1752 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1725 § 6, 1988: Ord. 1614 § 4, 1986: Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(a)). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 1, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.235 - New residential. 
Each residential unit for which a building permit is issued on or after August 1, 2008 shall pay an additional one time charge for garbage, green waste, rubbish, storm drainage and refuse service, at the time of issuance of said permit as follows: 
New single family residential, including mobile homes 	$419.15 
New multi family development fee is paid per unit 	$290.88 
 
(Ord. 2309 § 2, 2008: Ord. 2139 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1795 § 1, 1991). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 2, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.250 - Business—Generally. 
A.  Every business, industrial, or mercantile establishment shall be liable for payments for refuse service; provided that the public works manager - solid waste may combine accounts for businesses in office buildings and in similar cases where equity and justice would require several businesses as one for the purpose of establishing fees. 
B.  Where more than one account is established for a single container for the convenience of the establishments, a service charge of two dollars and ten cents per month will be charged to each account in addition to the normal pickup fee. 
(Ord. 2073 § 6, 2001: Ord. 1752 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1614 § 5, 1986: Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(b)(1)).  
8.04.260 - Business—Fees. 
The fees and charges for collection of garbage, rubbish, street trees, refuse and other wastes for each business shall be in accordance with the following chart: 
01/01/2015 Commercial Refuse Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$61.25 	$115.81 	$170.37 	$224.93 	$279.49 	$334.04 	$388.60 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$43.59 	$87.20 	$130.79 	$174.38 	$217.97 	$261.56 	$305.15 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$66.74 	$126.78 	$186.82 	$246.86 	$306.89 	$366.93 	$426.97 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$79.92 	$153.16 	$226.41 	$299.65 	$372.86 	$446.10 	$519.35 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$87.76 	$168.84 	$249.91 	$330.99 	$412.06 	$493.13 	$574.22 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$95.60 	$184.52 	$273.44 	$362.34 	$451.26 	$540.16 	$629.07 
5 				$103.43 	$200.19 	$296.93 	$393.18 	$490.44 	$587.18 	$683.94 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$111.28 	$215.87 	$320.45 	$425.05 	$529.61 	$634.21 	$738.79 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$126.95 	$247.21 	$367.48 	$487.74 	$608.01 	$728.26 	$848.53 
 
01/01/2016 Commercial Refuse Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$61.86 	$116.97 	$172.07 	$227.18 	$282.28 	$337.38 	$392.49 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.03 	$88.07 	$132.10 	$176.12 	$220.15 	$264.18 	$308.20 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$67.41 	$128.05 	$188.69 	$249.33 	$309.96 	$370.60 	$431.24 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$80.72 	$154.69 	$228.67 	$302.65 	$376.59 	$450.56 	$524.54 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$88.64 	$170.53 	$252.41 	$334.30 	$416.18 	$498.06 	$579.96 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$96.56 	$186.37 	$276.17 	$365.96 	$455.77 	$545.56 	$635.36 
5 				$104.46 	$202.19 	$299.90 	$397.11 	$495.34 	$593.05 	$690.78 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$112.39 	$218.03 	$323.65 	$429.30 	$534.91 	$640.55 	$746.18 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$128.22 	$249.68 	$371.15 	$492.62 	$614.09 	$735.54 	$857.02 
 
01/01/2017 Commercial Refuse Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$62.48 	$118.14 	$173.79 	$229.45 	$285.11 	$340.75 	$396.41 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.47 	$88.95 	$133.42 	$177.89 	$222.35 	$266.82 	$311.28 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$68.08 	$129.33 	$190.58 	$251.82 	$313.06 	$374.31 	$435.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$81.53 	$156.24 	$230.96 	$305.67 	$380.35 	$455.07 	$529.79 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$89.52 	$172.23 	$254.93 	$337.64 	$420.34 	$503.04 	$585.76 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$97.52 	$188.23 	$278.94 	$369.62 	$460.33 	$551.02 	$641.71 
5 				$105.51 	$204.21 	$302.90 	$401.08 	$500.30 	$598.98 	$697.69 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$113.52 	$220.21 	$326.89 	$433.59 	$540.26 	$646.96 	$753.64 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$129.50 	$252.18 	$374.87 	$497.54 	$620.23 	$742.90 	$865.59 
 
01/01/2018 Commercial Refuse Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$63.11 	$119.32 	$175.53 	$231.75 	$287.96 	$344.16 	$400.37 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.91 	$89.84 	$134.75 	$179.66 	$224.57 	$269.49 	$314.40 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$68.76 	$130.62 	$192.48 	$254.34 	$316.19 	$378.05 	$439.91 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$82.34 	$157.80 	$233.27 	$308.73 	$384.16 	$459.62 	$535.09 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$90.42 	$173.96 	$257.48 	$341.02 	$424.55 	$508.07 	$591.62 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$98.50 	$190.11 	$281.73 	$373.32 	$464.93 	$556.53 	$648.13 
5 				$106.56 	$206.26 	$305.93 	$405.09 	$505.30 	$604.97 	$704.66 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$114.65 	$222.41 	$330.16 	$437.93 	$545.66 	$653.43 	$761.18 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$130.80 	$254.70 	$378.62 	$502.52 	$626.43 	$750.33 	$874.24 
 
01/01/2019 Commercial Refuse Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$63.74 	$120.51 	$177.29 	$234.06 	$290.84 	$347.60 	$404.38 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$45.36 	$90.74 	$136.10 	$181.46 	$226.82 	$272.18 	$317.54 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$69.45 	$131.93 	$194.41 	$256.88 	$319.35 	$381.83 	$444.31 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$83.17 	$159.38 	$235.60 	$311.82 	$388.00 	$464.21 	$540.44 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$91.32 	$175.70 	$260.06 	$344.43 	$428.79 	$513.05 	$597.54 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$99.48 	$192.01 	$284.54 	$377.05 	$469.58 	$562.09 	$654.61 
5 				$107.63 	$208.32 	$308.99 	$409.14 	$510.35 	$611.02 	$711.71 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$115.80 	$224.64 	$333.46 	$442.31 	$551.11 	$659.96 	$768.79 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$132.10 	$257.25 	$382.40 	$507.54 	$632.70 	$757.83 	$882.98 
 
Roll Off Containers Sizes and Fees 
Sizes: 20 Cubic Yards 16' x 6' x 5' 	30 Cubic Yards 18' x 8' x 6' 
MOVE CONTAINER FEE after initial placement. Customers must give specific placement instructions, or have a spotter on site. 
01/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
$63.79 	$64.43 	$65.07 	$65.72 	$66.38 
SCHEDULED PICK-UPS per empty plus** actual landfill charges. No container rental fee and MUST KEEP Roll Off for at least 90 days to qualify for scheduled pick-ups. 
01/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
$179.91 	$181.71 	$183.53 	$185.36 	$187.22 
UNSCHEDULED PICK-UPS per empty plus** actual landfill charges plus per day container rental charge as shown below 
08/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
$214.16 	$216.30 	$218.47 	$220.65 	$222.86 
Daily Container Rental Charge for Unscheduled Service 
08/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
$4.91 	$4.96 	$5.01 	$5.06 	$5.11 
UNSCHEDULED PICK-UPS additional fee for nights, weekends, or holidays 
08/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
$114.16 	$115.30 	$116.45 	$117.62 	$118.80 
**ACTUAL LANDFILL CHARGES Note: Landfill charges are not part of the fees shown above, and will be added to those fees. Actual landfill charges will vary based on the type of material hauled, and the actual weight of said material. 
Note: SCHEDULED SERVICE is furnished the same day(s) each week or bi-weekly on an on going basis. UNSCHEDULED SERVICE includes all other request initiated by the customer as needed. 
Appliances/TV's 
** If the container is mixed with garbage and appliances, the following charges apply: 
Non-refrigerated appliances (washing machines, dryers, etc.) = $10.00 each 
Refrigerated appliances = $18.00 each 
TV's monitors are accepted at the Household Hazardous Waste site at the landfill 
Businesses must register as a small quantity generator. (Open M — Thu 9-4 PM) 
 
(Ord. 2309 § 3, 2008: editorially amended during 11-07 Supplement; editorially amended during 8-06 Supplement (See Resolution 2005-125); editorially amended during 2-05 Supplement; editorially amended during 8-04 Supplement; Ord. 2073 § 7, 2001: Ord. 1977 §, 1997: Ord. 1974 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1791 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1752 § 4, 1990: Ord. 1725 § 6, 1988: Ord. 1614 § 6, 1986: Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(b)(2)). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 3, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.265 - Industrial/Commercial—Surcharge. 
In addition to the charges contained in Section 8.04.260 above, there shall be added a surcharge on said charges of 17.37% for those industrial and commercial accounts located at a new structure whose building permit is issued on or after August 1, 2008. The surcharge shall be in effect for ninety-six (96) months from issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. 2309 § 4, 2008: Ord. 1795 § 2, 1991). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 4, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.270 - Business—Liability. 
The proprietor, partner, corporation, or other business entity of each business, industrial, or mercantile establishment shall be liable for payment of all refuse collection charges billed to such establishment. 
(Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(c)(2)).  
8.04.280 - Extent of service—Determined by director of public works operations. 
The director of public works operations or his assistants shall determine those areas of the city which shall be provided with three hundred-gallon container alley service, packout service, curb line service, alley property line service, or commercial/industrial cubic yard container service. 
(Ord. 2073 § 12, 2001: Ord. 1372 A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(d)(1)).  
8.04.290 - Extent of service—Residential. 
The fees established entitle the owner of each dwelling unit to the removal of the equivalent of the contents of two thirty-gallon containers of garbage or rubbish once each calendar week. The fees for removal of additional containers of garbage or rubbish from any premises shall be increased in proportion to the amount of additional garbage or rubbish removed; provided, that collection service to residences will be provided no more frequently than once each week. 
(Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1302 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(d)(2)).  
8.04.300 - Extent of service—Downtown. 
Within the downtown central business district, collection service will be provided six days each calendar week, except legal holidays. 
(Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(d)(3)).  
8.04.310 - Extent of service—Outside of downtown. 
Collection schedules for business, industrial, or mercantile establishments outside of downtown central business district shall be determined by the director of public works operations, commensurate with the volume of garbage or green waste and the nature thereof, but in no event shall such collection be made less than once each week. 
(Ord. 2073 § 13, 2001: Ord. 1614 § 7, 1986: Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(d)(4)).  
8.04.320 - Special services and conditions. 
If special services are requested by a refuse customer or if special conditions exist which make the rates set forth in this chapter inequitable to the customer or the city, the director of public works operations may, with the approval of the city council, enter into a special contract with the consumer. 
(Ord. 2073 § 14, 2001: Ord. 1372A § 1 (part), 1981: Ord. 1301 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 13.18(e)).  
8.04.330 - Increased service requirement procedure. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the director of public works operations shall have the authority to increase the number or size of garbage containers required of a refuse service customer and/or to increase the frequency of collections or to make unscheduled collections in those instances where the existing containers and/or collections are not adequate to handle the accumulation of garbage or green waste at the residence or establishment. 
B.  The refuse service customer shall be notified in writing at least two weeks in advance of any election by the director of public works operations to increase the containers or collections, except in those emergency situations where the public health would be threatened if immediate steps were not taken to remove the garbage or green waste from the residence or establishment. 
C.  If the refuse service customer fails to furnish additional containers as required by the director of public works operations, the director of public works operations may furnish the containers and charge the cost thereof to the refuse service customer. Additional collections shall be billed to the refuse service customer on a cost basis. 
D.  A refuse service customer who is dissatisfied with the determination made by the director of public works operations pursuant to this section may appeal in writing such determination to the city council within ten days of receiving the written notice thereof. Upon receipt of the appeal, the action of the director of public works operations shall be stayed (except in emergency situations) until the city council has acted upon the appeal. The city council shall hold a hearing upon the appeal within thirty days thereafter and shall determine the appeal within fifteen days of the hearing. The refuse service customer shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing and of his/her right to appear and be heard at the hearing. 
(Ord. 2073 § 15, 2001: Ord. 1958 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1392 § 1, 1981: prior code § 13.18(f)).  
Article III. - Recycling[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2436, § 5, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, changed the title of Art. III from "Curbside Recycling" to read as set out herein. 
 
8.04.410 - Definitions. 
A.  Recyclable material. "Recyclable material" as used in this chapter means any material that has been designated by the city for collection in a residential recycling program. This would typically include, but may not be limited to, a variety of paper, cardboard, plastics, aluminum, and steel cans. This list may change as markets change to accept more, or fewer, materials for processing in accordance with the administrative rules and procedures established by the director of public works operations and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.04.420 - Rules established. 
A.  The following requirements, as contained in this chapter, covering the handling of accumulations of recyclable material to be observed by the occupants of places of residence and places of business are established. The director of public works operations is hereby authorized to promulgate administrative rules and procedures subject to the approval of the city manager which are necessary and proper to ensure the efficient operation of the recycling program. The city council in establishing this rule-making authority specifically reserves unto itself the authority to set rates and charges. 
B.  Nothing herein shall limit the right of residents or businesses to take cash redemption value of "CRV" or other material to a recycling center so long as the resident or business otherwise participates in the recycling program established by this Article or the resident or business opts-out through the self-haul provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.04.425 - Exemptions from use of services provided by the city of Merced. 
A.  No person shall be required to use the collection services provided by the city if that person can establish to the city's satisfaction that any one (1) of the following conditions are met: 
1.  That the property the person owns, occupies, possesses, or controls is undeveloped and/or does not produce any recyclable material; 
2.  That all recyclable material produced or accumulated at the property is disposed of by agreement with and through the use of the approved recycling container of a person subscribing to the service provided by the city; 
3.  That the person self-hauls all recyclable material to an approved buy-back center or processing site in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Any person subject to the requirements of this chapter who opts to self-haul recyclable material that is produced or accumulated on the person's property ("self-haulers"), as permitted by subsection (A)(3) of this section shall do so subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The owner, occupant, or manager of a residential property may collect and transport recyclable material generated on the property to an authorized buy-back center or processing site. Owners, occupants, and managers of residential properties who self-haul such materials, as provided in this section, may not contract with any entity other than the city for transport services, unless: (a) the entity does not charge any transport fee, and (b) the entity pays the owner compensation for such materials. 
2.  The owner or manager of a commercial establishment may collect and transport recyclable material generated on the property to an authorized buy-back center or processing site. Owners or managers of a commercial establishment who self-haul such materials, as provided in this section, may not contract with any entity other than the city for transport services, unless: (a) the entity does not charge any transport fee, and (b) the entity pays the owner compensation for such materials. 
3.  Self-haulers shall make an application on forms developed by the director of public works operations. Self-haulers shall submit to the director of public works operations following every calendar quarter, i.e., April 1st, July 1st, October 1st, and January 1st, ("reporting dates"), evidence, including receipts, of self-hauling to authorized recycling centers. Such self-haul certification shall be submitted on forms developed by the director of public works operations which includes a declaration under the penalty of perjury that the submittal is true and correct. The purpose of the submittal is to ensure that recyclable materials are diverted from landfills and that the city gets credit for such diversion under AB 939. Should any self-hauler fail to submit the self-hauler certification later than thirty (30) days after the reporting date therefor, the self-haul authorization shall be revoked following notice from the city and the self-hauler shall thereafter be subject to the rates and charges set forth in Section 8.04.630 of this chapter for a period of no less than two (2) years. 
C.  With the exception of those who self-haul recyclable material from their property in compliance with this section, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person other than the city to collect and transport recyclable material, unless: (1) no transport fees are charged, and (2) compensation is paid to the owner of the recyclable material. Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to solicit or attempt to obtain from the owner, occupant, or manager of any residential or commercial property in the city permission to remove recyclable material, unless: (1) no transport fees are charged, and (2) compensation is paid to the owner of the recyclable material. The city may revoke any exemption granted pursuant to this section upon a determination that the factual basis for it no longer exists. A provider of transport services under this section must comply with the business license provisions of Title 5 of this code. 
(Ord. 2316 § 24, 2008: Ord. 2267 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.430 - City containers. 
Containers which are provided by the city shall be the exclusive containers for the deposit of recyclable material and shall be kept in good repair by the customer, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The cost to replace a city container which is lost, damaged, or not returned to the city upon cessation of service shall be charged to the customer. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.450 - Placement of receptacles. 
Residential and commercial curbside recyclable collection customers shall place container(s) provided by city at the curb on the designated day of collection and in a location accessible to refuse collection trucks. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.455 - Designated locations and days. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to place, keep or cause, or suffer or permit to be placed or kept, any receptacle for garbage, rubbish, green waste, other waste matter or recyclables upon the any public street, curb, sidewalk, alley or public way except in the location that has been designated by the city, and then only after four p.m. on the day preceding the day designated, and on the day designated by the city for the collection thereof until nine p.m. No aforementioned receptacle shall be stored between collection days in such a manner that it is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2181 § 2, 2004: Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.480 - Use of another's receptacle. 
Except as provided in Section 8.04.425, no person shall place any receptacle material or permit or allow any recyclable material to be placed in the city's or any other person's receptacle without the consent of the city or such other person. No consent is given by the city for any person to place recyclable material in city receptacles intended for use of others. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.520 - Collection is duty of director of public works operations. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public works operations of the city and his assistants to collect all recyclable material from the places of residence and places of business in the city and to deposit such matter so collected as soon after collection as is reasonably possible at the place provided for by the city. 
(Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.04.630 - Curbside recycling rates and charges. 
Unless exempt pursuant to Section 8.04.425, the fees and charges for collection of recyclable material is established as follows: 
	01/01/2015 	01/01/2016 	01/01/2017 	01/01/2018 	01/01/2019 
1. Per residential dwelling unit provided with curbside recycling collection per container per month 	$4.87 	$5.05 	$5.22 	$5.40 	$5.59 
2. Per commercial property provided with curbside recycling collection per container per month 	$4.87 	$5.05 	$5.22 	$5.40 	$5.59 
 
(Ord. 2309 § 5, 2008: editorially amended during 11-07 Supplement; Res. 2006-126, 2006; Ord. 2096 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2097 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 6, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.635 - New residential. 
Each residential unit for which a building permit is issued on or after January 1, 2004 shall pay an additional one time charge for recycling service, at the time of issuance of said permit as follows: 
	Per Unit 
Single family residence 	$92.68 
Mobile home 	92.68 
 
(Ord. 2139 § 1 (part), 2003). 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 7, 11-3-2014)  
8.04.640 - Commercial recycling rates and charges. 
The fees and charges for collection of recyclable material for each business are established as follows: 
01/01/2015 Commercial Recycling Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$52.58 	$99.42 	$146.26 	$193.10 	$239.94 	$286.77 	$333.62 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$43.59 	$87.20 	$130.79 	$174.38 	$217.97 	$261.56 	$305.15 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$57.30 	$108.84 	$160.39 	$211.93 	$263.47 	$315.01 	$366.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$68.61 	$131.49 	$194.37 	$257.25 	$320.10 	$382.98 	$445.86 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$75.34 	$144.95 	$214.55 	$284.16 	$353.75 	$423.35 	$492.97 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$82.08 	$158.41 	$234.74 	$311.07 	$387.40 	$463.73 	$540.06 
5 				$88.79 	$171.86 	$254.92 	$337.54 	$421.04 	$504.09 	$587.16 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$95.53 	$185.33 	$275.10 	$364.91 	$454.67 	$544.47 	$634.25 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$108.99 	$212.23 	$269.58 	$418.73 	$521.98 	$625.21 	$728.47 
300 Gallon Recycling 	$42.33 	$80.43 	$114.29 	$152.39 	$190.49 	$228.58 	$266.68 
 
01/01/2016 Commercial Recycling Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$53.11 	$100.41 	$147.72 	$195.03 	$242.34 	$289.64 	$336.96 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.03 	$88.07 	$132.10 	$176.12 	$220.15 	$264.18 	$308.20 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$57.87 	$109.93 	$161.99 	$214.05 	$266.10 	$318.16 	$366.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$69.30 	$132.80 	$196.31 	$259.82 	$323.30 	$386.81 	$450.32 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$76.09 	$146.40 	$216.70 	$287.00 	$357.29 	$427.58 	$497.90 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$82.90 	$159.99 	$237.09 	$314.18 	$391.27 	$468.37 	$545.46 
5 				$89.68 	$173.58 	$257.47 	$340.92 	$425.25 	$509.13 	$593.03 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$96.49 	$187.18 	$277.85 	$368.56 	$459.22 	$549.91 	$640.59 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$110.08 	$214.35 	$272.28 	$422.92 	$527.20 	$631.46 	$735.75 
300 Gallon Recycling 	$42.75 	$81.23 	$115.43 	$153.91 	$192.39 	$230.87 	$269.35 
 
01/01/2017 Commercial Recycling Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$53.64 	$101.42 	$149.20 	$196.98 	$244.76 	$292.53 	$340.33 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.47 	$88.95 	$133.42 	$177.89 	$222.35 	$266.82 	$311.28 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$58.45 	$111.03 	$163.61 	$216.19 	$268.77 	$321.34 	$366.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$69.99 	$134.13 	$198.28 	$262.42 	$326.53 	$390.68 	$454.82 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$76.85 	$147.86 	$218.86 	$289.87 	$360.86 	$431.86 	$502.88 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$83.73 	$161.59 	$239.46 	$317.32 	$359.19 	$473.05 	$550.92 
5 				$90.57 	$175.31 	$260.04 	$344.32 	$429.50 	$514.22 	$598.96 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$97.45 	$189.06 	$280.63 	$372.24 	$463.81 	$555.41 	$647.00 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$111.18 	$216.50 	$275.00 	$427.15 	$532.47 	$637.78 	$743.11 
300 Gallon Recycling 	$43.18 	$82.05 	$116.59 	$155.45 	$194.32 	$233.17 	$272.04 
 
01/01/2018 Commercial Recycling Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$54.17 	$102.43 	$150.69 	$198.95 	$247.21 	$295.46 	$343.73 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$44.91 	$89.84 	$134.75 	$179.66 	$224.57 	$269.49 	$314.40 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$59.04 	$112.14 	$165.25 	$218.35 	$271.45 	$324.56 	$366.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$70.69 	$135.47 	$200.26 	$265.04 	$329.80 	$394.58 	$459.37 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$77.62 	$149.34 	$221.05 	$292.77 	$364.47 	$436.18 	$507.91 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$84.57 	$163.21 	$241.85 	$320.50 	$399.14 	$477.78 	$556.42 
5 				$91.48 	$177.07 	$262.64 	$347.77 	$433.80 	$519.36 	$604.95 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$98.42 	$190.95 	$283.44 	$375.97 	$468.45 	$560.97 	$653.47 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$112.29 	$218.66 	$277.75 	$431.42 	$537.80 	$644.15 	$750.54 
300 Gallon Recycling 	$43.61 	$82.87 	$117.75 	$157.01 	$196.26 	$235.51 	$274.76 
 
01/01/2019 Commercial Recycling Rates and Fees* 
Cubic Yard Container Sizes and Fees Per Number of Pickups 
Size of Container 	Number of Pickups 
	L 	W 	H 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
1 	23" 	61" 	37" 	$54.71 	$103.46 	$152.20 	$200.94 	$249.68 	$298.41 	$347.17 
1.5 C 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$45.36 	$90.74 	$136.10 	$181.46 	$226.82 	$272.18 	$317.54 
1.5 	32" 	62.5" 	37" 	$59.63 	$113.26 	$166.90 	$220.54 	$274.17 	$327.80 	$366.55 
2 	30" 	6' 	43" 	$71.40 	$136.83 	$202.26 	$267.70 	$333.10 	$398.53 	$463.96 
3 	4' 	6' 	4' 	$78.40 	$150.84 	$223.26 	$295.70 	$368.11 	$440.54 	$512.99 
4 	51" 	6' 	57" 	$85.41 	$164.84 	$244.27 	$323.70 	$403.13 	$482.56 	$561.99 
5 				$92.40 	$178.84 	$265.27 	$351.25 	$438.14 	$524.56 	$611.00 
6 	6' 	6' 	5' 	$99.41 	$192.86 	$286.27 	$379.73 	$473.13 	$566.58 	$660.00 
8 	6' 	6' 	7' 	$113.42 	$220.85 	$280.53 	$435.73 	$543.17 	$650.60 	$758.05 
300 Gallon Recycling 	$44.05 	$83.70 	$118.93 	$158.58 	$198.22 	$237.86 	$277.51 
 
(Ord. No. 2436, § 8, 11-3-2014)  
Chapter 8.06 - RECYCLING 
Sections: 
 
8.06.010 - Purpose. 
Cities and counties must divert 50 percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. 
Diverting 50 percent of all solid waste requires the participation of the residential, commercial, industrial, and public sectors. 
The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to diverting solid waste and constitutes an urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. This ordinance has been developed to meet that need. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.06.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this chapter. 
A.  Development project - Means any of the following: 
1.  A project for which building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building, marina, or residential building having five or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five(5) or more living units. 
2.  Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste. 
B.  Recycling area (area for recycling) - Space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. 
C.  Project for which a building permit is required - A project for which a building permit is required is, at a minimum: 
1.  all new projects, and 
2.  any single alteration of an existing project requiring a building permit, and 
3.  any sum total of alterations requiring a building permit to an existing project conducted within a twelve month period. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.06.030 - General requirements. 
Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1994, shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
Any project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1994 for modifications that meet one or both of the conditions below shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials: 
A.  Modification to the project adds 30 percent or more to the existing floor area, or 
B.  The price of modification exceeds value of the subject parcel. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part, 1993).  
8.06.040 - Design standards. 
Areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to serve the development where the project occurs. 
Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is to be located. 
An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development should be located within the recycling areas of development projects. 
The design and construction of recycling areas shall be compatible with surrounding land uses. 
Recycling areas shall be secured to prevent the theft of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal materials. 
Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. 
Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the hauler in the area in which the development project exists. 
A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling areas. 
Residential developers and property owners are encouraged to include recycling areas or systems within the residence; such as roll-out drawers below the sink for recycling receptacles; fireproof, cleanable, secure chutes from the living space to the space for collecting and loading recyclable materials, etc. Recommended internal storage space for individual living units of residential development projects is three (3) cubic feet. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.06.050 - Location. 
Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required by the Municipal Code to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to fire and other applicable building and/or public safety laws. 
Each recycling area within a multi-family residential development should be no greater than 250 feet from each living unit. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part), 1993).  
8.06.060 - Commingled waste. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a development project located in an area served by a recycling system based upon the collection of commingled solid waste and recyclable materials may fulfill the requirements of this chapter by providing adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading commingled solid waste recyclable materials. 
(Ord. 1854 § 1 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 8.12 - WATER WELLS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.12.010 - Purpose. 
The city of Merced relies on ground water as its sole source for public drinking water. Protection of the quality of ground water is essential to ensure future prosperity and health. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for location, construction, maintenance, rehabilitation, sealing, abandonment and destruction of all wells, test wells and certain exploration holes so the quality of the ground water is not polluted, contaminated or otherwise impacted in a manner which will jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. The intent of these standards is to prevent mixing or transfer of degraded waters into aquifers of good quality water through wells or open borings. These standards are written to address the specific hydrogeologic conditions of the city. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990: prior code § 29.1).  
8.12.020 - Applicability. 
The standards set forth in this chapter apply to all new and existing water wells, monitoring wells, cathodic protection wells, test wells and those exploratory holes deeper than twenty feet within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990: prior code § 29.2).  
8.12.030 - Special ground water protection. 
The city is underlain by various geologic units which consist of unconsolidated and consolidated sediments that contain permeable layers, or aquifers, of varying depth and dimension intermixed with low permeability sediments. The city's water supply relies on the production of ground water from three aquifer zones which are separated by low permeability layers. These three aquifers are called the "shallow", "intermediate" and "Mehrten." Layers of lower permeability are common, but three distinctive and generally continuous layers are known. These low permeability layers are called the "shallow confining layer", the "Corcoran Clay" and the "300-foot clay." Deeper aquifers of good quality water may also exist and must be protected. 
Recent pollution and contamination by organic chemicals has been found in the shallow and intermediate aquifers. Because it has been determined that ground water problems are known to exist, all ground water within the city's sphere of influence is hereby designated, pursuant to authority granted under the State of California Water Code, Section 13801, as requiring "Special Ground Water Protection." The intent of this chapter is to minimize the impacts and prevent the migration of harmful chemicals into aquifers used by the city. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990: prior code § 29.3).  
8.12.040 - Implementation standards. 
A.  Implementation, performance of inspections, and enforcement of compliance with this chapter shall be the responsibility of the director or his assignee. 
B.  Within five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner, operator or permittee of an existing private well within the city must destroy any existing well in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  All persons owning an abandoned well within the city shall destroy the well before December 31, 1991. 
D.  The director may require, at any time, the destruction of a private well which causes or threatens to cause the spread of pollution or which adversely impacts the quality of ground water. 
E.  The director may implement the destruction of any well which causes or threatens to cause the spread of pollution, if the owner, operator or permittee of such well has not destroyed the well within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written notice requiring the destruction of the well. Costs incurred by the city to destroy a private well shall be the responsibility of the well's owners, operators and permittees. 
F.  The director or his designee shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable times to make inspections and tests for the purpose of enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
G.  Drilling or construction of a new private well or rehabilitation of an existing or abandoned well within the city is not permitted. New exploratory holes, cathodic protection wells, monitoring wells and contaminant extraction wells are permitted, provided all provisions of this chapter are followed, a well permit form is filed with the department of public works and approved by the director, and required fees are paid. 
(Ord. 2285 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990: prior code § 29.4).  
8.12.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  If compliance with any of the requirements prescribed in this chapter is impractical for a particular location because of unusual conditions, or if compliance would result in construction of an unsatisfactory well, then the director may, upon written request from the well owner or permittee, waive compliance and prescribe alternative requirements which are "equal to" these standards in protection of ground water quality. Specific conditions or exemptions will be described as a variance on the permit. 
B.  The construction, maintenance, rehabilitation, modification, and destruction of monitoring wells may be performed under the statutory and regulatory requirements of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, the State Department of Health Services, the Merced County Department of Health, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. If, on a specific site, provisions in this ordinance are in conflict with well standards prescribed by these other agencies, then the director may, upon written request from the well owner or permittee, waive compliance provided the other agency's well standards provide equal or greater protection of ground water quality. 
C.  The requirement of subsection B of Section 8.12.040 that existing private wells be destroyed, may be waived by the city upon a determination by the director of public works operations that: 
1.  The well has value for the treatment and/or monitoring of chemical or other contamination of ground water, and 
2.  The well is constructed and will be operated in a manner which will avoid further contamination of ground water; and 
3.  The city is allowed unimpeded access to the well pursuant to Section 8.12.040(F). 
D.  A waiver granted pursuant to subsection C above shall terminate upon written notice to the well owner by the director of public works operations that one or more of the above conditions no longer exists. In such event the well owner shall destroy the well within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice. If the well has not been destroyed within said ninety (90) days, the director of public works operations may destroy the well. Costs incurred by the city to destroy the well shall be the responsibility of the well's owners, operators and permittees. 
(Ord. 1863 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.060 - Exclusions. 
A.  The construction standards prescribed in Section 8.12.320 do not apply to shallow exploration borings or test wells unless one or more of the following occurs: 
1.  Ground water is encountered; 
2.  The shallow clay layer or the Corcoran Clay is penetrated; or 
3.  Pollution or contamination of the soil or ground water is known or suspected at the site of drilling. 
B.  All other sections of this chapter, including the reporting and destruction provision of Sections 8.12.080 and 8.12.330 shall apply to all wells, test wells and those exploratory borings of a depth greater than twenty feet. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.070 - Well drillers. 
The construction, rehabilitation, modification, or destruction of all wells shall be performed by contractors with a valid C-57 license in accordance with the provisions of the Contractors' License Law (Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code) unless exempted by that act. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a resident or owner from doing his own work provided such work is performed under the direct and continuous supervision of a person licensed as specified above. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.080 - Report of activity. 
A.  Reports concerning the location, construction, sealing, rehabilitation, modification, or destruction of all wells shall be filed with the city department of public works, county of Merced department of health, and the California department of water resources in accordance with the provisions of Sections 13750 through 13754 (Division 7, Chapter 10, Article 3) of the California Water Code. 
B.  Within thirty days after completion of work authorized by a permit, a copy of the state "Water Well Drillers Report" shall be filed with the city department of public works and the county of Merced department of health. 
C.  Authorization for drilling in the course of contamination investigations shall be contingent upon submission of work plans, investigative reports, and/or remedial action plans as determined by the director to be necessary for the evaluation of potential impacts to the city's water supply. 
(Ord. 1863 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.090 - Transfer of monitoring wells. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the director determines an application to close a well involves a well containing evidence of contamination or otherwise constituting a threat to the city's water supply or public health, the director may either (1) require the well be kept open for monitoring until such time as the director determines the contamination is cleaned up or the well is no longer a threat to the city's water supply or public health; or (2) allow the owner of the well to transfer the well to city subject to B. 
B.  Any agreement for transfer of a well to the city shall provide for indemnification of the city for environmental hazards, payment of costs of evaluation of the well for transfer, and reimbursement of the director's estimated closure expenses. 
(Ord. 2017 § 1, 1999).  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
8.12.100 - Definitions. 
Definitions of terms shall be as set forth in: (1) Chapter II and Appendix A of the Department of Water Resources (DWR) Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988 (or the latest revision); (2) Chapter II and Appendix A of Department of Water Resource Bulletin 74-88; (3) Chapter II and Appendix A of Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-1 as revised in 1988 (or the latest revision); (4) Section 2 of the county of Merced Ordinance No. 752; and (5) as set forth below: 
A.  "Abatement" means the reconstruction, repair or destruction of a well, test well, or exploratory hole so as to eliminate a public nuisance. 
B.  "City" shall mean the city of Merced. 
C.  "Exploratory hole" shall mean a temporary artificial excavation, hole or opening created by any means for the purpose of identifying or collecting information on the nature of the subsurface but which is greater than twenty feet for the purposes of this chapter. 
D.  "Inspector" shall mean a person designated by the director and authorized to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. 
E.  "Permittee" shall mean any person, association, firm, corporation, special district or public agency. 
F.  "Public nuisance" shall mean any well or condition that impairs or threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public. 
G.  "Test hold or well" shall mean a well drained for the purpose of obtaining information needed to design a well. A test well may be cased and can be converted to observation, monitoring or production well. 
H.  "Well" shall mean all water wells as defined in Section 13710 of the California Water Code, including community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, recharge or injection wells, air-conditioning wells, cathodic protection wells, observation wells and monitoring wells. 
I.  "Director" shall mean the city engineer of the city of Merced. 
(Ord. 2017 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
Article III. - Permit Procedures 
 
8.12.200 - Application. 
A.  Permits required by this chapter shall be subject to conditions set forth in this chapter or as required by law. 
B.  No person shall construct, rehabilitate, seal, modify, or destroy a test well, exploratory hole, cathodic protection well, monitoring well, or contaminant extraction well in the city unless a written permit has been obtained from the department of public works. No person shall seal, modify, or destroy a private well in the city unless a written permit has been obtained from the department of public works. 
C.  Applications for permits shall be made by filling out a well permit form and filing same with the department of public works. Complete drawings and specifications for any proposed work shall accompany the well permit and shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all standards. 
D.  A permit to construct, rehabilitate, seal, or modify a test well, exploratory hole, cathodic protection well, monitoring well, or contaminant extraction well may be denied by the director if such activities will cause or threaten to cause the spread of pollution which adversely impacts the quality of the ground water. 
E.  Any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without having obtained a permit shall be required, if subsequently granted a permit for this work, to pay double the standard permit fee. 
(Ord. 2285 § 2, 2007: Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.210 - Fees. 
The following fee schedule shown in Table 1 is established to cover the administrative costs of issuing a permit. Costs for plan checking and inspection will be based on hourly rates set by the director with the intent of recovering the full cost of such work. 
Table 1 
Schedule of Filing Fees 
New well or test well permit 	At cost ($75.00 min.) 
Rehabilitation and modification permit 	At cost ($50.00 min.) 
Test well permit 	At cost ($75.00 min.) 
Destruction of well permit 	No cost 
  
8.12.220 - Inspections. 
A.  A well site and surrounding property must be inspected by the director or his designee: (1) before the construction, rehabilitation or destruction of any well, test well or exploratory hole; (2) while the annular seal is being constructed; (3) during the placement of grout while a well is being destroyed; and (4) at any time during the work authorized under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to insure that compliance with the permit and all applicable standards are met. 
B.  Upon completion of the work authorized by a permit and before the well is placed in service, or upon destruction of a well or test hole, the director or his designee must make an inspection and approve the work. 
C.  A permittee or the drilling contractor must make a request for an inspection at least twenty-four hours (one full regular city work day) before the time any inspection is needed. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.230 - Terms of the permit. 
A.  Work authorized by a permit pursuant to this chapter shall begin within ninety days from the date of issuance. The permit authorizes work for a period of one year from the date of issuance or as otherwise stated on the permit. 
B.  If work has not begun within ninety days or completed within one year, or within the time interval specified on the permit, from the date of issuance, the permit shall be void. A sixty-day extension of the permit may be granted by the director upon written request from the permittee. Upon the expiration of the extension, no further work shall be permitted unless and until a new permit is issued. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the drilling contractor to file the permit and ensure that a copy of the permit is posted at the work site. 
D.  The contractor or owner shall notify the director at least twenty-four hours prior to the commencement of work. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.240 - Liability. 
As a condition of all permits, the permittee shall assume all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage resulting from any work performed by the permittee or his agent under a permit, or resulting from the failure of the permittee to perform his obligation under a permit. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, employees, or agents, the permittee shall defend, indemnity and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claims, 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.250 - Enforcement. 
A.  If a well, test well, or exploratory hole subject to this chapter is found to be a public nuisance because of construction, operation, or maintenance in a manner contrary to the terms of this chapter, or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the director shall give a written notice of violation to the owner of the land and to the permittee. 
B.  The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the corrective measures to be taken, and a reasonable time within which such corrections must be made. 
C.  The notice of violation shall include a statement to the land owner, well owner, or permittee that upon failure to make the required corrections within the period specified, the director may abate the condition at the expense of the landowner, well owner or permittee. 
D.  If the director finds that a well, test well, or exploratory hole subject to this chapter is by reason of location, construction, operation, or maintenance causing significant irreparable damage to the ground water or presents an immediate danger to health and safety, or that it is impractical to notify the owner or permit-tee, the director may perform, or order performed, emergency work necessary to abate the condition without giving notice as required above. The owner or permittee shall be liable for the costs of abatement. 
E.  The director may record a notice of violation with the office of the county recorder, 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.260 - Review of permits and inspections. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the refusal to issue a permit, the terms of the permit, or any decision made by the inspector may, upon written request submitted within ten days of any such denial, conditional granting, or other decision, have the matter reviewed by the director. 
B.  Upon receipt of written request for review, the director shall schedule the matter for review within three weeks and give the applicant at least ten days written notice of the time and place of the review, unless the applicant agrees to a lesser time. 
C.  The director will notify the person requesting the review in writing of his decision within two weeks of the review. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.270 - Violations. 
Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail of Merced County for a period not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
Article IV. - Well Construction Standards 
 
8.12.300 - General standards. 
A.  Except as may be specified in this chapter, the standards for the location, construction, sealing, maintenance, rehabilitation, modification, abandonment, or destruction of wells, exploratory holes, and test wells shall be those published in Chapter ii and Appendixes B, C, and D of the "State Water Well Standards" (DWR Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision), Chapter II of the "Monitoring Well Standards" (DWR Bulletin 74-88 or the latest revision), and Chapter II of the "Cathodic Protection Well Standards" (DWR Bulletin 74-1 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision). 
B.  Well Integrity. 
1.  All wells, exploratory holes and test wells shall be constructed to prevent the entrance of surface water or foreign material from any source into the well, hole or aquifer. 
2.  All wells shall be located, constructed, maintained, rehabilitated, modified, abandoned or destroyed so the quality of the ground water is not degraded. 
3.  Drainage wells which are used for dewatering agricultural areas which discharge only to irrigation facilities are exempt from the sealing requirements, except when they penetrate the Corcoran Clay or cause or threaten to cause the spread of pollution. Surface protection and safety from hazard standards shall be provided. 
4.  Construction of a well in a pit is prohibited except for agricultural dewatering wells which discharge only to irrigation facilities. 
5.  In special situations where pollution or contamination of ground water is known, the city may modify these standards or otherwise prescribe special requirements to ensure the quality of the ground water, and the health and safety of the people. If, in the opinion of the director, special conditions or construction will not adequately safeguard the quality of the environment or the health or safety of the public, then the director shall deny such a permit. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.310 - Well location. 
A.  Wells shall be located an adequate distance from known or potential sources of pollution to prevent degradation of water quality. 
B.  No wells shall be located within fifteen feet of a property line. 
C.  Separation between a drinking water well and any well which has no upper annular seal or sanitary seal shall be at least three hundred feet. 
D.  No well shall be located closer to a potential source of pollution than the distance listed below in Table 2. When, in the opinion of the director, adverse conditions or unusual sources of pollution exist which may cause degradation of water quality, distances prescribed in Table 2 may be extended by the director. 
Table 2 
Distance Between A Well and Potential Sources of Pollution 
Source 	Minimum 
Distance 
Sewer 	50 feet 
Watertight septic tank or subsurface sewage leaching field 	100 feet 
Cesspool or seepage pit 	150 feet 
Animal or fowl enclosure 	100 feet 
Hazardous waste/materials storage 	500 feet 
 
E.  Exemptions from Table 2 may be granted by the director for monitoring wells and cathodic protection wells. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.320 - Well construction standards. 
A.  Well Sealing. 
1.  Sealing conditions and procedures prescribed in Sections 9 and 13 of DWR Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision, Section 11 of DWR Bulletin 74-88, and Sections 10 and 11 of DWR 74-81 as reviewed in 1988 or the latest revisions, are considered standards for this chapter, except as provided below. 
2.  A well shall be sealed with a sealing material in a manner that prevents bridging, dilution, or segregation of the grout which would prevent the material from completely filling the annular space. The suggested methods for sealing given in Appendix B of DWR Bulletin 74-8 1 are the minimum standards for this chapter. Other methods of sealing the annular space may be approved upon review by the director after reviewing a written request by the owner for an alternative method. 
3.  Sealing material shall be of a composition equivalent to those given in Section 9 of DWR Bulletin 74-8 1 as reviewed in 1988, or the latest revisions and Section 11 of DWR Bulletin 74-88 or the latest revisions. 
4.  Wells shall be constructed so the annular space is effectively sealed at the surface to protect against contamination or pollution by entrance of surface or shallow subsurface waters. At a minimum, new wells shall be sealed from the surface in accordance with the following Table 3. 
Table 3 
Minimum Depth of Surface Seal 
	
Domestic well 	50 feet 
Industrial well 	50 feet 
Agricultural well 	50 feet 
Monitoring wells 	50 feet or to top of the filter pack if shallower than 50 feet 
Cathodic protection wells 	50 feet 
Grave yard or cemetery 	150 feet 
 
5.  Wells which penetrate the Corcoran Clay shall be constructed in a manner to prevent production or mixing of waters from above and below the Corcoran Clay. 
6.  Annular seal shall extend from the surface to a depth of at least three hundred feet for new wells producing water from a depth below three hundred feet. 
7.  Where a well penetrates more than one aquifer and mixing of aquifer waters in sufficient quantities will cause significant deterioration of the quality of water in one or more aquifers, then the strata producing the poor quality water shall be sealed off. New wells shall not be allowed to tap two or more separate and distinct producing zones (aquifer systems). 
8.  If any existing well producing water from both the intermediate aquifer and the Mehrten aquifer is found to be contaminated, it shall be modified to seal off the contaminated zones and to prevent mixing between aquifers or shall be destroyed. 
9.  When special conditions exist, such as known pollution, the director may prescribe additional sealing standards to prevent the migration of pollution. 
B.  Casing Materials. 
1.  All new and rehabilitated wells shall be constructed with casing materials which have sufficient strength and durability to resist the forces imposed on it during installation, including grouting and development, and which will provide structural integrity against forces which can normally be expected after installation. No thermoset or thermoplastic casing greater than eight inches in nominal diameter will be allowed below a depth of three hundred feet. 
2.  Casing material and thickness of material shall be selected in accordance with good design practices. Materials selected for the well casing shall be of a strength and durability that meets the specifications prescribed in Section 12 of Chapter II of DWR Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision, or Section 9 of Chapter II of DWR Bulletin 74-88 or the latest revision. 
C.  Surface Construction. 
1.  All pumping equipment shall be installed with protective devices to effectively prevent entrance of foreign matter or back siphonage into the well casing. A properly designed air gap may be considered an acceptable protective device for agricultural wells. 
2.  A concrete slab or base shall be constructed around the top of all water wells. The top of the floor slab shall be sloped away from the casing. The floor slab shall be a minimum of six inches thick with the outer edge of the slab at least four inches above and at least two inches below the ground surface, The surface slab shall be tied to the well's annular surface seal. 
3.  All wells furnishing water for human consumption shall have a greaseless petcock valve with the spout facing down located on the discharge line before the storage tank for obtaining water quality samples. 
4.  Any well terminating above the ground surface in areas where vehicular traffic can occur must be identified and protected such that the well can easily be seen and protected from damage. 
5.  Where the top of a monitoring or cathodic protection well must be below the ground surface, a concrete or other water tight vault must be installed. The vault and its lid must be strong enough to support vehicular traffic. The top of the vault should be set so drainage is away from the vault. The well must be capped with a leakproof cap so water in the vault will not enter the well. The vault cover or lid must be leakproof. 
D.  Well Development. 
1.  Development or redevelopment of a well shall be done in a manner which will not cause damage to the well or cause adverse subsurface conditions that may destroy barriers to vertical movement of water, 
2.  Developing or redeveloping of a well by using explosives is prohibited unless a special variance is granted by the director. 
3.  Developing or redeveloping of a monitoring well shall be done in a manner which does not interfere with the analytical results of water quality sampling. In areas of known ground water pollution, development fluids shall be handled, stored and disposed of in accordance with all applicable state and county department of health standards and procedures. 
E.  Well Disinfection. 
1.  All well and associated equipment furnishing or in contact with potable water for domestic use shall be disinfected after construction, installation or repair of the well, pump or storage equipment and before use of the water or return of the well to operation. 
2.  Suggested methods for disinfection given in Appendix C of DWR Bulletin 74-8 1 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision are required. 
F.  Water Sampling. 
1.  Before, and then annually thereafter, a new or rehabilitated well for domestic use is placed into service, samples shall be collected and analyzed for chemical and bacteriological constituents and the results filed with the director. The director shall specify which chemical and bacteriological constituents are to be sampled and analyzed and specify the method of analysis, At a minimum all such wells shall meet state standards for large systems as defined by the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, as amended. 
2.  Samples for water quality analyses shall be collected from the discharge line before the storage tank. 
3.  Water samples shall be collected by persons trained and knowledgeable in the sampling procedures and chain-of-custody requirement for the constituents being analyzed. 
4.  Analysis of water samples shall be performed by a laboratory which is certified by the State Department of Health to perform the method of analysis specified by the director. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
8.12.330 - Well abandonment and destruction. 
A.  All abandoned wells, exploration holes or test wells, as defined by DWR Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988 or the latest revision, shall be destroyed in such a manner that they will not produce water or act as a conduit for mixing or otherwise transferring of water between permeable zones or aquifers, and will not be a hazard to the safety and well being of people or animals. 
B.  Materials used to fill a well shall have a low permeability. Materials shall meet the material standards prescribed in DWR Bulletin 74-81 as revised in 1988, and DWR Bulletin 74-88 or the latest revision. 
C.  Wells penetrating the Corcoran Clay shall be destroyed in a manner that ensures a seal is placed across the Corcoran Clay. If necessary, the casing shall be perforated for an interval of not less than ten feet and sealing material forced under pressure into the annular space. 
D.  Wells penetrating deeper than three hundred feet shall be destroyed in a manner that ensures a seal is placed across the three hundred foot clay. If necessary, the casing shall be perforated for an interval of not less than ten feet and sealing material forced under pressure into the annular space. 
E.  Wells without an upper annular seal equal to or greater than that set forth in Table 3 shall perforate the casing at a depth equal to Table 3 and inject sealing material under pressure into the annular space. 
F.  In areas where ground water pollution is known, the director may prescribe special methods for well destruction to prevent the migration of pollutants. 
G.  Any well, exploratory hole or test hole which is abandoned, out of service, or otherwise left unattended shall have a temporary cover over the well or hold opening which prevents the introduction of undesirable material into the well or hole, and ensures public safety. The cover shall be secured in such a manner that it cannot be removed except with the aid of equipment or through the use of tools. 
H.  The owner or permittee of any well, exploratory hole or test hole which is abandoned, out of service, or otherwise left unattended for a period greater than ninety days shall file with the director a letter of intent which provides the reason(s) for not properly destroying the well, exploratory hole or test hole as required by this chapter and which specifies the time when the well, exploratory hole, or test hole will be completed, put back in service, or destroyed as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1754 § 1, 1990).  
Chapter 8.16 - ABANDONED ICEBOXES 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside, or an airtight snap lock or other device thereon, without first removing the snap lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Prior code § 17.1).  
Chapter 8.20 - DISASTER CONTROL* 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for this city, requiring the combined forces of political subdivisions of this state beyond the city to combat. Any term or phrase used herein which is not defined herein but defined within the California Emergency Services Act, Government Code Section 8550, et seq., shall have the meaning ascribed within such Act. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.020 - Purposes of this chapter. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations, and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency activities, including mutual-aid activities, are conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.030 - Disaster council—Membership. 
The disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The city manager, who shall be chair; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall also be the city manager. All subsequent references to the director of emergency services may be referred to as the "director"; 
C.  The deputy director of emergency services—operations, who shall be the vice-chair; 
D.  Such officers and section chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; and 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional or other organizations, having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city of Merced disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual-aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.050 - Disaster council—Meetings. 
The disaster council shall meet upon the call of the chair or in his/her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chair. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.060 - Director and deputy director of emergency services—Appointment. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of deputy director of emergency services—operations, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.070 - Director and deputy director—Powers and duties. 
The director is empowered to: 
A.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
B.  Request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
D.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of divisions, services, and staffs of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
E.  Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergencies as defined. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.080 - Director—Powers after disaster proclaimed. 
In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided by Section 8.20.070, or the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered to: 
A.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
B.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
C.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor in the county in which the city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. In the execution of these duties, such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers; 
D.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
E.  Execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant thereto by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any ordinance, by any agreement approved by the city council and/or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the constitution and general laws; 
F.  The director shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council; and 
G.  The deputy director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service section chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.090 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons commandeered under the provisions of Section 8.20.080(C) of this chapter, shall be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, and they shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.100 - Emergency operations plan—Established by resolution. 
The city of Merced disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city of Merced emergency operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
8.20.110 - Unlawful acts—Penalty. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.020 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or for any person during an emergency to: 
A.  Obstruct or Delay Members of Organization. To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Violation of Rules or Regulations. To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; or 
C.  Unauthorized Use of Identification. To wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 2292 § 1 (part), 2007).  
Chapter 8.22 - FIREWORKS 
 
8.22.010 - Short title. 
This section shall be known and cited as the "Fireworks Ordinance." When used in this chapter, the phrase "this section" means the Fireworks Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.020 - Findings and intent. 
(a)  This section governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as dangerous fireworks in California Health and Safety Code, Section 12505 et seq. or the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by this section. The administrative fines are imposed under authority of Government Code, Section 53069.4; California Health and Safety Code, Section 12557; and, the police power of the City of Merced. 
(b)  The issuance of an administrative citation to any person constitutes but one (1) remedy of the city to redress violations of this section. By adopting this section, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this section which the city may otherwise pursue. 
(c)  The imposition of administrative fines under this section shall be limited to persons who possess, use, sell and/or display, or the seizure of twenty-five (25) pounds or less of dangerous fireworks or persons who possess, use, sell and/or display safe and sane fireworks on or at the dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by this section. 
(d)  Administrative fines collected pursuant to this section shall not be subject to California Health and Safety Code, Section 12706. The administrative fines collected shall be allocated in compliance with California Health and Safety Code, Section 12557, which requires the city to provide cost reimbursement to the California State Fire Marshal for reimbursement of costs, including, but not limited to transportation, and disposal. Regulations are to be adopted by the California State Fire Marshal setting forth this allocation. Unless and until such regulations have been adopted by the State of California, the city shall hold in trust a two-hundred-fifty dollar ($250.00) fee in addition to any fine collected to cover the reimbursement to the California State Fire Marshal for the cost of transportation and disposal of the dangerous fireworks. This fee is non-refundable. 
(e)  Due to the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of dangerous fireworks or safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by this section, this section imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real property for all violations of this section existing on that property. Each contiguous use, display, and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine. 
(f)  The fire chief or designee may seek cost recovery for any costs imposed on the fire department due to negligence, an intentional wrongful act, carelessness, or malice as set forth in Merced Municipal Code Master Fee Schedule. 
(g)  In addition to any other remedy available by law, any person or entity who possesses, uses, stores, sells and/or displays dangerous fireworks or any person or entity who possesses, uses, sells and/or displays safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times, or locations other than those permitted by this section are subject to an administrative fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for first violation, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for second violation and two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for any subsequent violation in a twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this section are defined as follows: 
a.  "Dangerous fireworks" means any fireworks specified as such in the State Fireworks Law, California Health and Safety Code Sections 12505 and 12561, and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous by the state fire marshal. 
b.  "Eligible organization" means an organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one (1) full year preceding submittal of an application for the permit required by this section (and which continues to do so thereafter): 
(1)  The organization is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of Internal Revenue Code Sections 501(c) (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10), (19), (23), or (26), or Section 501(d), or Section 501(e); 
(2)  The organization must be headquartered within and clearly affiliated or identified with Merced; 
(3)  The organization must be one which provides direct and regular community services and benefits to the citizens of the city; and, 
(4)  The organization must hold its regularly scheduled meetings within the city. 
"Eligible organization" also means an organization which has met criteria set out in subdivisions (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection, for a continuous period of not less than one (1) full year preceding submittal of an application for the permit required by this section (and which continues to do so thereafter) and which demonstrates at the time of each application that criteria set out in subdivision (4) of this subsection is not met only because adequate and appropriate facilities for the organization's regular meetings are not available for such purposes within city limits. 
"Eligible organization" also means any for-profit organization that obtained a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks and actually operated a fireworks stand in the city during the 2013 season with future eligibility being contingent upon obtaining successive, annual permits, and operating each successive season. A for-profit organization shall become permanently ineligible if the organization fails to obtain a permit and/or to operate a fireworks stand in any given year. 
c.  "Exempt fireworks" means any special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which the California State Fire Marshal, with the advice of the state advisory board, has investigated and determined to be limited to industrial, commercial, and agricultural use, or religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by the authority having jurisdiction. 
d.  "Fireworks" means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. These items include but are not limited to: 
° Devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks. 
° Torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, papercapts, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits. 
e.  "Safe and sane fireworks" as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12529, means any fireworks which do not come within the definition of 'dangerous fireworks' or 'exempt fireworks.' All safe and sane fireworks shall be labeled with the safe and sane fireworks seals as authorized by the California State Fire Marshal. 
f.  "Stand" means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale or offering for sale of fireworks pursuant to a permit duly issued. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.040 - Permits for public displays of fireworks. 
The fire chief or designee shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for those activities contained in California Health and Safety Code, Section 12640, including supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park, other organizations, or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Each such use or display shall be handled by a licensed pyrotechnic operator as defined by California Health and Safety Code, Section 12527, and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the fire chief, after proper investigation, will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.050 - Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, to offer for sale, or sell at retail any fireworks in the city other than safe and sane fireworks, with the exception of those activities provided for in Section 8.22.040 of this section. It shall be unlawful to possess, store, offer for sale, or sell at retail safe and sane fireworks in the city without first obtaining a permit therefore. The fire chief shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks by eligible organizations. The fire chief shall also have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the safe operation of firework stands. Such rules and regulations shall be made available upon request from the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.060 - Applications for permits to sell and store safe and sane fireworks. 
Permits to sell and store safe and sane fireworks shall be issued by the fire department. 
(a)  All applications for permits shall be in writing and delivered to the fire chief on forms supplied by the fire department, and shall include all documentation and proof required by the rules and regulations established by the state fire marshal and the fire chief. All application materials must be complete to be received. 
(b)  Applications may be filed beginning the first regular business day of February of each year up to and including five p.m. on the first day of May of the same year. No applications shall be received after five p.m. on the first day of May, unless that day falls on a holiday or weekend—then the deadline shall be five p.m. on the next business day. 
(c)  Such applications shall be signed by a bona fide officer of the eligible organization wherein the officer, on behalf of the organization and its agents, shall agree to abide by all state laws, all administrative regulations, all city ordinances, all rules and regulations promulgated by the fire chief and the terms and conditions of the permit if permission to operate a fireworks stand shall be granted to the organization. 
(d)  Applications shall identify the name of the organization, the organization form, the address of the principal meeting place, number of members, the purpose of the organization or corporation and the date it came into existence within the city. 
(e)  Application Fees. There is a non-refundable application fee established by resolution of the city council and set forth in the master fee schedule. This application fee shall be in addition to any other chapter or article of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.070 - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Only eligible organizations as defined in Section 8.22.030(b) will be permitted to sell and store safe and sane fireworks. Each of the eligible organizations that were issued permits and operated a stand in the year 2013 (including for-profit organizations), and that submit the required fee and a complete application acceptable to the fire chief or designee by the filing deadline in 2014 pursuant to Section 8.22.060, shall be granted a permit to operate a stand in the year 2014. Thereafter, an organization granted a permit in any given year shall be granted a permit in each subsequent year, so long as this section remains in effect and the organization continues to: (1) be an eligible organization, (2) timely submit complete applications annually, and (3) operate annually without the occurrence of any act or omission that could subject the permitee to revocation of a permit pursuant to Section 8.22.110. 
(b)  In order for the fire chief or designee to issue permits to additional organizations when additional permits become available, the fire chief or designee shall establish and maintain a priority list of eligible organizations. The fire chief or designee shall issue available permits based upon the ranking of organizations on the priority list. The organization ranked first on the priority list shall be issued the next available permit. The priority list in any given year shall include the names of the organizations that did not operate a stand in the previous year and have submitted a complete application for a permit prior to the application deadline for that given year. The order of placement on the priority list shall be determined by lottery conducted pursuant to reasonable rules and regulations promulgated by the fire chief. The rules shall provide for the type of lottery to be used, the date and time the lottery shall be conducted, notice to the participating organizations, and any other terms that the fire chief deems to be appropriate. 
(c)  Once the priority list is established, an organization on the list shall maintain its priority position from year to year with respect to organizations in a lesser position of priority on the list and with respect to organizations being added to the list through subsequent lotteries so long as this section remains in effect and the organization continues to (1) be an eligible organization, and (2) timely submit complete applications annually. 
(d)  Each year, upon notification that the organization has been selected to participate in the upcoming fireworks season, each organization shall provide additional information as required by the fire department including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Each approved organization shall submit a permit fee or additional fees recommended by the fire chief and approved by the city council by resolution to cover all of the costs and expenses of the city related to the permitting of the sales of fireworks, including, but not limited to, "standby" and cleanup costs incurred by the city. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable, and shall be valid only as to the applicant and location provided on the application for such permit. 
(2)  An executed indemnification and hold harmless agreement as required by the city's risk manager or the risk manager's designee. 
(3)  Throughout the life of the permit, the applicant shall pay for and maintain in full force and effect policies of insurance as required by the city's insurance division. The policies of insurance shall name the city, its officers, officials, agents, employees and authorized volunteers as additional insured. the applicant shall submit proof of insurance to the fire department. 
(4)  Other information as may be required by the rules and regulations of the city fire department. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a fire permit for the sales and storage of safe and sane fireworks, each year, one (1) or more representatives from each organization shall attend a stand operator safety seminar conducted by the fire department. Failure of an organization to have a responsible individual attend the seminar shall disqualify the organization from receiving a fireworks sales permit. 
(6)  Fireworks Stands. When all the application requirements have been completed, fees have been paid and the fireworks stand location has been approved, the fire department shall authorize the erection of a fireworks stand. A fireworks stand must be inspected and approved by the fire chief, or designee, prior to the sale of any fireworks from such stand. No retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted except from approved temporary fireworks stands. The sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.080 - Permits. 
Permits will be effective only when delivered by the fire department after the final inspection of the stand shows compliance with all the requirements established by the fire chief for the operation of a fireworks stand and the applicant has paid the required permit fee. Each approved organization shall submit to the finance office a permit fee or additional fees recommended by the fire chief and approved by the city council by resolution to cover all of the costs and expenses of the city related to the permitting of the sales and storage of fireworks, including, but not limited to, "standby" and cleanup costs incurred by the city. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable, and shall be valid only as to the applicant and location provided on the permit issued by the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.090 - Operating hours of fireworks stands. 
Fireworks stands may be operated only from the hours of six a.m. until ten thirty p.m. on and between Sundays and Thursdays with the exception of the third and fourth day of July, and may be operated from six a.m. until twelve a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, and on the third and fourth day of July. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.100 - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful to: 
(a)  Obtain or use more than one (1) permit or to operate more than one (1) stand in the city per year; 
(b)  Sell fireworks in the city earlier than noon on the twenty-eighth day of June or later than noon on the sixth day of July; 
(c)  Use or explode any fireworks in the city earlier then noon on the twenty-eighth day of June or later than noon on the sixth day of July without a permit issued by the fire chief or designee for public displays of fireworks; 
(d)  Sell fireworks to persons under the age of sixteen (16) years old; 
(e)  Sell, assign, or in any way transfer a permit to operate a fireworks stand, or a place or position on the permit waiting list, to another organization, individual, or entity; 
(f)  Use or explode any fireworks inside a building other than an outdoor stadium; or, 
(g)  Fail to dismantle and remove any stand or structure of any nature where fireworks are sold or offered for sale no later than the eighth day of July at five p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.110 - Revocation of permits. 
Any violation of this section or other city ordinances or policies, or the terms and conditions of the permit, or state laws or administrative regulations, or safety rules of the fire department, shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit. All officers, agents, and employees of the eligible organization shall be responsible for compliance with all of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.120 - Seizure of fireworks. 
The fire chief, or the designee thereof, shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.130 - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to criminal prosecution, civil remedies, administrative fines and penalties, and any other remedies available to the city for enforcement of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
8.22.140 - Number of fireworks stands allowed in the city. 
There shall be allowed no more than one (1) fireworks stand for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) residents in the city. The number of residents shall be determined based on the most recent annual population figures provided by the state to the city as of the first day of May of each year. The number of stands allowed shall increase according to increases in population. 
(Ord. No. 2424, § 1, 4-21-2014)  
Chapter 8.24 - FIRE ALARM SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Breaking, removing or injuring. 
It is unlawful for any person to break, remove or injure any of the parts or appurtenances of the fire alarm system of the city; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the breaking of the glass in a fire alarm box by a person about to turn in an alarm of fire in the city. 
(Prior code § 17.6).  
8.24.020 - Unauthorized possession of keys. 
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or under his control, any key, belonging to or fitted to open the lock of any signal box of the fire alarm system, or to make or fit any such key without the permission of the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 17.7).  
8.24.030 - Obstruction of signal box. 
It is unlawful for any person to put, place or suffer to be or remain upon any street or sidewalk, any article or thing whatsoever in such a manner as to obstruct, hinder or interfere with the free access or approach to any signal box of the fire alarm system. 
(Prior code § 17.8).  
8.24.040 - Replacement of wires after movement of building. 
Whenever the moving of any building over or along the public streets of the city requires the removal or displacement of any wires, belonging to the fire alarm system, the person moving or intending to move such building, shall give notice thereof to the chief of the fire department, and the chief of the fire department shall furnish to such person an estimate of the cost of removing and replacing such wires and shall, on receiving from such person the amount of such estimated cost, remove such wires within twenty-four hours after the receipt of such deposit. In the case the actual cost of removing such wires and appurtenances and replacing them is less than the amount so deposited, then the excess of such deposit over such cost shall be returned to the person by whom the deposit was made. 
(Prior code § 17.9).  
8.24.050 - Crossing or running wires too near. 
It is unlawful for any person to run, erect or maintain any wire crossing any wire of the fire alarm system, within a distance of ten inches; provided, that where the wires so crossing each other are attached to the same pole at the place of crossing, the distance may, with the written consent of the chief of the fire department, be decreased. It is unlawful for any person to run, erect or maintain any wire parallel or approximately parallel with any wire of the fire alarm system and within a distance of ten inches therefrom. 
(Prior code § 17.10).  
8.24.060 - Tree limbs, shrubs or vines. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or controlling any land along or near the lines of the fire alarm system to allow any branch or limb of any tree, shrub or vine growing on such land to be or remain within a distance of two feet from any wire of the fire alarm system. 
(Prior code § 17.11).  
Chapter 8.26 - REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PLACES 
Sections: 
 
8.26.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter, unless the content indicates otherwise, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
A.  "Bar" means any area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
B.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities under which legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
C.  "City of Merced" includes all entities within the geographic boundaries of the city, except government facilities, other than city government, over which the city council has no jurisdiction. 
D.  "Dining area" means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
E.  "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
F.  "Employer" means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
G.  "Nonprofit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social, or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section. 
H.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, joint venture, business trust, joint stock company, club, or other organization of any kind, except the city of Merced or any public agency. 
I.  "Place of employment" means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Work areas; 
2.  Conference and classrooms; 
3.  Employee cafeterias; 
4.  Employee lounges and restrooms; 
5.  Hallways; and 
6.  Medical facilities. 
J.  "Public place" means any enclosed area, to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Banks; 
2.  Educational facilities; 
3.  Health facilities; 
4.  Public transportation facilities; 
5.  Recreation areas; 
6.  Restaurants; 
7.  Retail stores; 
8.  Retail service establishments; 
9.  Retail food production, and marketing establishments; 
10.  Waiting rooms; 
11.  Restaurants. 
K.  "Restaurant" means any restaurant, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria, dining area, service line, or eating establishment and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including veterans club, boardinghouse, or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, patrons, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering functions except the term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if the cocktail lounge or tavern is a bar as defined in this section. 
L.  "Service line" means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
M.  "Smoking" means lighting, inhaling, exhaling, or burning any pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, or plant, or carrying any lighted weed, lighted plant, or other ignited combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
N.  "Tobacco store" means any retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
O.  "Work area" and "work place" means any area of a place of employment enclosed by floor to ceiling walls in which one or more employees are assigned to perform work for an employer. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.020 - Regulation of smoking in city facilities. 
Smoking is prohibited in buildings owned or leased by the city or the city's redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.030 - Signs. 
Signs designating smoking or no smoking areas shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every room, building, or other place covered by this chapter. The manner of such posting including the wording, size, color, design, and place of posting, whether on the walls, doors, tables, counterstands, or elsewhere shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.040 - Violation—Infraction. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by smoking in a posted no smoking area or otherwise violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1868 §1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.050 - Prohibited in certain places open to the public. 
Smoking is prohibited in every place in the city, provided, however, that this prohibition against smoking shall not apply within a restaurant wherein a "no smoking" area of not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the seating capacity in which customers are served is maintained, nor shall this prohibition apply between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. The owner, manager, or operator of a restaurant shall post "no smoking" signs in the designated no smoking sections and a sign in at least three-fourths-inch letters conspicuously displayed at the main entrance of the restaurant which states as follows: "_______% seating reserved for non-smokers." In lieu of the above language, any similar wording which conveys to the patrons the percentage of seating capacity where smoking or no smoking is permitted shall satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part) 1994: Ord. 1678 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.060 - Prohibited in transportation facilities. 
Smoking is prohibited in buses, taxis, and all other modes of transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994).  
8.26.070 - Regulation of smoking in private places of employment in the city of Merced. 
Smoking is prohibited in all places of employment in the city. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.080 - Discharge of employee. 
No person or employer shall discharge or in any manner retaliate against any employee because such employee exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994).  
8.26.090 - Smoking areas. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, no regulation or prohibition of smoking is required in the following areas: 
A.  Bars; 
B.  Private residences, except when used as a business in which more than two people are employed; 
C.  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests; 
D.  Retail tobacco stores; 
E.  Licensed card rooms and establishments conducting bingo games provided that at least fifty (50%) percent of the seating of card rooms and at bingo games is maintained as a "no smoking" area. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 1667 § 2 (part), 1987).  
8.26.100 - Signs—Posted conspicuously. 
Signs which designate smoking or no smoking areas established by this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in rooms, buildings, or other places so covered by this chapter as reasonably deemed necessary by the department head, operator, manager, or other person having control of such room, building, or other place. Where possible, ashtrays, receptacles, or other devices used for extinguishing or discarding smoking materials shall be removed from all nonsmoking areas. 
(Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994)  
8.26.110 - Regulation of vending machines. 
A.  Each and every operator of a vending machine shall be charged with the duty and responsibility of compliance with the following: 
1.  Except as hereafter set forth in Sections 2 and 3, those persons in direct management, supervision, or control of the vending machine in the place of operation shall exercise such observation, direction and restraint over the machine necessary to prevent a person under the age of eighteen (18) years procuring or purchasing the product thereof. 
2.  These machines shall be located or placed in operation within a clear and unobstructed line of sight, but in no event more than fifteen (15) feet from the position of an adult employee responsible for supervision of the machine. Where a machine cannot be supervised, as required in this section, it may be operated if equipped with a remote control device which enables a responsible adult to permit single item individual purchases by persons over eighteen (18) years of age upon request. 
3.  The requirements of this section shall not apply to lunchrooms or rest areas of private places of employment which are not accessible to the public and which do not employ persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. 1879 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1868 § 1 (part), 1994).  
8.26.120 - Self-service displays of tobacco. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to regulate self-service displays of tobacco products, thereby restricting the availability of these products to those persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
B.  The city council of the city of Merced finds that the use of tobacco products is detrimental to human health, that a large majority of persons who use tobacco start that use as minors, and that restricting the availability of tobacco products to minors is a goal of the city. 
C.  Self-service display—defined. For the purpose of this section, a "self-service display" shall mean: Any display of tobacco product merchandise that does not require assistance of the seller, for the buyer to acquire or possess that product. 
D.  Self-service display—Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, display, or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of a self-service display. 
E.  Exemption. The following self-service displays are exempt from this section: 
1.  Cigarette or tobacco product vending machines or self-service displays that are located in facilities where the person, business, or tobacco retailer ensures that no person younger than eighteen (18) years of age is present, or permitted to enter the premises, at any time. 
2.  Retail/commercial uses of over 50,000 square feet and which only sell cigarettes by the carton. 
(Ord. 2022 § 1, 1999).  
Chapter 8.28 - BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEMS AND FALSE ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2484, § 1, adopted January 2, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 8.28, §§ 8.28-010—8.28.230. Former ch. 8.28 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2456, § 1, adopted April 18, 2016. 
 
8.28.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Burglary Alarm Ordinance of the City of Merced." 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and regulations for the installation and use of alarm systems to reduce the needless and frequent occurrence of police responses to false alarms occurring at commercial, residential, and other facilities or structures within the city. The increasing frequency of police responses to false alarm calls constitutes a hazard to police officers and the public, and also inhibits the ability of the police department to respond to other emergencies to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. Police resources within the city are limited and the unnecessary responses to false alarms diverts valuable police resources and results in substantial costs to the city each year. The regulation of alarm systems is necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public by discouraging false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set forth below unless it is apparent from the context a different meaning is intended. 
A.  "Alarm Administrator." The term "alarm administrator" means the person designated by the chief of police to administer the city's false alarm program, to issue citations and levy fees pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  "Alarm Company." The term "alarm company" shall be defined as any person, retail establishment, organization, answering service, central station, or modified central station that installs, maintains, alters, sells, connects, or monitors burglary or other alarm security systems for profit or other consideration. This includes an alarm company that is located outside of the limits of the city which monitors alarms installed within the limits of the city. Such companies must be licensed in accordance with the Business and Professions Code Sections 7590 et seq. 
C.  "Alarm Permit." An "alarm permit" means a permit issued by the city or chief of police allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city. 
D.  "Alarm System." The phrase "alarm system" means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other illegal activity requiring immediate attention and a law enforcement response. Fire or smoke detection systems, alarm systems affixed to motor vehicles, alarms designed to elicit medical responses or alarm systems which by design or operation, only alert the occupants of a residence or business premises do not constitute alarms systems within the meaning of this chapter. 
E.  "Alarm User." The phrase "alarm user" means any person owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system or a person who is entitled to possession of any premises within the city that has an installed alarm system that he/she operates. 
F.  "Answering Service." The phrase "answering service" means a telephone answering service which provides, among its services, the receiving of signals from alarm systems, and the subsequent immediate relaying of said messages based on such signals by live voice to the communications center of the police department. 
G.  "Automatic Dialing Device." The phrase "automatic dialing device" means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect and a request for a law enforcement response. 
H.  "Business." The word "business" means any individual or organization engaged in a for-profit enterprise or any non-profit organization which seeks to install an alarm system. 
I.  "Cancellation." A "cancellation" means the process where a police response is terminated when an alarm company or alarm user notifies the police department before the arrival of law enforcement personnel that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response. 
J.  "City." References to "city" refer to the City of Merced. 
K.  "Central Station." The phrase "central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators monitor the circuits, and where guards and/or service persons are continuously present to investigate signals. 
L.  "Chief of Police." For purposes of this chapter, "chief of police" means the chief of police for the city or his or her designee. 
M.  "Emergency." For purposes of this chapter, the word "emergency" means the commission or attempted commission of an illegal act, including, but not limited to, robbery or burglary, or an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or any other life threatening emergency requiring a law enforcement or medical response. 
N.  "Excessive False Alarms." An alarm system shall be deemed to have actuated excessive false alarms when there are more than ten (10) false alarms for a residence or twenty (20) false alarms for businesses or institutional facilities within a calendar year. 
O.  "False Alarm." A "false alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user or his/her employees, agents or authorized users which necessitates a response and arrival by the police department when an emergency condition does not exist. Alarm calls that are cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before police department personnel arrive at the alarmed location shall not constitute a false alarm. A false alarm shall not include an alarm which was caused by a severe storm, earthquake, or other uncontrollable act of nature, a loss of electrical power at the address of the alarm system or any other extraordinary circumstances that are not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user. 
P.  "Government Facility." The phrase "government facility" means any alarmed location where the primary owner, operator, renter or lessee is the United States Government, the State of California, a county, or departments thereof, including the University of California. 
Q.  "Modified Central Station." The phrase "modified central station" means an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators monitor the circuits but where guards are not present to investigate alarm signals. 
R.  "Panic Alarm." The phrase "panic alarm" means any electrical or mechanical device designed to enable an individual, twenty-four (24) hours a day, to instantly alert others of the existence of an emergency by the sounding of an audible alarm or transmitting a signal or message when activated. 
S.  "Permittee." The word "permittee" means the person to whom an alarm system permit is issued. 
T.  "Person." The word "person" shall include natural persons without regard to number or gender, and any partnership, corporation, or any other type of legal entity. 
U.  "Residence." The word "residence" means any structure used primarily as living quarters. This includes single-family homes, multi-family dwellings, duplexes, apartments, condominiums, and mobile homes. 
V.  "Robbery Alarm." The phrase "robbery alarm" means any device or system designed to operate day or night to instantly transmit a signal to alert others of an actual armed robbery or holdup in progress. 
W.  "Service Fees." "Service fees" are fees charged for police responses to false alarms. 
X.  "Verify/verification." The terms "verify" and "verification" mean an attempt by the alarm monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone or other electronic means to determine or attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a law enforcement dispatch in order to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.040 - Audible alarm system. 
Audible alarms shall automatically turn off within fifteen (15) minutes of initial activation. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.050 - Automatic dialing devices prohibited. 
A.  No person shall install, maintain or use an alarm system that automatically dials or transmits a signal directly to the police department upon activation. 
B.  The relaying of emergency messages regarding activation of burglary or robbery alarms to the police department by a central station, modified central station, or an answering service shall be as permitted and designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.060 - Robbery, burglary and panic alarm systems. 
A burglary, panic or robbery alarm system is to be activated only in the event of an emergency as defined in Section 8.28.030 of this chapter. Any other use or indiscriminate activation is prohibited and constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.065 - Duties of alarm companies. 
A.  All alarm companies shall verify burglary alarm activations prior to contacting the police department to request a law enforcement response. This verification requirement shall not apply to robbery or panic alarm activations or signals. Verification must be made by one (1) of the following methods prior to requesting a police response: 
1.  Enhanced call verification (ECV) whereby at least two (2) calls to two (2) different phone numbers provided by the alarm user have been made to verify that an actual emergency exists. 
2.  Video verification whereby a video signal or connection is sent or accessed by the alarm company showing visual evidence that criminal activity or an emergency situation is occurring at the alarmed location. 
3.  Listen in or audio technology whereby the alarm monitoring company operator hears evidence indicating there is the possibility that criminal activity or an emergency situation is occurring at the alarmed location. 
4.  Multi-zone activation whereby the alarm monitoring company operator has determined that there are alarm activations in two (2) or more separate monitoring zones and the alarm company has been unable to contact the alarm user. 
B.  An alarm company shall immediately contact the police department communications center to cancel a request for a police response following a determination that a police response is unnecessary. 
C.  Upon the effective date of this ordinance, any alarm companies providing alarm monitoring services within the city shall provide to the alarm administrator the initial list of alarmed locations in the format designated by the alarm administrator within thirty (30) days. All alarm companies shall also ensure that their customer information is updated with the alarm administrator at least quarterly in the format provided by the alarm administrator. 
D.  Alarm companies providing alarm system installation services shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions shall specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off with an emphasis on the avoidance of false alarms. 
E.  Alarm companies that purchase alarm system accounts from another person or the alarm company shall notify the alarm administrator of that purchase within thirty (30) days of the finalization of the purchase and shall provide information regarding their services and accounts as may be reasonably requested by the alarm administrator. 
F.  Alarm companies shall, on new installations of alarm systems, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.070 - Maintenance and testing. 
An alarm user or alarm company shall ensure that the police department is notified, and confirm receipt of such notice, at least eight (8) hours before conducting any service, testing, or maintenance of an alarm system which may signal or activate an alarm. An alarm activated where such prior notice has been given to the police department shall not constitute a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.080 - Assessment of service fees. 
Each false alarm within any calendar year (i.e., January to December) shall incur a service fee, payable to the city as follows: 
Number of False Alarms 	Service Fees for Permitted Systems 	Service Fees for Non-permitted Systems 
1-2 	No service fee 	$100.00 
3 	$ 50.00 (subject to waiver) 	$150.00 
4-5 	$ 50.00 	$150.00 
6 or more 	$ 100.00 	$200.00 
 
The maximum fee per day shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.085 - Special rules applicable to governmental entities. 
Government facilities are subject to the following special rules: 
A.  Any alarmed government facilities must obtain a permit and update the permit annually for the purpose of providing contact information for the alarm system. 
B.  No cost recovery service fees shall be charged for police response(s) to false alarms at governmental facilities. 
C.  Government facilities are exempt from having police response suspended. 
D.  To qualify for the special rules and exemptions under this section, an alarm site/facility must meet the following criteria: 
1.  The facility is located within the municipal boundaries of the city; and, 
2.  The site meets the criteria as defined in Section 8.28.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.090 - Alarm user awareness class. 
A.  The police department may deliver, provide access to or recommend an on-line provider for an alarm user awareness class for the prevention of false alarms. 
B.  If an alarm user successfully completes the alarm user awareness class, the police department or approved provider shall issue the person a certificate or other proof of completion. The certificate may be used in lieu of payment for the third false alarm service fee as described in Section 8.28.080 of this chapter. A waiver shall only be granted to an alarm user who had a permitted alarm system at the time of their third false alarm violation. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.100 - Alarm permit required. 
A.  Individual users. No property owner or person in possession of property shall cause an alarm system to be installed, connected, operated, or maintained on any property in the city without first obtaining an alarm system permit from the chief of police in accordance with this chapter. Alarm systems which are not designed to summon public and/or city police department attention, but which are privately monitored and responded to, are exempt from this requirement. 
B.  Alarm companies: installation or connection of alarm system. No alarm company shall install or connect an alarm system upon any property within the city without first obtaining a copy of the alarm system permit. 
C.  Existing alarm users. All alarm users who have alarm systems installed and operational prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this ordinance to obtain an alarm user's permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.110 - Permit applications. 
A.  Permit applications. Applications, renewals, and reapplications for alarm system permits shall be filed with the chief of police on such forms as he or she may prescribe. Such applications shall contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will respond to the alarm, or render service or repairs to the alarm during any hour of the day or night and such additional information the chief of police shall deem reasonably necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the permit application. 
B.  Confidentiality. The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so the contents thereof shall not be disclosed except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.120 - Issuance of permit. 
The chief of police may issue an alarm system permit after determining that the requirements of this chapter have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.130 - Expiration of permit. 
Each alarm system permit issued shall only expire upon renewal, change of ownership if issued to a property owner or upon change of tenancy if issued to a tenant. Upon expiration of an alarm system permit, a new permit shall be secured in the manner specified in this chapter, before an alarm system may continue to be used. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.140 - No transfer or assignment of permit. 
Any alarm system permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only as to the permittee named on the permit and only for the particular alarm system specified on the permit. No alarm system permit shall in any manner be transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.150 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
A.  Grounds for suspension or revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of an alarm system permit: 
1.  The violation of any provision of this chapter. 
2.  The occurrence of excessive false alarms calls, meaning more than ten (10) false alarms for a residence or more than twenty (20) false alarms for businesses or institutional facilities within a calendar year. 
3.  The violation of any condition imposed by the chief of police upon an alarm system permit issued in accordance with this chapter. 
4.  This section does not apply to public schools or government facilities. 
B.  Length of suspension; restoration. When a permit is suspended, the chief of police may impose a suspension period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The permit will be restored when the condition which caused the suspension is corrected. If the condition causing the suspension is not corrected within ninety (90) days, the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.160 - Suspension and revocation hearing. 
No alarm system permit shall be suspended or revoked until a hearing has been held by the city manager or his or her designated representative. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the permittee. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. The notice of hearing shall include the date, time, and location of the hearing, and a brief statement of the grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation will be based. Notice may be given either by personal service or by depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to such person(s) to be notified at the address provided on the alarm system permit application or any change of address provided to the chief of police for purposes of updating the alarm system permit information. A permittee may appear at the hearing telephonically. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.170 - Reapplication for permit; certification; reissuance of permit. 
Any person whose alarm system permit is suspended or revoked may reapply for a new alarm system permit as follows: 
A.  Reapplication for permit. All reapplications shall be submitted directly to the chief of police on such forms as he or she prescribes. 
B.  Certification of corrective action. The person reapplying for an alarm system permit following the suspension or revocation of their permit shall submit a certification declared under penalty of perjury that all corrective action has been taken to ensure that no further violations will occur and that any pre-conditions to the re-issuance of the alarm system permit have been met. 
C.  Reissuance of permit. If, after reviewing the certification and in his or her sole discretion, the chief of police determines that the grounds for the prior suspension or revocation have been eliminated, or that such grounds are not likely to occur again in the future, an alarm system permit shall be re-issued to the owner or person in possession of the property for which the alarm system is sought to protect. The chief of police may impose such conditions on the alarm system permit as he/she deems reasonably necessary to ensure that the permittee will comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.180 - Alarm use after suspension or revocation of permit. 
Any alarm user who knowingly operates or causes a false alarm to occur after his or her alarm user permit has been suspended or revoked shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.190 - Notices. 
Any notice or other written proof required by this chapter to be served on or given to any person shall be in writing and shall be duly served and given when personally delivered to the person to whom it is directed or when deposited in the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the person to whom it is directed. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.200 - Contesting a false alarm service fee. 
An alarm user may appeal the imposition of a service fee as follows: 
A.  An alarm user may appeal the imposition of a service fee by sending a letter to the chief of police specifying the reasons for the appeal and contesting the imposition of the service fee. The alarm user must include a detailed description of the false alarm event and include all credible evidence in his or her possession that supports the contention that the alarm activation does not constitute a false alarm. 
B.  The letter must be received by the chief of police within thirty (30) calendar days after the false alarm service fee invoice is mailed to the alarm user. 
C.  A false alarm service fee may only be appealed on the grounds that the incident cited as the basis for the service fee was, in fact, not a false alarm as defined by Section 8.28.030 of this chapter. 
D.  The chief of police may reject requests for appeals that are not supported by detailed, credible evidence demonstrating that the alarm was not a false alarm. 
E.  A notice of decision regarding the appeal to the chief of police shall be mailed to the alarm user within fifteen (15) business days following the receipt of the appeal request. 
F.  In the event that the first appeal is denied, the alarm user may, within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the notice of decision is sent by the chief of police, file a written request for an appeal with the city manager or his or her designee requesting an in-person hearing. 
G.  An informal appeal hearing shall be held within ninety (90) days following the timely submission of a request for an appeal. 
H.  The hearing shall be conducted by an appeals officer appointed by the city manager. Written notice to the appellant of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing either by personally delivering the notice to the appellant or by mailing a copy thereof to the appellant at the address shown or provided in the appeal. The appellant may appear at the hearing telephonically. 
The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the appeals officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld, imposed, awarded or assessed by the appeals officer. 
I.  The alarm administrator may serve as the city's representative in these hearings. The alarm administrator may participate in the hearing telephonically. 
J.  The decision regarding the appeal shall be in writing and shall contain a determination of the all issues and questions of fact presented. The decision shall be mailed to the appellant by first class mail to the address shown or provided in the appeal within thirty (30) days of the hearing. 
K.  The failure of any person to timely file an appeal shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the notice imposing the false alarm service fee. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.210 - Violations. 
A.  Penalties. Except where punishment is specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, penalties for violations of provisions of this chapter may be levied in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  Enforcement. The conviction or punishment of any person for violating any provision of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any service fees due and unpaid at the time of such conviction or punishment, nor shall payment of any service fees bar a criminal prosecution for a violation of any provision of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any service fees due and owing shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent service fees. All service fees shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days from the date they are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.220 - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are, and are intended to be, severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
8.28.230 - Nonliability. 
Nothing in this article shall create or be construed to create a duty upon the police and/or fire department or city to respond to any alarm system activation or signal whether false or not. All calls for service from the city's police and fire departments, including those caused by an alarm activation or signal, may be responded to within the resources available at the time of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2484, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Chapter 8.30 - REGULATION OF SHOPPING CARTS 
Sections: 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Abandoned shopping carts are unsightly, interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, accumulate over time on public and private property causing blight and similar conditions resulting in reduction of property values and deterioration of the city's neighborhoods, are detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing that it is a violation of this code to improperly remove any shopping cart from the premises of the owner of the cart. In addition, this chapter provides requirements for storeowners to take action to reduce the removal of shopping carts from the owner's premises and to facilitate the retrieval of shopping carts removed from the owner's premises. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Abandoned shopping cart" means any cart that has been removed from the premises of the owner and is no longer in the possession or under the physical control of the person who removed such cart. A cart abandoned by a person other than the owner shall not constitute a relinquishment of ownership of the cart by the owner. 
B.  "Cart" means a basket or platform which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a business establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. This includes, but is not limited to, laundry, grocery, or shopping carts. 
C.  "Director" means the director of parks and community services of the city of Merced or the director's designee. 
D.  "In the business of shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval" means to search for, gather, and restore possession to the owner, or an agent thereof, for compensation or in expectation of compensation, of shopping carts or laundry carts located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment. 
E.  "Laundry cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them. 
F.  "Owner" means any person, business establishment or entity who owns, possesses, or has the power to make a shopping cart available to customers. For the purpose of this chapter, owner includes, but is not limited to, the storeowner, manager, on-site manager, on-duty manager, or other designated agent of a business establishment providing shopping carts for customer use. 
G.  "Parking area" means a parking lot or other property provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. 
H.  "Person" means any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, and other entity capable of being sued. 
I.  "Plan" means a written document describing in detail the measures an owner intends to implement to prevent cart removal and to retrieve abandoned carts. 
J.  "Premises" means the entire area owned, rented, leased, or utilized by a business establishment that provides shopping carts for customer use, including parking areas. 
K.  "Street" means any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, parking lot, parking area, and place used by the general public. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.30.030 - Enforcement authority. 
A.  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director with the assistance of the police chief, fire chief and their designated agents and code enforcement officers. The director is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and implement rules, regulations, and procedures necessary or appropriate for enforcement of this chapter. The director, police chief, fire chief and their designated agents and code enforcement officers are authorized as follows: 
1.  To enter upon and inspect any public and private property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter or applicable state laws are being obeyed. As used herein, "public property" includes the outdoor common area of any building, business premises, apartment building or complex, or other premises or portion thereof which is adjacent to public property, open to the public, and which contains a shopping cart or shopping carts visible at street or ground level from the adjacent public property. All inspections, entries, and examinations shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, tenant, occupant, or agent or other responsible party refuses to grant the city permission to enter or inspect, the city may seek an inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed a limitation upon the director to enter private property pursuant to permission from the owner or occupant thereof or pursuant to a duly issued inspection warrant or other court order. 
2.  To examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of the owner of any shopping cart, or to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  To determine whether a violation of this chapter exists and to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state laws. 
4.  To issue administrative citations and to impose civil penalties for any violation of this chapter. 
B.  The police chief, city police officers, and designated city employees, who shall be designated by separate Resolution pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, shall have the authority to issue criminal citations for violations of this chapter. The city attorney and the district attorney shall have the authority to file criminal complaints to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.040 - Prohibition against removing, possessing, and altering carts. 
It is unlawful for any person except the owner of a cart or the owner's agent to do any of the following acts: 
A.  To remove a cart from the premises or parking area of a business establishment without the express, written consent of the owner; or, 
B.  To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of the owner of the cart without the express written consent of the owner. Written permission to remove a shopping cart shall be valid for a period not to exceed seventy-two consecutive hours; or, 
C.  To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated or altered; or, 
D.  To alter, convert, or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate, or alter serial numbers on a cart. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.050 - Prohibition against abandoning carts. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave, abandon, or store any cart upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place, or upon private property exposed to public view, at a location. other than the premises of the owner. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.060 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates Section 8.30.040 or Section 8.30.050 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.020 et. seq. of this code. An administrative fine may also be imposed not to exceed the amount allowable for a criminal fine. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from pursuing criminal, civil, administrative, or any other legal remedy to address violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.070 - Cart identification required. 
A.  Every owner who, in connection with the conduct of a business, including, but not limited to a food dispensing business, retail business, or laundry business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall permanently affix a durable metal or plastic sign to such cart containing the following information: 
1.  The name of the owner of the cart or the name of the retailer that provides the cart, or both; 
2.  A valid, current telephone number or address for returning the cart if removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer; 
3.  The procedure to be used for authorized removal of a shopping cart from the owner's premises if allowed; and, 
4.  Notice that the unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of a shopping cart is a violation of state law. 
B.  A cart with a sign attached pursuant to subsection A of this section that does not include a current valid telephone number shall bear some form of additional identification which includes a legible, valid, current telephone number of the owner or provider of the cart. 
C.  Carts provided by individual stores or retailers that are owned by or affiliated with the same company and share the same name (chain stores) shall bear some form of identification which identifies the specific store that the cart is assigned to. 
D.  A cart that does not have a sign attached as required by subsection A of this section is presumed to be abandoned if it has been left standing unattended on any public property or private property other than the owner's or the owner's agent. The city may impound, sell, or otherwise dispose of such a cart immediately upon discovery of the cart. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.080 - Penalty for failure to affix required signs. 
Any owner who maintains or permits the use of shopping carts in violation of the provisions of Section 8.30.070 shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.030 et. seq. of this code. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.090 - Removal prevention and retrieval—Mandatory plan. 
A.  Every owner who provides or intends to provide carts to be used by customers shall do the following: 
1.  Provide customers with written notice within thirty days of the adoption of this chapter, or for businesses opening after the adoption of this chapter within thirty days of the opening thereof, that removal of carts from the owner's business premises is prohibited and is a violation of state and local law. This notification shall be provided for at least two to seven days on days reasonably calculated by the owner to reach the most customers and may be provided in the form of flyers, warnings on shopping bags, or any form of written notification that will effectively notify customers of the prohibition; and, 
2.  In accordance with rules promulgated by the director upon the advice of the police department, post prominently and conspicuously at all locations required by such rules, a notice in substantially the following form: 
'REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS (OR LAUNDRY CARTS, IF APPLICABLE,) FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW (MMC § 8.30.040) AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A FINE OF UP TO $1000.00 OR SIX MONTHS IN JAIL OR BOTH THE FINE AND THE JAIL TERM.' 
3.  Implement specific measures to retrieve carts that are removed from the owner's premises. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, employment of personnel or contractors to retrieve shopping carts on a regular basis or whenever necessary so long as retrieval of carts occurs within seventy-two hours after the owner is notified that a cart belonging to the owner is off of the owner's premises. 
B.  If it is determined by the director that an excessive number of abandoned carts belong to a particular owner, the owner shall be required to contract with a cart retrieval service that retrieves carts at least five days a week; and submit to the director and implement a removal prevention and retrieval plan pursuant to subsection C of this section. The director shall notify the owner in writing when such requirements shall be imposed. For purposes of this subsection and subsection D of this section, the number of abandoned shopping carts belonging to a particular owner shall be considered excessive if: 
1.  The owner fails three times within a six-month period to retrieve a cart within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city of the shopping cart's discovery and location. 
C.  If required by the director to submit a removal prevention and retrieval plan, the owner shall submit a written plan describing in detail the measures the owner intends to implement to prevent cart removal and to retrieve abandoned carts. The plan shall describe notification methods as described in subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section; and the name, address, and working hours of the retrieval service that the owner has contracted with. In addition, the plan shall also describe specific physical removal prevention measures the owner intends to implement if the owner is required to implement such pursuant to subsection D of this section. The owner shall submit the plan within thirty days after notification by the director that submission of a plan is required and shall implement the plan immediately upon its completion. The removal prevention and retrieval measures shall continue until the city accepts or requires modification. 
D.  If it is determined by the director, that within one year of the implementation of a plan by an owner, as described in subsection C of this section, that an excessive number of abandoned carts belong to the owner, the director may require the owner to implement at least one specific physical measure to prevent cart removal from the business premises. If an owner is required to implement a physical measure, the measures the owner may implement include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Installation of disabling devices on all carts that prevent the use of the carts off of the premises; 
2.  Employment of personnel or security guards to advise and deter customers from removing carts from the premises; 
3.  Requiring a security deposit for use of all carts; 
4.  Restricting the use of carts outside the building of the business unless in the company of an employee; 
5.  Installation of obstacles to prevent the removal of carts provided such measure does not violate any other law, including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
6.  Installation of surveillance equipment on the premises. 
E.  The city may require additional measures to be implemented if it determines that the plan is not reasonably likely to prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises or retrieval measures are insufficient. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.100 - Penalty for failure to prepare and implement written plan. 
A.  Any owner who fails to submit a plan within thirty days of notification by the director that a plan is required; or who fails to implement the measures established in a plan or modifications to a plan as required by the city, shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.030 et. seq. of this code. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided for in subsection A of this section, if an owner is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of an infraction for violation of subsection A above three or more times within a twelve month period, the director is hereby authorized to require such owner to install on all shopping carts disabling devices which prevent their removal from an owner's premises. Any owner who fails to place a disabling device on all carts when required is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.020 et. seq. of this code. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.110 - Evaluation report. 
A.  Every owner who has been required to submit a removal prevention and retrieval plan pursuant to Section 8.30.090 shall submit an annual report. The annual report shall be submitted to the director by July 1st of each year, and shall evaluate the measures that were used and approved in the prior year. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The measures actually implemented to prevent removal of carts from the premises; and, 
2.  The number of times the city, a resident, or anyone else reported carts off the premise of the owner as well as the number of carts returned by the retrieval service. 
B.  The director may require the owner to provide additional information if deemed necessary. 
C.  After timely submitting the annual report, an owner who's report demonstrates compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be relieved of further reporting obligations by the director. If compliance with this chapter is not demonstrated by the annual report or such report is not timely submitted, the director shall extend the reporting obligations for at least one additional year. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.120 - Penalties for failing to submit an evaluation report. 
Any owner that fails to timely submit an evaluation report as required by Section 8.30.110 is guilty of an infraction and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.030 et. seq. of this code. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.130 - Administrative hearing. 
If a dispute arises between the owner and the city regarding the administrative enforcement of any requirement of this chapter by the director, the owner may request an administrative hearing in order to resolve this dispute. 
A.  The request for hearing shall be made in writing to the director. As soon as practicable after receiving the request for hearing, the director shall request the city manager or his or her designee to appoint a hearing officer. The city manager or his or her designee may act as the hearing officer. 
1.  In the event the owner objects to the designated hearing officer within five business days of the date of mailing of the same to the owner by the city, the owner and the director shall meet and confer to develop a mutually acceptable hearing officer. Any owner objecting to the designation of the hearing officer shall do so in writing addressed and delivered to the city clerk which is dated and signed by the owner and setting forth the basis of the objection. Any costs associated with a non-city designated hearing officer shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
B.  The director shall schedule a date, time, and place for the hearing and provide notice of the hearing in accordance with subsection C of this section. 
C.  Written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by first class mail at the address provided by the owner. The hearing shall be set no sooner than twenty days following the request for hearing. The administrative hearing shall be held within ninety calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing. One continuance of the hearing, not to exceed twenty-one days, may be granted upon written request to the director. 
D.  The administrative hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the city manager and approved by the city attorney. The hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair, and impartial review of the dispute. The hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive testimony from the owner or any authorized representative of the owner and any witnesses. The director or the director's designee may, but shall not be required to, participate in an administrative hearing. All documents relating to the dispute shall be submitted as evidence. Depending on the hearing officer's determination whether the disputed decision, order, requirement, or other action of the director was reasonable, the hearing officer shall either uphold the director's decision, order, requirement, or other action, or grant relief to the owner by reducing or nullifying any administrative fine or by canceling an order or action required by the director. The hearing officer's decision or order shall be deemed the final administrative order or decision of the city. The administrative hearing procedures provided by this section shall not apply to any criminal enforcement of this chapter. 
E.  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision which shall be served personally upon, or by first class mail to, the owner or the authorized representative of the owner. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.140 - Impoundment of abandoned carts. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22435.7 of the Business and Professions Code, a cart that has a sign affixed to it in accordance with Section 22435.1 of the Business and Professions Code may be impounded by the city provided both of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
1.  The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center. 
2.  Except as provided in subsection (G), the shopping cart is not retrieved within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city of the shopping cart's discovery and location. 
B.  In instances where the location of a shopping cart will impede emergency services the city is authorized to immediately retrieve the shopping cart from public or private property. 
C.  When the city impounds a shopping cart under the authority provided in subsections A and B, the city is authorized to recover its actual costs for providing this service. 
D.  Any shopping cart that is impounded by the city pursuant to subsections A and B shall be held at a location that is both: 
1.  Reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart. 
2.  Open for business at least six hours of each business day. 
E.  The city shall fine the owner of a shopping cart in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars for each occurrence in excess of three during a specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this section in a one-day period. 
F.  The city may sell or otherwise dispose of any shopping cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days of receipt of a notice of violation by the owner of the shopping cart. 
G.  Notwithstanding subsection (A)(2) of this section, the city may impound a shopping cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in subsection (A)(1) without complying with the three day advance notice requirement provided that: 
1.  The owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, is provided actual notice within twenty-four hours following the impound and that notice informs the owner, or his or her agent, as to the location where the shopping cart may be claimed. 
2.  Any shopping cart so impounded shall be held at a location in compliance with subsection D of this section. 
3.  Any shopping cart reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be released and surrendered to the owner or agent at no charge whatsoever, including the waiver of any impound and storage fees or fines that would otherwise be applicable pursuant to subsections C or E of this section. Any cart reclaimed within the three business day period shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of subsection (E) of this section. 
4.  Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be subject to any applicable fee or fine imposed pursuant to subsections C or E of this section commencing on the fourth business day following the date of the notice. 
5.  Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within thirty days of receipt following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection, may be sold or disposed of in accordance with subsection (F) of this section. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.150 - Retrieval services. 
A.  Any person who engages in the business of shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval, as defined in this chapter, in the city shall have a city business license and shall retain records showing written authorization from the cart owner, or an agent thereof, to retrieve the cart or carts and to be in possession of the cart or carts retrieved. 
B.  A copy of the record showing written authorization shall be maintained in each vehicle used for shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval. 
C.  Each vehicle employed for the retrieval of shopping carts or laundry carts shall display a sign that clearly identifies the retrieval service. 
D.  Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.020 et seq. of this code. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
8.30.160 - Prosecution for theft not precluded. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to prosecution for theft. 
(Ord. 2106 § 1 (part), 2002).  
Chapter 8.34 - ABANDONED VEHICLE ABATEMENT* 
Sections: 
 
8.34.010 - General abandoned vehicles as nuisances. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code (VC) to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, including highways, creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as set out in this section: 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
"Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the highway or other public or private property; 
B.  A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard; 
C.  Nothing in this section authorizes the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provision of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.040 - Nonexclusivity of regulation. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the city and/or county. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by this city/county, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.050 - Officer designated. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the vehicle abatement officer as designated by the city manager or designated agency head responsible for abandoned vehicle abatement operations in the designated city and/or county. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officers and deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.060 - Authority of private contractor. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to remove vehicles pursuant to this chapter, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.070 - Administration costs. 
The city council shall, from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.080 - Authority of vehicle abatement officer. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city/county, the vehicle abatement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.090 - Abatement notice of intention. 
A.  A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE" 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
 "As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to, license or VIN number, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of (ordinance or municipal code Chapter number)." 
 "You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located." 
 "As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council of the City of Merced within such ten (10) day period, the City Manager shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing." 
NOTICE MAILED:________ 
______________ 
City Manager 
City of Merced 
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE" 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle - notice should be given to both if different.) 
 "As the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number)." 
 "You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by removing said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of this notice." 
 "As the registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If such request is not received by the City Council of the City of Merced within such ten (10) day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing." 
Notice Mailed________ 
______________ 
City Manager 
City of Merced 
B.  A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if: (1) the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, or (2) all the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed; 
b.  The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) by the police chief of the city of Merced or his/her designee; 
c.  The department of building and safety has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; 
d.  The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; and 
e.  The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one (1) or more dwelling units. 
C.  If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section, prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrap-yard, automobile dismantler's yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.100 - Public hearing requested. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city's/county's vehicle abatement officer within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the enforcement hearing officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing, which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city/county shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.110 - Public hearing—Procedure action. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the enforcement hearing officer, which shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning the vehicle's location on the private property or public property. The enforcement hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial. 
The enforcement hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. This may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in the opinion of the hearing officer, the circumstances justify the delay. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the enforcement hearing officer may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and by resolution order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the enforcement hearing officer shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner. 
If an interested party makes a written presentation to the enforcement hearing officer, but does not appear, (s)he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.120 - Vehicle disposal. 
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance or five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, as required by Section 8.34.110, whichever date is later, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to 5004 VC, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.130 - Notice to department of motor vehicles. 
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles by the persons authorized to remove the vehicle identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.140 - Cost recovery. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.34.110 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code Section 25845 or 38733.5 and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other county taxes. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.150 - Act of abandonment—Infraction. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, store, leave, or permit the abandonment, storing, or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative upon any private property or public property, including highways, within the city for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.160 - Refusal to abate—Infraction. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law, where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
8.34.170 - Constitutionality. 
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, or phrase of this chapter for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2315 § 1 (part), 2008).  
Chapter 8.36 - GRAFFITI* 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Intent and purpose. 
A.  The city council of the city of Merced hereby finds and declares that graffiti on public and private property creates a condition tending to reduce the value of such property, promotes blight and deterioration of surrounding property, and invites further vandalism; it also results in loss of pride in affected neighborhoods and loss of business to neighboring commercial enterprises. 
B.  The city council further finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance, and must be eliminated by means of prevention, education and abatement to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.36.020 - Terms defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Felt tip marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch, and contains an ink that is not water-soluble. 
"Graffiti" means any inscription, work, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, to the extent that same was unauthorized by the owner or party otherwise in control, or despite authorization, is otherwise deemed by the city to be a public nuisance. 
"Graffiti implement" means a pressurized or nonpressurized container, a felt tip marker, a foam tipped container, or a paint stick. 
"Minor" means a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Paint stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty (20) feet, and not water-soluble. 
"Pressurized container" means any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism designed to propel liquid which contains ink, paint, dye or other substance which is expelled under pressure, either through the use of aerosol devices, pumps or similar propulsion devices. 
"Property owner" means any person who is the owner of property, or who has primary responsibility for control over property, or who has primary responsibility for the repair and maintenance of property. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.36.030 - Display of aerosol spray paint containers, felt tip markers, and paint sticks. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation doing business within the city of Merced to store, stock, keep or display for sale or transfer aerosol spray paint containers, felt tip markers that are not water-soluble and paint sticks in an area other than a place that is locked and secure or is otherwise made unavailable to the public and which is accessible only to employees of such businesses. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005).  
8.36.040 - Possession by minors—Prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement: 
1.  While upon public property; or 
2.  While upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property. Such consent must be given in advance and must authorize the minor's presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement. 
This subsection shall not apply while the minor is attending, or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at the school which has, as a requirement of the class, the need to use felt tip markers. 
B.  This section is not intended to conflict with California Penal Code Section 594.1. 
C.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.050 - Sale, furnishing, or purchase of graffiti implements; persons under the age of 18 years. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation except a parent or legal guardian, to sell, give away or in any way, furnish to a minor any graffiti implement. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.060 - Graffiti prohibited. 
A.  Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon any property of any kind within the city of Merced. 
B.  Assisting in or Encouraging Violations. It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage another to violate the provisions of this chapter, by words, overt act, failure to act, or by lack of supervision and control. 
C.  Property Owner's Duty to Abate Graffiti. 
1.  It is unlawful for any property owner within the city to permit graffiti to remain upon his or her real or personal property for a period exceeding five (5) days. 
2.  Violation of subsection (C)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
3.  Each day a property owner fails to remove graffiti after the time limit for such removal has expired, constitutes a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.070 - Right of city to remove graffiti. 
A.  Authorization to Use City Funds. Within the limits set forth in this section, city funds may be used to remove graffiti and other similarly inscribed material that is within the public view from publicly or privately owned structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city. 
B.  The written consent of the owner of the affected structures, public or private, shall be obtained, except as specified below. The consent shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and shall: 
1.  Authorize entry of city employees and contractors on the affected property to accomplish the removal of the material; 
2.  Assign to the city any cause or causes of action which the owner may have, against any person or persons who defaced the property with graffiti; and 
3.  Hold the city, its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors harmless from all liability arising out of the entry on the property or the work of removing the material. 
C.  City funds shall be used only to remove the inscribed material itself and may not be used for painting or repairing any more extensive area than is necessary to abate the graffiti. When the abatement method involves painting over reasonable efforts to approximately match surface, color may be used. 
D.  Right of Entry on Private Property—Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to remove graffiti within the time herein specified, or if the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city may commence abatement proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the nuisance abatement authority granted by California Government Code Sections 38773, et seq., and Chapter 8.08 of this code. 
E.  Noninterference by Owner or Occupant. No owner or occupant of the property shall obstruct any abatement activity by any authorized person after abatement activities have commenced. 
F.  The city may contract with a person or entity, public or private, for performing abatement services. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.080 - Abatement and recovery of abatement expenses from property owner. 
Abatement of graffiti nuisance and recovery of expense of abatement proceedings commenced against a property owner shall be according to the following procedure: 
A.  If a hearing is requested by the property owner, the city manager, or his or her designee (hearing officer) shall give the property owner not less than forty-eight (48) hours' notice of a hearing to be held by the hearing officer for the purpose of showing cause why the public nuisance should not be abated by the city. Following notice, the hearing shall be held by the hearing officer at the time, date, and place designated and at such hearing the property owner may be heard and provided with the opportunity to show cause why the nuisance should not be abated. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether abatement of the nuisance shall be commenced. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that abatement of the nuisance shall be commenced, the city may enter the property and cause such nuisance to be removed in the manner determined most appropriate by the city. 
C.  If a hearing has not been requested by the property owner, the city may enter upon the property and cause such nuisance to be removed in the manner determined most appropriate by the city. 
D.  Upon removal of the public nuisance, the city may provide an accounting of the expense of abatement along with a demand for payment to the property owner. 
E.  If payment or payment arrangements with the city finance department are not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the accounting and demand for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty assessment of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus interest on the unpaid amount plus penalty, which interest shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) percent per month until paid. 
F.  In the event the expense of abatement has not been paid within thirty (30) days from the date of issuing an accounting and demand for payment, and payment arrangements have not been made with the city finance department, as required in subsection E of this section, the amount unpaid including any penalty and interest therein, shall constitute a lien pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773, 38773.1, and their successors, against the property of the property owner. Prior to recording a notice of lien, the hearing officer shall provide notice pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.1. Any such lien not paid by June 30th of each year shall, upon adoption of a resolution by the city council, be collected along with, and in the same manner as, the general property taxes. The liened property shall be subject to the penalties, procedures, and sale in case of delinquency as provided in the Civil Code of California. 
G.  Alternatively, pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, the expense of abatement may constitute a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the property owner. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in Government Code Section 38773.5 and its successors. 
H.  In addition to any other remedy provided herein or available at law, expense of abatement pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773, 3873.1 and 38773.5 shall constitute a personal obligation against the property owner. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.090 - Abatement of graffiti nuisance and recovery of expense of abatement. 
A.  The recovery of expense of abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement of property by graffiti or any other inscribed material by a minor or other person who has created, caused, assisted in creating or causing the nuisance shall be according to the following procedure: 
1.  The city manager, or his or her designee, (hearing officer), shall give the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, or other person, not less than ten (10) days' notice of a hearing to be held by the hearing officer for the purpose of showing cause why the city should not recover the expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, or other person. Following notice, the hearing shall be held by the hearing officer at the time, date, and place designated and at such hearing, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, may each be heard and provided with the opportunity to show cause why the city should not recover the expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the city should recover expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, or other person. 
2.  If the hearing officer determines that the city should recover the expense of abatement from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, or other person, the city shall provide an accounting of the expense of abatement along with a demand for payment to the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, or other person. 
3.  The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the expense of abatement pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2, 38773.6, and their successors. If payment or payment arrangements with the city finance department are not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the accounting and demand for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty assessment of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus interest on the unpaid amount plus penalty, which interest shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) percent per month until paid. 
4.  The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for any damages caused by the misconduct of the minor, including, but not limited to, the costs expended to remove or otherwise abate such graffiti damage. The city attorney shall have the authority to recover such abatement costs pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(b). The finance officer or designee shall have authority to recover such abatement costs falling within the jurisdictional limitations of small claims court. 
5.  In the event the expense of abatement has not been paid within thirty (30) days from the date of issuing an accounting and demand for payment, and payment arrangements with the city finance department have not been made, as required in subsection (A)(3) of this section, the amount paid, including any penalty and interest therein, shall constitute a lien pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.2 against the property of the minor, or other person and against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Prior to recording a notice of lien, the hearing officer shall provide notice pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2. Any such lien not paid by June 30th of each year shall, upon adoption of a resolution by the city council, be collected along with, and in the same manner as, the general property taxes. The liened property shall be subject to the penalties, procedures, and sale in case of delinquency as provided in the Civil Code of California. 
6.  Alternatively, pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6, the expense of abatement shall constitute a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor, or other person, or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in Government Code Section 38773.6 and its successors. 
7.  In addition to any other remedy provided herein or available at law, the expense of abatement pursuant to Government Code Section 38772 shall constitute a personal obligation against the minor and a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.100 - Treble costs of abatement. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two- (2) year period finding that a property owner, minor, or other person is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with Section 8.36.080(G) or 8.36.090(A)(6) of this chapter, the city attorney is authorized to seek a court order for treble the costs of the abatement. 
B.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38772(d)(3), a minor or other person means a minor or other person who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.110 - Diversion program. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 626 of the Welfare and Institutions Code and in lieu of, or as part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 (including, but not limited to, offenses which in the opinion of the police chief would constitute a violation of this chapter), the police chief or his designated representative is authorized to require the minor to perform such community service as the police chief deems appropriate. The community service shall not exceed one hundred (100) hours, and shall be performed under the supervision of the community service provider approved by the police chief. The police chief may also require that at least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, be in attendance at least fifty (50) percent of the period of assigned community service. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.120 - Encroachment permits and other discretionary approvals. 
A.  Conditions on Encroachment Permits. Additional conditions that may be imposed on encroachment permits issued by the city include: (1) the permit applicant or holder applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee; (2) the immediate removal by the permit applicant or holder of any graffiti; (3) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; (4) the permit applicant or holder providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in abating a graffiti nuisance on the encroaching object or structure. 
B.  Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits or other similar land use entitlements or development or design applications, the city may impose graffiti removal requirements or any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related conditions upon the permit applicant or holder to do the following: 
1.  Use of Anti-Graffiti Material. Apply an anti-graffiti material and provide a landscape design acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, to surfaces constructed on the site that are determined by the city manager, or designee, to be likely to attract graffiti ("graffiti-attracting surfaces," hereinafter referred to in this section); 
2.  Right of Access to Remove Graffiti. Grant, in writing, the right of entry and access to such property, upon forty-eight (48) hours posted notice, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of abating graffiti on such property. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land. 
3.  Supply City with Graffiti-Removal Material. Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a specified period of years after approval, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in abating graffiti nuisances on designated graffiti-attracting surfaces. 
4.  Owner to Immediately Remove Graffiti. Applicants for subdivision maps shall include, in a form satisfactory to the city, a covenant running with the land that all current and future property owners shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable surfaces to the city's satisfaction. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
8.36.130 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under this code and laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2207 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 8.40 - NUISANCE[3] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2349, adopted March 1, 2010, amended Ch. 8.40, Property Maintenance and Nuisances, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.40 was comprised of §§ 8.40-005—8.40.160, and derived from Ord. 1870 of 1994; and Ord. 2186 of 2005. 
 
Article I. - Generally 
 
8.40.010 - Generally. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions are to be construed as set out in this article, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions in Article IV of this chapter regarding preabatement notice and hearing requirements are hereby made applicable to all ordinances requiring the abatement of nuisances which are silent as to the procedures to be followed for the preabatement notice, summary abatement and/or hearing requirements, and to any other subsequently enacted ordinance declaring additional acts or omissions a nuisance. 
B.  The provisions in this chapter pertaining to the recovery of costs are applicable to the recovery of costs for all nuisance abatements effected by the city through its employees or by contract pursuant to any ordinance of the city unless an alternate procedure is specified in said ordinance or by other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
8.40.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions are to be construed as set forth in this section: 
A.  "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the city manager, or his/her designated representative, shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  "Abatement costs" means the actual costs paid or incurred by the city in connection with the matter, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Costs of investigation; 
2.  Personnel costs; 
3.  City overhead incurred in the preparation for any hearing and appearing at the hearing itself; 
4.  Costs incurred for all inspections and reinspections necessary to enforce any order issued under this chapter; 
5.  Costs of preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and inspecting the work performed under contract; 
6.  Costs of mailing and printing notices and documents; and 
7.  The cost, including staffing costs, expended or incurred by the city in abating the conditions or violations pursuant to any order under this chapter. 
C.  "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
D.  "Hearing officer" means the individual who shall conduct nuisance abatement hearings pursuant to this chapter and shall render decisions pursuant to the applicable hearing procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall be designated by the city manager. 
E.  "Responsible party or person" means any individual, business or entity responsible for creating, causing, maintaining or permitting the nuisance activity, premises, condition or conduct, and includes, but is not limited to, the property owner, tenant, lessee, possessor, or occupant of real property, the president or other officer of the corporation, and a business owner or manager of a business. 
F.  "Weeds" mean all weeds growing upon streets, alleys, sidewalks, or private property in the city and includes any of the following: 
1.  Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature; 
2.  Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property; 
3.  Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; 
4.  Weeds which are a public nuisance of seasonal and recurring nature; 
5.  Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health; 
6.  Accumulations of garden refuse, cuttings and other combustible trash; 
7.  Mistletoe, viscum album. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Article III. - Rules and Obligations 
 
8.40.040 - Responsibility for property maintenance. 
Every owner, tenant, occupant, agent, person having charge or possession of any premises or property, lessee or holder of any possessory interest in real property within the city is required to maintain such property so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the property shall remain liable for violations hereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property or the occupation of the property by any third party. Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon, or in the use of, such property, created by the former owner, is liable therefore in the same manner as the one who first created it.  
8.40.050 - Keeping sidewalks clean. 
The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain the sidewalk free of accumulating dirt, sand, soil (including eroding dirt, sand, or soil), leaf, vegetation, waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, sawdust, building materials, paint, chemical, combustible materials, trash, or other debris, and shall promptly remove such materials from the sidewalk, gutter, and storm drains located under or next to the sidewalks. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be swept, blown by mechanical means, or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on such real property as required for the disposal of garbage or green waste, as appropriate.  
8.40.060 - Repair of motor vehicles in residential district; permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to repair or dismantle in the open in any residential district of the city, any automobile, boat, or other vehicle or conveyance without having first obtained a permit to do so. 
B.  Application for a permit shall be made to the fire department on forms provided for such purpose. The applicant shall furnish all of the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Address at which proposed work is to be done; 
3.  Written consent of owner of premises if other than applicant; 
4.  Description of the type of conveyance to be dismantled or repaired and a statement of work to be done; 
5.  Estimated time necessary to complete the work; and 
6.  Such other information as may be required by the fire department. 
C.  All applications shall be referred to the fire chief for review prior to the granting of any permit. Where such work can be done without creating a police problem or a fire hazard, a permit shall be granted for the doing of the work described in such application. 
D.  The permit shall specify the time period in which the work shall be accomplished, which time period shall not be more than fifteen (15) days. Work shall be completed within the time limit specified, or any extension granted for reasonable cause shown. 
E.  Upon completion of the work authorized, the applicant shall clear the work site of all debris, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, lacquer, or other combustible material, and leave it in such a condition that no hazard to persons or property shall remain. 
F.  As a condition to the granting of the permit, applicants shall be required to authorize the fire department to remove and store at applicant's expense, any conveyance and/or parts thereof where dismantling or repair is not completed within the time granted. 
G.  The term "repair" as used in this section shall not include minor adjustments or the replacement of parts where such adjustments or replacement may reasonably be expected to be accomplished within a seventy-two-hour period. No permit shall be required for such minor adjustments or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.070 - Maintenance of property; nuisances. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises in this city to maintain such premises in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon including, but not limited to, those stated in this section: 
A.  Land, topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation, fill, or landscaping, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties; 
B.  Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or permitted to remain for an unreasonable period of time in a state of partial construction; 
C.  The failure to close, by such means as shall be acceptable to the city manager or his/her designated representative, all doorways, windows, and other openings into vacant structures; 
D.  Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping and lack of adequate weather protection; 
E.  Broken windows, doors, fences or gates; or walls constituting potentially hazardous conditions or inviting trespassers and malicious mischief; 
F.  The existence of any fence or other structure or thing on private property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk or place, which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or other dilapidated or unsafe condition; 
G.  Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin, and other nuisances or having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; 
H.  Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, and other vegetation potentially dangerous to the public safety and welfare or having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; 
I.  The existence of any accumulation of waste paper, hay, grass, dirt, straw, weeds, litter or combustible trash upon the premises or public sidewalks, streets or areas in front of said premises or upon any roof or in any building, entranceway, court or yard thereof; 
J.  The existence of mistletoe (Phoradendron flavescens) on any property within the city; 
K.  The existence of any accumulation of dirt, sand, soil (including eroding dirt, sand, or soil), leaf, vegetation, waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, sawdust, building materials, paint, chemical, combustible materials, trash, or other debris emanating from any real property in the city onto the city's streets and/or sidewalks. Any accumulation of the above at or near storm drains shall be immediately cleared and removed by the developer, property owner, construction contractor, lessee, renter, or occupant of the property, and replaced with appropriate prevention devices pursuant to the city-approved storm water pollution prevention plan and by use of maintained best management practices; 
L.  The existence of any branches or foliage which interferes with visibility on, or free use of, or access to, any portion of any street improved for vehicular or pedestrian travel or which interferes with access to any hydrant, alarm box, standpipe, sprinkler system, connection or any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes; 
M.  The substantial lack of maintenance of grounds within the city on which structures exist, where said grounds are visible from the public right-of-way or from the sites of neighboring properties where such conditions would have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; 
N.  The existence of any garbage or rubbish upon the premises contrary to the provisions of Chapter 8.04 of this code, or any amendments thereto or replacements thereof; 
O.  The parking or storing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation, whether or not motorized or operational, on a required front yard, side yard, lawn, grass, or landscaped area other than a permanent driveway or parking place specifically and properly designed for the purpose of parking vehicles and constructed of asphalt blacktop, concrete, cement, paver blocks or other paved surface. Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation, whether or not motorized or operational, parked on a street or public way in a manner such that one (1) or more wheels rest in a yard, lot or lawn more than twelve (12) inches from the curb or pavement edge shall be deemed to be in violation of this section; 
P.  The accumulation and storage for unreasonable periods of time of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, unlicensed, or inoperative automobiles, or trailers, campers, boats, and other mobile equipment in any yard or parts thereof; 
Q.  The accumulation and storage of vehicles in violation of Chapter 8.34, and/or the repair or dismantling of any vehicle on any premises not in compliance with Section 8.40.060; 
R.  Attractive nuisances potentially dangerous to children or the general public in the form of abandoned, discarded, or broken equipment, unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations, neglected machinery, icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes dryer, washing machine, or any other enclosed container of any kind with a closable door, or any other attractive nuisance visible to the public or surrounding properties; 
S.  Broken or discarded furniture and household items on the premises for unreasonable periods of time and visible from the street or from neighboring properties and having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; 
T.  Packing boxes, unused building materials, lumber, trash, dirt, litter, and other debris either inside or outside buildings, in vestibules, doorways, or along the adjoining sidewalks of residential, commercial, or industrial buildings and visible from the public right-of-way, or from the site of neighboring properties for unreasonable periods of time and having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties. Nothing in this section shall prevent the storage of packing boxes, unused building materials and lumber when done in conjunction with a construction project for which a building permit has been issued and which is being prosecuted diligently until completion; 
U.  The existence on any premises of any unused and abandoned open pipe, well or excavation, building foundation or buildings which are abandoned, or boarded up, partially destroyed or unfinished and not properly secured; 
V.  The maintenance of any premises, building, dwelling, or dwelling unit in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance, substandard building, or dangerous building as these terms are defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or Title 17 of this code, as amended from time to time; 
W.  The operation and maintenance of any premises or property within the city in a manner that has resulted in repeated disruptive activities including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passers-by, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, loud noises which violate any of the city's Municipal Code regulations, traffic violations, curfew violations, or police detentions and arrests; 
X.  The maintenance of any premises or property within the city which fails to comply with any condition imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental document issued by or approved by the city in connection with said premises or property or improvement located thereon; 
Y.  To cause or permit on any premises or property within the city any matter or substance from a private vault, cesspool, septic tank, water closet, privy vault, urinal, pipe, sewer line or any sewage, effluent, slop water or any other filthy water, matter or substance to flow or discharge upon the ground or upon any private property, public sidewalk, street, or other public place; 
Z.  For any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit or maintain on such premises or property stagnant water, refuse, rubbish, garbage, dead animal carcasses, offal, animal excrement or other waste materials which emit odors that are unreasonably offensive to the physical senses of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity or which may cause or attract insects; 
AA.  The city may: 
1.  Declare that a public nuisance exists whenever any member of the public creates, causes, commits, permits, or maintains any condition or performs or causes to be performed any activity that falls within the scope of the definition of 'public nuisance' as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11570; and 
2.  Commence any action or proceeding pursuant to the California Drug Abatement Act to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the violator. 
BB.  Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480; 
CC.  The existence of graffiti on the exterior portions of any buildings or structures located upon the property. For the purpose of this chapter, graffiti has the same meaning as defined in Chapter 8.36; 
DD.  Any other condition on or use of property which constitutes a public nuisance as defined by state law or which may be declared such by other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Article IV. - General Procedures for Nuisance Abatement 
 
8.40.080 - Abatement of nuisances. 
All or any part of premises found as provided in this chapter to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal, or other appropriate means as determined by the enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.090 - Right to enter property to inspect or abate. 
An enforcement officer may enter and inspect or abate any building or premises whenever necessary to secure compliance with, or prevent violation of, any provision of this chapter, in accordance with Chapter 1.13 and as authorized by law. If required by law, the enforcement officer shall first obtain consent of the responsible person or an appropriate court order to inspect and/or abate a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.100 - Notice and order to abate public nuisance. 
A.  Whenever the enforcement officer determines that any premises within the incorporated city limits is maintained as a nuisance pursuant to the appropriate Merced Municipal Code section or other law, then an inspection shall be made, and written notice of inspection and findings provided to the responsible party. 
B.  The written notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date and the address or definite description of the location of the nuisance. 
2.  The Merced Municipal Code section(s) or other laws or conditions violated, all facts constituting the nuisance, and a declaration of nuisance. 
3.  A reasonable time limit, in no event less than seven (7) days, in which to take corrective action to remedy the nuisance, except as set forth in Articles V and VI of this chapter. 
4.  A date for reinspection of the premises. 
5.  A description of the consequences for failing to abate the nuisance. 
6.  Name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.110 - Methods of acceptable notice. 
A.  Notice shall be given by as follows: 
1.  If the nuisance relates to real property, by posting on the property; and 
2.  By personal delivery to the responsible party; or 
3.  To the property owner, by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to his or her address shown on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared, and by first class mail to the same address, and to other responsible parties at their address as known to the enforcement officer or at the property address. Service under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail. 
4.  If the corrective action may involve demolition of or significant expense to abate, the property, to all other persons with a legal interest in the property subject to abatement, by mailing a copy of the notice by United States mail, postage prepaid. Service under this subsection shall be deemed complete after deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.120 - Reinspection of nuisance. 
After the period of time specified in the declaration of nuisance served pursuant to Section 8.40.100, a reinspection of the premises shall be made to determine whether or not compliance has been achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.130 - Notice of results of reinspection. 
A.  If, after reinspection on the indicated date, the nuisance has not been abated, a notice of the results of said reinspection shall be mailed to the involved parties. Said notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date and the address or definite description of the location of the nuisance. 
2.  The Merced Municipal Code section(s) or other laws or conditions violated, all facts constituting the nuisance, and a declaration of nuisance. 
3.  Specify the corrective action required. 
4.  A reasonable time limit, in no event less than seven (7) days, in which to take corrective action to remedy the nuisance, except as set forth in Articles V and VI of this chapter. 
5.  A date for reinspection of the premises. 
6.  A description of the consequences for failing to abate the nuisance. 
7.  Advise that failure to correct the violation will result in the city taking corrective action and collecting all charges related thereto, by pursuing appropriate civil remedies, including billing, obtaining a civil judgment, lien, or special assessment against the property. 
8.  Advise of the right to an appeal hearing before a hearing officer for the date set on the notice. 
9.  Advise of the right to present evidence, including written, oral, and testimony from witnesses at the administrative appeal hearing. 
10.  That failure to appear at the administrative appeal hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to be heard at the hearing. 
11.  Name and signature of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.140 - Administrative appeal hearing. 
A.  Report and Recommendation. The enforcement officer shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer and provide for his/her review five (5) days prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the notice and order to abate public nuisance, a staff report, and any evidence of the violation(s). 
B.  Admissibility of Evidence at Administrative Appeal Hearing. At the administrative appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents and written testimony and hear all oral testimony offered either in support of appellant's claim or in support of the notice and order to abate public nuisance, provided such evidence and testimony is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer also has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the administrative appeal hearing. 
C.  Failure to Attend Administrative Appeal Hearing. If the responsible party(s) fails to attend the scheduled administrative appeal hearing, the hearing will proceed without the responsible party(s) and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the administrative appeal hearing. 
D.  Hearing Officer's Determination on Appeal. 
1.  Following the appeal of a notice of order to abate public nuisance, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the notice and order, establish a modified schedule for compliance, overturn some or all of the findings of the enforcement officer and/or rescind the notice and order in part or in its entirety. 
2.  The hearing officer shall prepare and serve a written notice of decision ("decision") upon the responsible party(s), including the owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular first-class mail to all other persons and entities who received notice of the original hearing, and to any other person requesting the same. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except as otherwise provided by Section 8.40.150. In the event the decision may require demolition of a structure, the decision must also be served on all persons with a legal interest in the property, in the manner specified in Section 8.40.110. 
3.  The hearing officer shall serve the written notice of decision five (5) days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The hearing officer shall also provide or cause to be provided a copy of the decision to the enforcement officer. 
4.  The decision shall include the following: 
(a)  Whether the notice and order to abate public nuisance has been either upheld, in full or in part, or rescinded, in full or in part; 
(b)  A brief summary of the evidence considered; 
(c)  Findings of fact; 
(d)  A determination of the issues presented; 
(e)  The effective date of the decision; 
(f)  A compliance order, if applicable, which shall: 
(1)  Specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the code violations indicated in the decision; and, 
(2)  Shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline; and 
(g)  Specify the consequences for failure to comply with the order. 
5.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.150 - Limitation of filing judicial action. 
Any appeal of the decision of the hearing officer ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter must be brought in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.160 - Compliance with abatement order. 
At no cost to the city, the responsible party will comply with all of the provisions of an abatement order. If the responsible party fails, for any reason, to comply with an abatement order within the time required in the order, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall cause the nuisance described in the abatement order to be abated by city forces or by private contractor. The city attorney is authorized to take action as needed to gain entry upon the property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.170 - City expenses; record of costs. 
The enforcement officer shall keep an account of all abatement costs, as defined in Section 8.40.030.B., for abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.180 - Hearing on the cost of abatement. 
A.  The enforcement officer shall give notice of the cost of abatement by certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and to the responsible party. The cost notice will include a statement of hearing rights of the property owner and the responsible party (if not the property owner) concerning the cost of abatement. Upon written request for a hearing by the property owner received by the city manager within ten (10) days after mailing the cost notice, a hearing will be held by the city manager, or his/her designee, on the question of the cost of the abatement. 
B.  Notice of the hearing will be mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing by certified mail, to the property owner and responsible party. The city manager or his/her designee will either confirm the costs of abatement or modify the amount. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee is final. The city manager or designee will give notice of the decision on the cost of abatement by registered or certified mail to the property owner and responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.190 - Cost recovery. 
A.  The city may pursue any available legal remedy to collect costs owed to the city for abatement of the nuisance. 
B.  Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest and/or late charges imposed on the delinquent obligation. Collection costs imposed under this section shall be added to and become part of the underlying obligation. 
C.  Interest. Any person who fails to remit payment to the city of all abatement costs required to be paid to the city pursuant to a nuisance abatement order under this chapter within sixty (60) days of the date such abatement costs are confirmed in accordance with Section 8.40.180, shall, in addition to the amount of the abatement costs, pay interest on the amounts due at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum, pro rata, from the date on which the amount due first became delinquent until the date that payment is received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.200 - Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures. 
A.  Lien. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38773, 38773.1 and 38773.5, and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public nuisance as ordered pursuant to this article will be obligated to pay all city expenses of abating the nuisance and all administrative costs, as defined in Section 8.40.030.B., associated therewith. A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for the expenses of the city will be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against the property on which the nuisance is maintained. The lien will specify the amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
B.  Notice of Proposed Recordings. An itemized notice of the lien amount and proposed recording will be sent by certified mail to the property owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated by the city, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, before recordation of the lien. The notice will be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq., at least ten (10) days before recording the lien. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located. 
C.  Recording. The city's nuisance abatement lien will then be recorded in the Merced County Recorder's office, and from the date of recording, will have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  Special Assessment. 
1.  The city's total abatement costs may also be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of the County of Merced of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed shall constitute a special assessment on the property for the amount of the assessment. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes. 
2.  The city clerk shall give written notice to the owner of the imposition of the special assessment by United States mail, postage prepaid, at the time of imposing the assessment. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(a)  That the property may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments and that the tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. 
(b)  That the assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and the sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(c)  That if the property is sold to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date to which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, the cost of abatement shall not be a lien against the real property, but shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
E.  Satisfaction. In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien shall be recorded by the city. 
F.  Fees. Any fees incurred by the city for processing, recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the city as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.210 - Order for treble costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with Article IV of this chapter, except conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.220 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
In all cases where the city attorney or his/her designee has determined to proceed with abatement proceedings either by filing a criminal or a civil action, initiating an administrative proceeding or special proceeding, recovery of attorney's fees shall be available to the prevailing party. However, recovery of attorney's fees shall only be available to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney's fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney's fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.230 - Judicial remedies. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to prevent the city attorney from: 
1.  Commencing a civil action in the Superior Court to enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order; 
2.  Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates; or 
4.  Filing a criminal action to enforce this code. 
B.  Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the court will also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in the judicial proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.240 - Alternative remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be so interpreted as to prevent prosecution under any other civil, penal, building, fire, or related codes or other sections in other titles of the Merced Municipal Code. The city reserves the right to employ any one (1) or any combination of any and all codes for prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.250 - Violation. 
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision(s) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.260 - Liability. 
The city manager or any employee charged with the enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself liable personally and he/she is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against the city manager or employee because of such act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of this code shall be defended by the city attorney or designated counsel until final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Article V. - Special Nuisance Abatement Proceedings for Weeds and Rubbish 
 
8.40.270 - Weed abatement. 
The city council may: 
A.  Declare by resolution, pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq., that a public nuisance exists with respect to a specific parcel whenever that parcel is being maintained in a manner that has resulted in weeds, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 39561.5, being grown upon the streets, sidewalks or private property in the city; and 
B.  Commence any action or proceeding, pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq., to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the violator, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the violator and to recover any and all costs from the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.280 - Rubbish, refuse and dirt. 
The city council may: 
A.  Declare by resolution, pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq., that a public nuisance exists with respect to a specific parcel whenever that parcel is being maintained in a manner that has resulted in an accumulation of rubbish, refuse, and dirt upon the parkways, sidewalks, or private property in the city; and 
B.  Commence any action or proceeding, pursuant to California Government Code Section 39561 et seq., to abate the public nuisance, to pursue all other remedies against the responsible person, to seek the imposition of all penalties against the responsible person and to recover any and all costs from the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.290 - Notice. 
The enforcement officer shall cause any owner or other responsible person to be notified of the existence of such condition on the premises and shall direct that such person or persons shall abate such condition or appear before the enforcement officer at a stated time and place and show cause why such condition should not be abated by the city at such person's expense. 
The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE TO REMOVE WEEDS, RUBBISH, 
LITTER AND MISTLETOE 
(Name and Address of such person notified) 
As owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of the building, lot or premises at ___________ you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 8.40.070 of the Merced Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon or adjoining said premises the following condition contrary to the provision of Subsection ________ of Section 8.40.070. 
You are hereby notified to abate said condition to the satisfaction of the undersigned within ___ days of the date of this notice or to appear at the office of the ___________ at Merced, California, on ___________ 20___ at ___ o'clock ___.M., and show cause, if any you have, why said condition should not be abated by the City and the expenses thereof charged to you as a personal obligation and/or made a lien upon said buildings or grounds. Abatement is to be accomplished in the following manner: 
Dated: ___________ 
___________ 
(Name of Department Head) 
By ___________ 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.300 - Manner of giving notice. 
A.  A copy of the notice provided for in Section 8.40.290 shall be sent to the owner and may be sent to any other of said persons sought to be charged with the responsibility of abatement. The notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid and addressed as follows: 
1.  To the owner: as such person's name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the enforcement officer or the person authorized by the enforcement officer to give such notice; 
2.  To any other such person: as such person's name and address are known to the enforcement officer or the person authorized by him/her to give notice. 
B.  The person giving such notice shall file a copy thereof in the office of the enforcement officer together with an affidavit or certificate stating the time and manner in which such notice was given. The failure of any owner or any other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.310 - Hearing. 
At the time fixed in the notice described in Section 8.40.290, the enforcement officer shall hear testimony offered on behalf of the person or persons sought to be charged which tends to show why the condition should not be abated and the expense thereof charged to the person as a civil debt and/or made a lien upon the buildings or grounds. The enforcement officer may hear rebuttal testimony on behalf of the city. If at the conclusion of the hearing the enforcement officer is satisfied that the condition exists and concludes that it should be abated at the expense of such person or persons as aforesaid, he/she shall so advise such persons attending the hearing, either orally or in writing. In the event any person given notice of hearing as shown by the evidence of mailing shall fail to appear at the hearing, then as to him/her such evidence of mailing shall, without the taking of further testimony, be sufficient evidence of the existence of facts in support of the conclusion, and no notice of the conclusion of the enforcement officer need be given to any such person failing to appear. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.320 - Abatement by city. 
In all cases where the enforcement officer has determined to proceed with abatement, then on the day following the date fixed for the hearing or, if the matter has been continued by the enforcement officer, the day following the conclusion thereof, the city shall acquire jurisdiction to abate the condition at the person's expense as provided in this article. Any property owner or responsible person shall have the right to abate the condition himself/herself or have the same abated at his/her own expense, provided such condition has been abated prior to the arrival of the enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.330 - Account and report of cost. 
The enforcement officer shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance and embody such an account in a report and assessment list to the city council, which shall be filed with the city clerk. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.340 - Notice of report. 
The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list on the bulletin board near the entrance to the City Hall, together with a notice of filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation, notifying property owners that they may appear at such time and place, and object to any matter contained therein. A like notice shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated within the city. The posting and publication of said notice shall be made and completed at least five (5) days before the time such report has been submitted to the city council. Such notice, as so posted and published, shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REPORT 
AND ASSESSMENT FOR 
WEED, RUBBISH, LITTER AND 
MISTLETOE ABATEMENT 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ________, 20___, the Enforcement Officer of the City of Merced filed with the City Clerk of said City a report and assessment on abatement of weeds, rubbish, litter, and mistletoe, within said City, a copy of which is posted on the bulletin board at the entrance to the City Hall. 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ________ 20___, at the hour of 7:00 o'clock P.M., in the Council Chambers of said City Hall, said report and assessment list will be presented to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation, and that any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear at said time and place and be heard. 
List of properties to be assessed: 
DATED: ________ 
CITY CLERK OF THE CITY OF MERCED 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.350 - Hearing; lien on property. 
A.  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance. The purpose of the hearing shall only be to consider the amount of the liens in the report of the enforcement officer, and not to consider or contest the validity of the liens. The enforcement officer shall attend such hearing with his/her record thereof; and upon such hearing, the city council may make such modifications in the proposed assessments therefor as it may deem necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution. 
B.  The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon, or in the front or rear of, the various lots or parcels of land respectively referred to in such report, shall constitute special assessments against such respective lots or parcels of land, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.360 - Collection on tax roll. 
After confirmation of the report, a copy shall be given to the city finance officer, who may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and issue receipts at any time after the confirmation and until a list of unpaid assessments shall have been given at least annually to the county auditor for effecting collection on the tax roll at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor's map books for the current year. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are made applicable to such special assessment, and the lien of said assessment shall have priority of the taxes with which it is collected. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.370 - Enforcement agency. 
The fire department, chief building official, and code enforcement officers shall have jurisdiction to administer the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.380 - Procedure not exclusive. 
The special procedure provided in Article V of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this city or by state law for the abatement of weeds and rubbish, and abatement under this chapter shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Article VI. - Summary Abatement Proceedings 
 
8.40.390 - Summary abatement proceedings. 
Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, any enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate the same. The enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative shall further have the authority to summarily stop all work on, and/or suspend any and all permits applicable to, the property and/or the subdivision under development in which the property is located, until the condition or use of the property that constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof is abated. The expenses of such abatement shall become a lien on the property and be collected as provided in Section 8.40.200. The property owner shall be entitled to a hearing on the cost of such abatement in accordance with Section 8.40.180. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.400 - Inventory. 
Prior to the city performing any summary abatement, the enforcement officer shall, if feasible, cause an inventory to be taken which lists those items which are proposed to be removed from the property and discarded. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.410 - Summary abatement report. 
A.  Prior to ordering a summary abatement, the enforcement officer shall prepare a written report which sets forth in writing the facts and circumstances establishing: 
1.  Why advance notice of the abatement to the property owner, occupant and/or agent having charge or control is not reasonable or feasible or why prior advance notice was not effective; 
2.  Why the subject property constitutes a public nuisance; and 
3.  Why immediate abatement of the public nuisance is essential. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.420 - Service of summary abatement report. 
A copy of the summary abatement report shall be served as soon as possible on the owner(s) of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance exists by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as otherwise known by the enforcement officer. If no address of any such person so appears or is not otherwise known, then a copy of the summary abatement report shall be so mailed, addressed to such person(s), at the address of the subject premises. The failure of the enforcement officer to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of the Municipal Code or any other applicable statute, rule, code or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.430 - Proof of service of summary abatement report. 
Proof of service of the summary abatement report shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card, returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to a copy of the summary abatement report and retained by the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.440 - Attorney's fees. 
The prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this article and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorney's fees incurred in any such proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
8.40.450 - Responsibility for public nuisance abatement costs. 
If the city elects to perform public nuisance abatement work pursuant to this article, the owner of record of the property shall be liable for all fees and costs of abatement, as defined in Section 8.40.030.B., incurred by the city to abate the public nuisances. Such costs may be recovered in accordance with Sections 8.40.200 and 8.40.230 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2349, § 1, 3-1-2010)  
Chapter 8.50 - FORECLOSED AND VACANT HOMES 
Sections: 
 
8.50.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that foreclosed and abandoned residential properties pose a risk to the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the City of Merced. The detrimental effects from the lack of security and maintenance of foreclosed and abandoned residential properties include dangerous attractive nuisances, increased opportunities for crimes such as squatting, vandalism and burglaries, discouraging buyers from purchasing neighboring homes, lowering property values, and physical and economical blight. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to utilize the procedures set forth in California Civil Code Section 2929.3 to prevent the detrimental effects associated with foreclosed and abandoned residential properties.* 
C.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter that the problem conditions identified in subsections A and B above and Civil Code Section 2929.3 be abated and compliance with the Municipal Code be accomplished rather than to have fines imposed. Every effort should be made to achieve compliance rather than to impose fines. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009) 
* California Civil Code § 2929.3 will be repealed on January 1, 2013, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 2013, deletes or extends that date.  
8.50.020 - Requirement to maintain vacant residential property. 
A.  A legal owner shall maintain vacant residential property purchased by that owner at a foreclosure sale, or acquired by that owner through foreclosure under a mortgage or deed of trust. 
B.  A legal owner's failure to maintain property under this chapter shall subject that owner to fines under this chapter. "Failure to maintain" is defined as: 
1.  Failure to care for the exterior of the property, including, but not limited to, permitting excessive foliage growth that diminishes the value of surrounding properties; 
2.  Failing to take action to prevent trespassers or squatters from remaining on the property; 
3.  Failing to take action to prevent mosquito larvae from growing in standing water; or 
4.  Other conditions that create a public nuisance under Title 8 of this Code or under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.030 - Imposition of fine. 
In any proceeding under this chapter, the city may impose a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day that the legal owner fails to maintain the property in violation of this chapter, commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the violation established in the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.040 - Notice to legal owner of violation, imposition of fine, and hearing. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer, as defined in Section 8.08.030 of this Code, determines that a violation of the requirement to maintain property under this chapter has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue a "Notice to Legal Owner of Violation, Imposition of Fine, and Hearing." This notice shall be referred to as "notice to legal owner" in this chapter. 
B.  The Notice to legal owner shall include a description of the conditions giving rise to the violation and notice of the city's intent to assess a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day if action to correct the violation is not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and completed within a period of not less than thirty (30) days. This period shall be referred to as the "compliance period." Notwithstanding this, a compliance period of less than thirty (30) days to remedy the violation may be required before imposing a fine if it is determined that a specific condition on the property threatens public health or safety. In that event, the notice to legal owner shall specifically state such determination and the lesser period for compliance. An enforcement officer may establish different compliance periods for different violations, subject to the minimums set forth in this section. 
C.  The notice to legal owner shall include the date, time, and place of a hearing at which time the legal owner shall be given an opportunity to contest any fine imposed. The hearing shall generally be set by the enforcement officer approximately thirty (30) days following expiration of the compliance period set forth in the notice to legal owner. 
D.  The notice to legal owner shall advise that fines will continue to accrue unless and until the enforcement officer inspects the property and issues a compliance certificate which the legal owner must produce at the hearing. In the event there is a delay of more than twenty-four (24) hours between the request for a reinspection and the reinspection, the fine shall be tolled between the date of the request for reinspection and the actual reinspection. It is the responsibility for the legal owner to arrange for such inspection and to obtain the compliance certificate. The notice to legal owner shall include contact information for the inspection and for the compliance certificate. 
E.  The notice to legal owner shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided in the deed or other instrument as specified in Government Code Section 27321.5(a), or, if none, to the return address on the deed or other instrument. Whenever a notice to legal owner is required to be provided to the legal owner, a copy thereof shall also be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the "responsible person." The phrase "responsible person" for purposes of this chapter and this chapter only shall mean that individual who has signed up with the city to receive city-provided utility services. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.050 - Hearing. 
A.  The hearing shall be set and conducted regardless of whether the hearing was requested by the legal owner or responsible person. If the legal owner, representative of the legal owner, or responsible person, fails to appear for the hearing, the hearing officer will conduct the hearing to a conclusion and issue a decision as set forth in this chapter. Failure to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies for purposes of judicial review. 
B.  The hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths. 
C.  At the hearing, the city shall present evidence in support of the notice to legal owner and imposition of fine(s). The legal owner, or any individual authorized in writing to represent the legal owner, including a responsible person, may present evidence in opposition to the notice to legal owner and/or imposition of fine(s). 
D.  The hearing shall be conducted informally. The rules of evidence shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded in the hearing officer's decision. 
E.  The city shall bear the burden of proof, which shall be preponderance of the evidence. 
F.  The city shall maintain the administrative record of the hearing. 
G.  If the property has a responsible person in addition to a legal owner, the hearing officer shall consider, in assessing the amount of the fine, if any, whether or not the responsible person was provided notice as required herein as well as how long the responsible person has been registered with the city as the responsible person for the property. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.060 - Decision after hearing. 
A.  The hearing officer shall file a written decision with the city clerk within seventy-two (72) hours of the hearing. The decision shall include a statement of the issues, findings of fact, a summary of relevant evidence and an order setting the amount of the fine. In determining the amount of the fine, the hearing officer shall take into consideration any timely and good faith efforts by legal owner to remedy the violation(s). 
B.  The city clerk shall mail a notice of decision by certified mail with an attached copy of the hearing officer's decision to the legal owner at the address as set forth above in Section 8.50.040(E) of this Code and to any other address if requested by the legal owner. 
C.  The city's notice of decision shall provide as follows: 
1.  Contain a statement that the decision is final and that judicial review may be sought within twenty (20) days pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4. 
2.  Advise that the total of the fines charged will become a lien against the property if not paid within forty-five (45) days of the notice of decision. 
3.  Notify the legal owner that fines will continue to accumulate if the violations are not abated following the hearing and that the legal owner and the responsible person, if any, shall be notified of the time and place of a subsequent hearing at which additional fines under this chapter may be imposed if the violation(s) is/are not abated. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.070 - Recovery of fines; liens and special assessments on property. 
Any fine imposed by a hearing officer's decision under this chapter shall be the personal obligation of legal owner and may become a lien on the property if not paid within forty-five (45) days of the decision. Such lien may be collected in the same time and manner as property taxes are collected as set forth in this Code regarding recovery of fees, costs, charges, and fines relating to public nuisances, except to the extent modified herein. It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to hold financial institutions and investors in foreclosed and/or vacant property accountable for the conditions of their property. In no instance shall a financial institution require a real estate agent or broker to advance the funds to satisfy the fine or clear any lien imposed and any financial institution requiring the same shall be in violation of this Code by committing a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.080 - Cumulative remedies. 
All rights and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. All procedures herein are intended to obtain the abatement of public nuisances and compliance with those provisions of the city's Code which are declared to be public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
8.50.090 - Fines collected by city. 
Fines imposed under this chapter shall be payable to the City of Merced and shall be directed to the city's code enforcement budget for nuisance abatement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2337, § 1, 6-1-2009)  
Ch.apter 8.52 - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2390, § 1, adopted June 4, 2012, repealed Ch. 8.52, §§ 8.52.010—8.52.100, which pertained to just cause for eviction and derived from Ord. No. 2379, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2011. 
 
8.52.010—8.52.100 - Reserved. 

Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.08 - GAMING 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Twenty-six. 
A.  Every person who deals, plays or carries on, opens, or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of twenty-six, for money, checks, credit or other representative of value, and every person who deals, plays or bets at or against any such prohibited game is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Every person who knowingly permits any game of twenty-six to be played, conducted or dealt in any house owned or rented by such person, in whole or in part shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Any owner of a business wherein card tables or cards are furnished to the public for the purpose of playing games of cards thereon or therewith, and which business is licensed in the city under the provisions of Chapter 5 of this Code, or any employee of such owner, who deals, plays or bets at or against any game of twenty-six played in the place of business of such owner so licensed as herein referred to, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  Any person who deals, plays or bets at or against any game of twenty-six conducted in any such place of business, who shall in any manner be financed by the owner of such place of business in the playing of any such game, or who shall in any manner share with the owner of such place of business any gains or losses incurred in the playing of any such game in such place of business, is an employee of the owner of such place of business within the meaning of this section. 
(Prior code § 17.12).  
9.08.020 - Cardrooms. 
A.  Cardrooms in the City of Merced may only be located in areas zoned as follows: 
1.  Central Commercial (C-C); 
2.  Commercial Thoroughfare (C-T); 
3.  General Commercial (C-G). 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to play, conduct, or deal any game of cards in any cardroom, or in any other public place or place resorted to generally by the public, between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day, with the exception of a duly licensed cardroom operating in a Commercial Thoroughfare (C-T) zone or Central Commercial (C-C) zone pursuant to a conditional use permit which regulates the hours of operation. 
C.  Any person operating a cardroom shall be responsible and liable for patron security and safety in and around the gaming establishment. Security guards shall be provided in such number and at such times as directed by the chief of police, or as may otherwise be required by conditional use permit. 
D.  As of April 18, 2016, there are two cardrooms authorized to operate within the City of Merced, each of which had four (4) card tables. There shall be no increase in the existing number of cardrooms without the approval of a majority of the voters of the city. 
E.  The city hereby increases the number of authorized card tables within the city from eight (8) card tables to sixteen (16) card tables. There shall be no increase in the number of card tables beyond sixteen (16) card tables without the approval of a majority of the voters of the city. 
F.  In order for a cardroom to increase the number of card tables from the four (4) card tables that existed as of April 18, 2016, the operator must first obtain a conditional use permit to add additional card tables. A cardroom operator may apply for up to eight (8) additional card tables subject to the overall limit of sixteen (16) card tables within the city; provided, however, that under no circumstances shall a cardroom have more than twelve (12) card tables. 
G.  If a cardroom operator obtains a conditional use permit to add additional card tables, the new card tables must be added within one (1) year from the date of approval of the conditional use permit. Otherwise, the right to add the additional card tables shall automatically expire and the number of card tables allowed in that cardroom shall revert back to the number of card tables that existed prior to the approval of the conditional use permit. 
H.  There shall be no city-imposed limits on bets and wagers in a cardroom located within the city. Individual cardroom operators may set their own limits on bets and wagers. The rules of each game and wagering limits shall be clearly posted at the gaming tables where the games are offered to provide the patrons adequate notice of such rules and limits. 
(Ord. 2297 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2087 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2005 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1508 § 2, 1983: prior code § 17.13). 
(Ord. No. 2457, § 1, 5-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2457, § 1, adopted May 2, 2016, changed the title of § 9.08.020 from "Cards" to read as set out herein.  
9.08.030 - Barricaded house—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to exhibit or expose to view, to have in his possession or under his control in any barred or barricaded house or room or in any place built or protected in any manner to make access or ingress difficult to police officers when three or more persons are present, any faro box, any roulette or fantan table or layout, or any part of such layout, or any other gambling device or lottery paraphernalia. 
(Prior code § 17.14).  
9.08.040 - Barricaded house—Visiting. 
It is unlawful for any person to visit or resort to any barred or barricaded house or room or other place built or protected in a manner to make access or ingress difficult to police officers where any gambling device or lottery paraphernalia are exhibited or exposed to view when three or more persons are present, as prohibited by Section 9.08.030. 
(Prior code § 17.15).  
9.08.050 - Keno. 
A.  Every person who deals, plays or carries on, opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of keno, and any and every person who plays or bets at or against such game, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Every person who knowingly permits the game of keno to be played, conducted, carried on or dealt in any house owned or rented by such person in whole or in part is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 17.16).  
9.08.060 - Minor—Playing or loitering. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one years to play or loiter about any gambling house, bar, saloon, or any place where malt or vinous liquors are sold or dispensed, or about any house of ill fame. 
(Ord. 2087 § 2, 2002: prior code § 17.20).  
9.08.070 - Employees must have permits. 
A.  "Gambling enterprise employee" means any natural person employed in the operation of a gambling enterprise, including, without limitation, dealers, floor men, security employees, countroom personnel, cage personnel, collection personnel, surveillance personnel, data processing personnel, appropriate maintenance personnel, waiters and waitresses, and secretaries, or any other natural person whose employment duties require or authorize access to restricted gambling establishment areas. 
B.  "Gambling enterprise" means the business of any person, entity, trust, joint venture, association, club, group, partnership, corporation, or any other business organization that provides a place for, conducts, or sponsors controlled gambling within the city. 
C.  "Controlled gambling" means to deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain; or expose for play any controlled game. 
D.  "Controlled game" means any game of chance, including any gambling device, played for currency, check, credit, or any other thing of value that is not prohibited and made unlawful by statute or local ordinance. "Controlled game" does not include any of the following: 
1.  The game of bingo conducted pursuant to Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
2.  Parimutuel racing on horse races regulated by the California Horse Racing Board. 
3.  Any lottery game conducted by the California State Lottery. 
4.  Games played with cards in private homes or residences, in which no person makes money for operating the game, except as a player. 
A person shall not be employed as a gambling enterprise employee, or serve as an independent agent, unless he or she is exempted by state law or is the holder of a valid work permit issued by the California Gambling Control Commission. 
(Ord. 2087 § 3, 2002).  
Chapter 9.12 - INTOXICATED PERSONS 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Intoxicated persons. 
It is unlawful for any person in an intoxicated or drunken condition or under the influence of any intoxicating liquors or drugs to be in any public place or upon any street or alley, or to be in any vehicle in any public place or upon any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 17.17).  
9.12.020 - Serving or drinking liquors on street. 
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Code, for any person to serve, drink, consume, or have in his/her possession an open container containing any spirituous, vinous, malt, or any other intoxicating liquors in or upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, parking lots, or any public place in the city, unless otherwise permitted by the Merced Municipal Code or authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. 2316 § 12, 2008: Ord. 1445 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1317 § 11, 1980: prior code § 24.7).  
9.12.030 - Open alcoholic beverage containers. 
A.  Prohibited Conduct. No person in possession of any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or has a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Posting of Signs. 
1.  All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed pursuant to Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code to operate in the City of Merced shall post such licensed premises with permanent signs which shall include language stating that possession of any opened alcoholic beverage container in or outside the store is prohibited by law. Signs required to be posted pursuant to this section must be clearly visible to: (1) patrons of the licensee; (2) persons using the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises; and (3) persons on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises. 
2.  Signs damaged, stolen or otherwise removed must be replaced by the licensee within ten working days from the date of damage or removal. 
3.  Any licensee who does not acquire, post and maintain signs pursuant to this provision is guilty of an infraction. 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  "Posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises which are posted with notices pursuant to subsection B. 
2.  "Parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises" means any parking lot which is contiguous to the licensed premises and is utilized by the patrons of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 1869 § 1, 1994).  
Chapter 9.16 - SPITTING, URINATING, DEFECATING IN PUBLIC 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Spitting on sidewalks. 
Any person who expectorates upon any sidewalk within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 24.10).  
9.16.020 - Urination and defecation. 
Any person who urinates or defecates upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, or other public place exposed to public view within the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1181 § 1, 1976: prior code § 24.10.1).  
Chapter 9.20 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Discharge—Air guns, spring guns and slingshots. 
It is unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any air gun or air pistol, spring gun or spring pistol or slingshot or other device for discharging projectiles within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1317 § 1, 1980: prior code § 17.2).  
9.20.020 - Discharge—Firearms. 
A.  No person shall shoot, fire or discharge, or cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged, in the city, any rifle, shotgun, revolver or firearm of any kind. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a peace officer nor to duly appointed animal control officers, acting within the scope and course of official duties, nor to city personnel authorized by the city engineer to control rodents by the use of firearms. 
C.  This section shall not be construed or deemed to prohibit: 
1.  The establishment or maintenance within the city of any pistol, rifle or target range, nor to prohibit the use of firearms on said range thereon, by any person using such range, if such range is so installed, constructed, safeguarded, equipped and used as to adequately prevent any bullet, shot or missile from being projected beyond the confines of such range; 
2.  The use of a shotgun in compliance with Section 9.44.010. 
(Ord. 1318 § 2, 1980: prior code § 17.32).  
Chapter 9.24 - OFFENSES BY AND AGAINST MINORS 
Sections: 
 
9.24.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2434, § 4, adopted Sept. 2, 2014, repealed § 9.24.010 which pertained to playing mechanical games and derived from prior code § 17.19.  
9.24.020 - Curfew. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to remain or loiter in or upon any public street, sidewalk, park, or other public place within the city after the hour of ten p.m. at night and before the hour of six a.m. of the following day, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care, custody, or lawful control of said minor. This section shall not apply to a minor actively proceeding to or from any place of business, amusement, worship, or other legitimate activity. 
(Ord. 1173 § 1, 1976: prior code § 17.21).  
9.24.030 - Curfew—Aiding and abetting. 
Any person assisting, aiding, abetting, or encouraging any minor under the age of eighteen years to violate the provision of Section 9.24.020 hereof is guilty of an infraction; and when any minor is found violating the provision of Section 9.24.020, a presumption shall arise that the parent, guardian, or adult person having the care, custody, and control of the minor assisted, aided, abetted, and encouraged the minor to violate Section 9.24.020. 
(Ord. 1173 § 2, 1976: prior code § 17.22).  
9.24.040 - Curfew—Juvenile court. 
Any person violating Section 9.24.020 of this code, shall be taken into custody of the police department of the city and by them delivered to the juvenile court of the county to be dealt with under the laws of the state. 
(Prior code § 17.23).  
Chapter 9.28 - FALSE NAMES 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Fictitious registration. 
It is unlawful for any person to register in any hotel, motel, camp, court or other similar place in the city by using a fictitious name or fictitious address, or a name or address which is not the true name or address of, or a name or address not customarily used by such person when the same is done with the intent to defraud or to violate any law or to conspire to violate any law or aid or abet the commission of a crime. 
(Prior code § 17.25).  
Chapter 9.32 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2434, § 5, adopted Sept. 2, 2014, repealed Ch. 9.32, §§ 9.32.010—9.32.080, which pertained to registration of felons and derived from prior code §§ 17.25A—G.  
Chapter 9.36 - AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
9.36.010 - Generally. 
No person shall own, use, possess, install or maintain any device or combination of devices that initiate transmission or deliverance of a taped or other prerecorded message to any telephone assigned to any office or department of the city. 
(Ord. 1224 § 1, 1978: prior code § 17.31).  
Chapter 9.40 - ADVERTISING 
Sections: 
 
9.40.010 - Posting bills on poles. 
It is unlawful for any person to post, stick, stamp, print or otherwise affix, or cause to be posted, stuck, stamped, printed or otherwise affixed any bills, posters, advertisements or notices upon any telegraph pole, telephone pole, fire alarm pole, electric light pole, awning, shelter pole, lamp pole or upon the curbing of any public street or alley in the city, or to mar, deface, change the appearance of, injure or write upon any such pole or street curbing. 
(Prior code § 3.1).  
9.40.020 - Advertising on streets, curbs and pavements. 
It is unlawful for any person to stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause to be stuck, stamped, painted or otherwise affixed, any bills, posters, notices, advertisements or signs, upon any sidewalks, curbs, streets or pavements in the city or upon any publicly owned property located in any public right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 3.2).  
9.40.030 - Throwing, leaving without consent—Newspapers exempt. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation or any agent or employee of any person, firm, or corporation to throw into, leave upon or scatter onto any street, alleyway or other public place, or onto any residential property in the city without the consent of the owner thereof, or his agent, or the occupant of private residential property any handbill, pamphlet, circular, dodger or any advertising sheet or matter devised or intended to promote any commercial or moneymaking activity. 
B.  A newspaper is exempted from the prohibition of this section. A newspaper is defined as a publication which is printed and distributed periodically at daily, weekly or other short intervals, containing news of a general or local character and interest, and containing no more than seventy-five percent advertising. The publisher shall not distribute newspapers to those persons requesting in writing that he not do so. 
(Prior code § 3.3).  
9.40.040 - Printed matter—Distribution on vehicle without permission unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, distribute or place on any automobile or other vehicle in the city, without first having obtained permission of the owner or person in possession thereof, any handbills, dodger, circular, newspaper, paper, booklet, poster, printed matter, advertising literature, advertising samples and devices. 
(Ord. 1565 § 1, 1984).  
Chapter 9.44 - TRESPASSING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.44.010 - City wastewater treatment facility—Protected portions. 
A.  Any person who hunts, trespasses, carries firearms or discharges firearms on the lands of the city known and described in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  The following lands of the city are designated for protection under this section: 
1.  All of Lots 65, 66, 67, 68, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91 and 92 of El Capitan Colony as such lots are shown on the map of El Capitan Colony filed for record in the office of the county recorder in Volume 2, Page 17 of Plats; 
2.  Those portions of Lots 63, 64, 82, 83, 85 and 86 of El Capitan Colony lying east of the center line of the Hartley Slough; 
3.  All of Section 15, T8S, R13E, MDB&M; 
4.  A portion of Sections 14 and 23 T8S, R13E, MDB&M, as shown on record of survey map for the city, filed for record in the office of the county recorder in Volume 15 of Survey Maps at Pages 50, 51 and 52. 
(Ord. 1317 § 10 (part), 1980: prior code 17.29 (part)).  
9.44.020 - City wastewater treatment facility—Signs posted. 
The city engineer shall install or cause to be installed signs forbidding trespass, hunting and carrying or discharging firearms at intervals of not less than three to the mile along all exterior boundaries of, and at all roads and trails entering, such lands. 
(Ord. 1317 § 10 (part), 1980: prior code § 17.29 (part)).  
9.44.030 - City wastewater treatment facility—Permit. 
Notwithstanding Section 9.44.010 and 9.44.020, nothing in this chapter shall (A) prevent hunting on the lands above described with a shotgun firing pellets in compliance with a permit therefor issued by the city engineer, and in compliance with all laws and the regulations of the city and the State Department of Fish and Game, or (B) prevent the discharge of firearms in compliance with Section 9.20.020. 
(Ord. 1317 § 10 (part), 1980: prior code § 17.29 (part)).  
Chapter 9.46 - PUBLIC BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
9.46.010 - Loitering. 
No person shall loiter in or around a public building or obstruct corridors, stairways or doorways, so as to prevent free access by members of the public, officers or employees. 
(Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 1986).  
9.46.020 - Trespass in a public building. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a public building, or portion thereof, after being notified by appropriate sign(s), that the building, or portion thereof, is closed to the general public. 
B.  Signs indicating that a public building, or portion thereof, is closed to the general public must be sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, and must be placed at each entrance to a public building, if the public building is closed, or at each entrance to a portion of a public building, if only said portion is closed. 
(Ord. 1612 § 1 (part), 1986).  
Chapter 9.48 - PAYMENT OF TAXI FARES 
Sections: 
 
9.48.010 - Failure to pay. 
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare as fixed in this chapter for any of the vehicles regulated by Chapter 5.16 after employing or hiring the same and any person so doing is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 27.54).  
9.48.020 - Disputes as to fares. 
All disputes as to fares shall be determined by the officer in charge of the police station. Failure to comply with such determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 27.55).  
Chapter 9.50 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
Sections: 
 
9.50.010 - Definitions. 
"Solicitation," for the purpose of this chapter, is any request made in person seeking an immediate donation of money, food, cigarettes or items of value. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this chapter. A person is not soliciting for the purpose of this chapter when he or she passively displays a sign or gives any other indication that he or she is seeking donations, and where he or she does not address his or her solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. This chapter does not apply to peddling and soliciting activity governed by Chapter 5.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 1872 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.50.020 - Time of solicitation. 
Any person who solicits after sunset or before sunrise is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1872 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.50.030 - Place of solicitation. 
Any person who solicits in any of the following places, or any person who solicits when the person solicited is in any of the following places, is guilty of an infraction: 
A.  Within ten (10) feet of any bus stop; 
B.  In any public transportation vehicle or facility; 
C.  In any vehicle on the street; 
D.  On private property, unless the solicitor has permission from the owner or occupant; 
E.  Within ten (10) feet of any entrance way into or exit from any building open to the public other than those referenced in subparagraph f.; 
F.  Within fifty (50) feet of any bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution buildings, including their outdoor automatic teller machines; 
G.  In the parking lot of any bank, savings and loan, or other financial institution; 
H.  Within fifty (50) feet of all cash disbursal machines, outdoor vending machines, outdoor money changing machines, or any other outdoor machine or device which disburses or accepts coins or paper currency, except parking meters and newspaper vending machines. 
(Ord. 1872 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.50.040 - Manner of solicitation. 
Any person who solicits in any of the following manners is guilty of an infraction: 
A.  By coming within three (3) feet of the person solicited, until that person has indicated that he or she wishes to make a donation; 
B.  By blocking the path of the person solicited along a sidewalk or street; 
C.  By following a person who walks away from the solicitor; 
D.  By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal; 
E.  By soliciting in a group of two (2) or more persons; or 
F.  While under the influence of alcohol or any illegal narcotic or controlled substance. 
(Ord. 1872 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.50.050 - False or misleading solicitation. 
A.  Any person who knowingly makes any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting a donation is guilty of an infraction. False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose that fact; 
2.  Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not exist; 
3.  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded, when that is not true; 
4.  Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not; 
5.  Stating that the solicitor is soliciting on behalf of an organization which does not exist or which has not authorized the solicitor to seek donations on its behalf. 
B.  Any person who knowingly solicits a donation stating that the funds are needed for a specific purpose and then spends the funds received for a different purpose is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1872 § 1 (part), 1994).  
Chapter 9.51 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.51.010 - Purpose. 
The public streets and areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at-large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and areas within the city in a clean and accessible condition. 
(Ord. 2316 § 18 (part), 2008).  
9.51.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Camp" means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia. 
"Camp facilities" means and includes, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or any temporary shelters. 
"Camp paraphernalia" means and includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or any other item that may be used for sleeping purposes, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
"Park" means the same as defined in Section 9.70.020 of this code. 
"Sidewalk" means the same as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this code. 
"Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
"Street" means the same as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2316 § 18 (part), 2008).  
9.51.030 - Unlawful camping. 
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided in this code: 
A.  Any street; 
B.  Any sidewalk; 
C.  Any park; 
D.  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. 2316 § 18 (part), 2008).  
9.51.040 - Storage of personal property in public places. 
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided in this code: 
A.  Any park; 
B.  Any street; 
C.  Any sidewalk; 
D.  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. 2316 § 18 (part), 2008).  
9.51.050 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to city-sponsored camp events. 
(Ord. 2316 § 18 (part), 2008).  
Chapter 9.52 - CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.52.010 - Obstruction of movement in public ways. 
No person shall occupy any portion of a public way or public place so as to obstruct or interfere with the flow of traffic thereon, whether such person does so alone or together with one or more persons, or with equipment or personal property of any nature, and whether such person does so by standing, sitting, lying, or in any other manner. 
(Ord. 1873 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.52.020 - Sitting or lying down on public sidewalks in designated city zones. 
No person, after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in this section, shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk or sidewalk, curb, or upon a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk in any commercially zoned district. 
(Ord. 1873 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.52.030 - Sections 9.52.010 and 9.52.020 shall not apply in the following cases and to the following persons. 
A.  Persons standing or sitting on the curb or portion of any sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any parade, festival, performance or similar event permitted under the provisions of this code; 
B.  Persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities provided or authorized for such purposes by municipal authorities; 
C.  Any conduct which is in conformity with the terms of any permit granted pursuant to this code; 
D.  Any conduct in public places that are privately owned where such conduct is in conformity with written permission granted by the owner of said premises or by the person entitled to the possession of said premises; 
E.  Persons sitting or lying down due to a medical emergency; 
F.  Persons who, as the result of a disability, utilize a wheelchair or similar device to move about. 
(Ord. 1873 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.52.040 - Conduct on public property, monuments, and lawns. 
No person, after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in this section, shall: 
A.  Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any monument, vase, decorative fountain, drinking fountain, bike rack, trash receptacle, median; fire hydrant, street tree planter berm, public sculpture, utility cabinet, railing, fence, planter, elevated planted area, or upon any other public property not designed or customarily used for such purposes; 
B.  Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any public lawn or planted area which is posted with signs that forbid such conduct; or 
C.  Walk, stand or lie upon any public bench. 
(Ord. 1873 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.52.050 - Public urination and defecation prohibited. 
No person shall urinate or defecate in public except when using a urinal, toilet or commode located in a bathroom, restroom or other structure enclosed from public view. 
(Ord. 1873 § 1 (part), 1994).  
Chapter 9.54 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
9.54.010 - Definition. 
A garage sale is the sale or offering for sale of personal property in, at, or upon any property used or occupied for residential purposes. A garage sale shall include, but not be limited to, any yard sale, rummage sale, patio sale, or any other sale similarly conducted on any property used or occupied for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 2024 § 1 (part), 1999).  
9.54.020 - Requirements. 
No person shall hold a garage sale unless the following requirements are complied with: 
A.  Frequency and duration upon any lot or parcel of land: A total of four (4) garage sales is permitted a year, provided that no more than one (1) garage sale may be held during any three (3) month period. A garage sale may occur on any day of the week provided that the maximum duration of a garage sale does not exceed three (3) consecutive days. Garage sales may not be held between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
B.  Location and display of goods: Items for sale shall not be displayed or stored within the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, the sidewalk, parkway, alley, or street. Upon conclusion of the garage sale, all items shall be removed from any yard visible from the public street. 
C.  Signage: Any sign used in connection with advertising a garage sale shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  With property owner permission, signs may be posted on property other than the site of the garage sale. 
2.  No sign advertising a garage sale shall be in the public right-of-way or on public property, including, but not limited to, electrical poles and traffic signals. 
3.  Signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of the sale. 
4.  If the city or its authorized agent is required to remove garage sale signs which are not in compliance with 2 or 3 above, then any person responsible for posting the sign shall be assessed the costs of the cleanup and removal. 
(Ord. 2024 § 1 (part), 1999).  
9.54.030 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2024 § 1 (part), 1999).  
Chapter 9.60 - LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITIES 
Sections: 
 
9.60.010 - Acts prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity defined as offenses in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 1874 § 1 (part), 1994).  
9.60.020 - Circumstances. 
Among circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are that the person: 
A.  Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such sections or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia pursuant to Chapter 9.04 of this code; 
B.  Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
C.  Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, acting as a "lookout"; 
D.  Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang," or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; 
E.  Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion; 
F.  Takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; 
G.  Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
H.  Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking; 
I.  Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity; 
J.  Is in or within six (6) feet of any vehicle registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(Ord. 1874 § 1 (part), 1994).  
Chapter 9.64 - DISRUPTIVE PARTIES AND GATHERINGS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.64.002 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that noise disturbances created by an individual or by parties and gatherings at private property within the city may, on occasion, disturb the public peace, safety, and welfare thereby requiring law enforcement services over and above those normally provided. It is in the best interests of the public safety, welfare, and convenience of the city as well as in fairness to its citizens that the city require those persons utilizing or requiring law enforcement services beyond those provided the public at-large to defray the city's expense for providing the same. 
(Ord. 2316 § 19, 2008: Ord. 2091 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.64.004 - Procedure to enforce. 
When a party, gathering, or other assemblage of persons occurs on private property, or where a noise disturbance is created by an individual, and it is determined by a police officer at the scene to constitute a violation of the California Penal Code or is otherwise a threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, noise, or disturbance, or disruptive behavior generated by the gathering, or the individual, excessive traffic, or destruction of property, then the police officer shall take such actions and give such direction as is necessary to abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible party orally and in writing that if additional law enforcement personnel are required to respond and return to the same location within seventy-two (72) hours of the initial response to abate the violation or condition, that the responsible party and/or property owner shall be held responsible for the cost of providing such services pursuant to this chapter. Direction shall be given to the person responsible for the event or on whose property it is located. If the condition is not voluntarily abated or if it nevertheless becomes necessary to call in additional police personnel in order to terminate the gathering, quell any disturbance, direct traffic, cite illegally parked vehicles, or otherwise respond to the situation within seventy-two (72) hours of the initial response, then the costs of such additional law enforcement services beyond the initial response shall be reimbursed to the city as provided in Section 9.64.006 of this chapter. Each response by law enforcement personnel after seventy-two (72) hours shall be a new response. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2091 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.64.006 - Cost reimbursement. 
The person or persons responsible for creating a noise disturbance or a party, gathering, or other assemblage of persons described in Section 9.64.004 of this chapter or on whose property the gathering is held, or if such person is a minor then the parents or legal guardians of the minor, shall be jointly and severally liable for the following costs attributable to the event: 
A.  The actual cost to the city of police services within seventy-two (72) hours beyond the initial response by a police officer necessary to abate the conditions described in Section 9.64.004 of this chapter; and, 
B.  Damage to public property resulting from such law enforcement response; and, 
C.  Injuries to police personnel incurred in such law enforcement response. 
The police department shall accurately compute the cost of providing such services and advise the city manager of such costs, as well as any other costs of damage to public property or injuries to personnel resulting from the police department's response. The person responsible for the event as above described shall be billed for these costs by the city manager upon notice of the charges from the police department and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the billing date. Should the amount due not be paid, the city may collect the debt, as well as any costs incurred in collecting the debt due to nonpayment, pursuant to any available provision of law. 
(Ord. 2235 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2091 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.64.008 - Same—Written notice. 
The chief of police is authorized and directed to prepare appropriate advisory procedures to be followed by police officers responding to a large gathering, including preparation of written materials advising the responsible person or persons of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2091 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.64.010 - Violation—Other remedies. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not limit any other remedies authorized by law. 
(Ord. 2091 § 1 (part), 2002).  
Chapter 9.65 - HOSTING PARTIES WHERE ALCOHOL IS CONSUMED BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE (21) ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.65.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the hosting or allowance of parties under the circumstances prescribed herein. This chapter is not intended to address matters involving alcohol beverages where separately regulated under state or local law. 
(Ord. 2284 § 1 (part), 2007).  
9.65.020 - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires and for purposes of this chapter only, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Party" means any number of persons who are assembling for a social occasion, gathering, activity, or event. 
(Ord. 2284 § 1 (part), 2007).  
9.65.030 - Certain parties on private property unlawful. 
No person may allow or host a party at any property under his or her control where person(s) under the age of twenty-one (21) are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by, any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. 2284 § 1 (part), 2007).  
9.65.040 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between persons under the age of twenty-one (21) and his or her parent or legal guardian, pursuant to rights guaranteed by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. 2284 § 1 (part), 2007).  
9.65.050 - Penalty for violation. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2284 § 1 (part), 2007).  
Chapter 9.70 - DRUG FREE ZONES 
Sections: 
 
9.70.010 - Designation of drug free zones. 
All public parks and libraries as set forth in Section 9.70.030 are designated as drug free zones pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5. This chapter applies and is enforceable only if notice of this chapter of the Merced Municipal Code is posted at the designated location. 
(Ord. 2088 § 1 (part), 2002).  
9.70.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The terms "park" and "public parks" mean any public parks, youth centers, swimming pools, and bike paths, within the City of Merced which are owned, operated or maintained by the city by its own forces or by contract, including, but not limited to, publicly-owned recreation and playground areas, any buildings or recreation facilities thereon, and any parking lot areas adjacent thereto. 
B.  The term "public library" means and includes any and all public libraries within the City of Merced city limits. 
(Ord. 2088 § 1 (part), 2002). 
(Ord. No. 2434, § 6, 9-2-2014)  
9.70.030 - City parks. 
A.  Ada Givens Park: Hawthorn Avenue at Ada Givens School playground; 
B.  Applegate Park: 25th and O Streets; 
C.  Bear Creek; 
D.  Bear Creek Bike Path; 
E.  Black Rascal Creek; 
F.  Black Rascal Creek Bike Path; 
G.  Bob Carpenter Park: Silverado Avenue; 
H.  Burbank Park: Olive Avenue; 
I.  Circle Drive Park: East 23rd Street; 
J.  City Hall Strip Park: West 18th and N Streets; 
K.  Chenoweth; 
L.  Courthouse Square (County park): 21st and N Streets; 
M.  Fahrens Creek Bike Path; 
N.  Fahrens Park: Buena Vista Drive at Fahrens Creek; 
O.  Flanagan Park: East Cone Avenue; 
P.  Joe Herb Park: Yosemite Parkway; 
Q.  Gilbert Macias Park: Childs Avenue and G Street; 
R.  M Street Bike Path; 
S.  Macready Park: Grogan Avenue; 
T.  Main Street Square: Main and Canal Streets; 
U.  McNamara Park: 11th and K Streets; 
V.  Rahilly Park: North Parsons Avenue; 
W.  Santa Fe Linear Park: Buena Vista Drive and M Street; 
X.  Santa Fe Strip Bike Path; 
Y.  Seventh Street and West Avenue; 
Z.  Stephen Leonard Park: 7th and T Streets; 
AA.  Yosemite-Donna Bike Path; 
BB.  Youth Sports Complex: West Avenue and Wardrobe Avenue. 
(Ord. 2088 § 1 (part), 2002).  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
Chapter 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
10.04.010 - Generally. 
A.  The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed in this chapter. 
B.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this title, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and apply to words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in full. 
(Ord. 1844 § 2, 1993: prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.020 - Holidays. 
"Holidays" means in this title those days designated in Section 2.44.420, as the same may be amended from time to time, and such other days as may, from time to time, be designated by ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1844 § 3, 1993: prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.030 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.040 - Official traffic control devices. 
"Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.050 - Official traffic signals. 
"Official traffic signals" means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.060 - Park. 
"Park" means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.070 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.080 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.090 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.100 - Police officer. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.110 - Spaced parallel parking. 
"Spaced parallel parking" may be designated by the city council and means the placing of vehicles in parking spaces parallel and adjacent to the curb so that two vehicles are in spaces immediately adjacent one to the other and separated from the next two adjacent spaces by a no parking area of no less than eight linear feet along the curb. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.120 - Stop. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.130 - Stop or stand. 
"Stop or stand," when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.140 - Traffic. 
"Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
(Prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
10.04.150 - Traffic manual. 
"Traffic manual," the traffic manual referred to in this chapter is published by the State Business, Transportation and Housing Agency, Department of Transportation, entitled, "California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 2279 § 1, 2007: prior code § 16.1 (part)).  
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
 
10.08.010 - Enforcement. 
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(Prior code § 16.19).  
10.08.020 - Traffic direction—Police. 
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the city and state traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Prior code § 16.20).  
10.08.030 - Traffic direction—Fire department. 
Officers of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Prior code § 16.21).  
10.08.040 - State and county highways—Regulation of. 
Whenever in this code there is adopted any section pertaining to the stopping, standing, parking, movement or traffic regulation of vehicles on any state highway or county highway within the city, such subsection shall not take effect until the department of public works or the county of Merced, as the case may be, has approved it and shall cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the department of public works or the county of Merced. 
(Prior code § 16.101).  
Chapter 10.12 - ENFORCEMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
10.12.010 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 16.2).  
10.12.020 - Obedience to policemen and firemen. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official when directing traffic. 
(Prior code § 16.3).  
10.12.030 - Persons authorized to direct traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person deputized or authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except, that persons may operate, when authorized to do so by the provisions of this chapter, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 16.4).  
10.12.040 - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Prior code § 16.5).  
10.12.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the state Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. 
(Prior code § 16.6).  
10.12.060 - Damage report. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person driving or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
C.  A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event the driver shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Prior code § 16.7).  
10.12.070 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Prior code § 16.8).  
10.12.080 - Driving through funeral processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated. 
(Prior code § 16.19).  
10.12.090 - Vehicles emerging from alleys, driveways or buildings. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from any alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. 
(Prior code § 16.10).  
10.12.100 - Driving on sidewalks and parkways. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Prior code § 16.11).  
10.12.110 - Driving on bicycle paths. 
A.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorized scooter, or any animal-drawn vehicle or ride or drive any horse, mule or other animal upon any bicycle path or bicycle trail. 
B.  The terms "bicycle path," "bike path," "bicycle trail" and "bike trail," mean a specifically designated area for bicycle travel, separated from the roadway in such manner that an intervening space or physical barrier exists between such bicycle path and the roadway so that the bicycle path is not contiguous to the outer edge of the tile-paved highway shoulder. 
C.  "Motor vehicle" includes motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, such as gasoline-powered mini-motorcycles. 
(Ord. 2203 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1154 § 1, 1975: prior code § 16.11.1).  
10.12.120 - Driving on new pavement or freshly-painted marking. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly-painted marking on any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Prior code § 16.12).  
10.12.130 - Driving onto or from limited-access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Prior code § 16.13).  
10.12.140 - Restrictions on use of freeways. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined in Section 604.5 of the state Vehicle Code, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in the space set aside for the use of pedestrians; provided, that official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Prior code § 16.14).  
10.12.154 - Advertising vehicles—Permit. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the city without first having obtained a permit from the city council to do so. 
(Prior code § 16.15).  
10.12.160 - Animal-drawn vehicles. 
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within any business district between the hours of four-thirty p.m. and six p.m. of any day. 
(Prior code § 16.16).  
10.12.170 - One-way streets and alleys. 
The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, designate one-way streets or keys. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed by the city engineer at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. When so designated, and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs. 
(Prior code § 16.17).  
10.12.180 - Blocking railroad crossings. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to operate or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except for the following conditions: 
1.  Blocking resulting from compliance with state and federal laws and regulations; 
2.  Terrain and physical conditions; 
3.  Adverse weather conditions; 
4.  Conditions which render the roadbed or track structure unsafe; 
5.  Mechanical failures; and 
6.  Train accidents. 
B.  For purposes of this section, an "accident" is described as an unforeseeable occurrence on the railway right-of-way or involving the railway train whereby the railway train or railway cars cannot be moved without endangering the safety of the public, passengers, private property, or freight. 
(Ord. 1194 § 1, 1977: prior code § 17.30).  
10.12.190 - Parking on lawns and yards. 
A.  No motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation, whether or not motorized or operational, shall be parked or stored on a required front yard, side yard, lawn, grass, or landscaped areas except on a permanent driveway or parking place specifically and properly designed for the purpose of parking vehicles and constructed of asphalt blacktop, concrete, cement, paver blocks or other paved surface. 
B.  Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation, whether or not motorized or operational, parked on a street or public way in a manner such that one or more wheels rest in a yard, lot or lawn more than twelve (12) inches from the curb or pavement edge shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
C.  It shall be presumed that the owner of the property, the person or entity occupying the property, and the registered owner of the motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation found in violation of this section authorized the parking in violation of this section. The property owner, occupant and registered owner of the vehicle may all be held responsible for violation of this section and shall each be responsible for the prompt removal of said motor vehicle, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, camper, or other mode of transportation from the front yard, side yard, lawn, grass, or landscaped areas of the property. 
(Ord. 2186 § 2, 2005).  
Chapter 10.16 - SPEED 
 
10.16.010 - Speed limits. 
A.  The prima facie speed limits stated in this section are determined and declared to be the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, and are reasonable and safe, and are established as designated in the following paragraphs, which prima facie speed limits become effective, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, upon the following streets: 
1.  2nd Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from West Avenue to Q Street; 
2.  8th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
3.  10th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to R Street; 
4.  11th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to R Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
5.  12th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to G Street; 
6.  13th Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from V Street to M Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Q Street to G Street; 
7.  13th Street, East: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to B Street; 
8.  14th Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from R Street to G Street; 
9.  15th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
10.  15th Street, East: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from G Street to B Street; 
11.  16th Street: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from West City Limit to Highway 59; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Highway 59 to R Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from R Street to G Street; 
d.  Forty (40) miles per hour from G Street to Yosemite Parkway; 
12.  18th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to O Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from O Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to G Street; 
d.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Cedar Avenue; 
13.  19th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to G Street; 
14.  20th Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from W Street to R Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
15.  20th Street, East: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to Glen Avenue; 
16.  21st Street: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from W Street to O Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
17.  21st Street, East: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to East City Limit; 
18.  22nd Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Canal Street to G Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from W Street to R Street; 
19.  23rd Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to M Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
20.  23rd Street, East: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Glen Avenue; 
21.  25th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
22.  26th Street: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
23.  26th Street, East: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Glen Avenue; 
24.  27th Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
25.  27th Street, East: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from G Street to 7th Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Glen Avenue to McKee Road; 
26.  Alexander Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Rambler Road to G Street; 
27.  Alexander Avenue, East: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Oleander Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Oleander Avenue to Parsons Avenue; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Parsons Avenue to McKee Road; 
28.  Austin Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Devonwood Drive to Olive Avenue; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Loughborough Drive; 
29.  Auto Center Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Westerly end to V Street; 
30.  B Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 15th Street; 
31.  Bear Creek Drive Northwest: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Highway 59 to Brookside Drive; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Brookside Drive to R Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
d.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
32.  Bear Creek Drive Northeast: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to East City Limits; 
33.  Bear Creek Drive Southeast: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to 6th Avenue; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 6th Avenue to Cameron Lane; 
34.  Bellevue Road: 
a.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from West City Limit to G Street; 
35.  Brookdale Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Cherokee Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Cherokee Avenue to Parsons Avenue; 
36.  Buena Vista Drive: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Highway 59 to R Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to Campus Drive; 
37.  Campus Parkway: 
a.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from northbound Highway 99 to Childs Avenue; 
38.  Canal Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from 13th Street to 16th Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Main Street to Railroad; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Railroad to 27th Street; 
39.  Cardella Road: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from G Street to M Street; 
b.  Forty (40) miles per hour from M Street to West Dead End; 
40.  Cherokee Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Seneca Street to El Portal Drive; 
41.  Childs Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from West Avenue to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to G Street; 
c.  Forty (40) miles per hour from G Street to DeLong Street; 
d.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Motel Drive to Parsons Avenue; 
e.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Parsons Avenue to Weaver Avenue; 
f.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Coffee Road to Doane Lateral; 
g.  Fifty (50) miles per hour from Doane Lateral to Kibby Road; 
h.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from Kibby Road to Tower Road; 
42.  Coffee Road: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to Baker Road; 
b.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Gerard Avenue to Childs Avenue; 
43.  College Green Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Park Avenue; 
44.  Collins Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to M Street; 
45.  Columbia Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to Cherokee Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Cherokee Avenue to El Portal Drive; 
46.  Cone Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from West City Limit to East City Limit; 
47.  Cooper Avenue: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Ashby Road to Highway 59; 
48.  D Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 13th Street; 
49.  Devonwood Drive: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Mistwood Drive to Austin Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Austin Avenue to Meadows Avenue; 
50.  Dinkey Creek: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Coffee Street to Albert; 
b.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from Parsons Avenue to East Dead End; 
51.  Donna Drive: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to Joerg Avenue; 
52.  El Portal Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from G Street to Cherokee Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Cherokee Avenue to Joerg Avenue; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Joerg Avenue to Parsons Avenue; 
53.  G Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 11th Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 11th Street to 19th Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 19th Street to North Bear Creek Drive; 
d.  Forty (40) miles per hour from North Bear Creek Drive to Olive Avenue; 
e.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Yosemite Avenue; 
f.  Fifty (50) miles per hour from Yosemite Avenue to Cardella Road; 
g.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from Cardella Road to Bellevue Road; 
h.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from Bellevue to Old Lake Road. 
54.  Gardner Road: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Yosemite Avenue to Cardella Road; 
55.  Gerard Avenue: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from South Highway 59 to Las Brisas Court; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from N Street to South Highway 59; 
56.  Gerard Avenue, East: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Parsons Avenue to Coffee Road; 
b.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Coffee Road to Tower Road; 
57.  Glen Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Yosemite Parkway to Santa Fe Drive; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Santa Fe Drive to South Bear Creek Drive; 
58.  Gove Road: 
a.  Fifty (50) miles per hour from southerly City Limit to Dickinson Ferry Road; 
59.  Grogan Avenue: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Wardrobe Avenue to West Avenue; 
60.  Joerg Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from El Portal Drive to Yosemite Avenue; 
61.  Kibby Road: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to Highway 140; 
62.  Lopes Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Thornton Road to West Avenue; 
63.  Loughborough Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Mistwood Drive to Olive Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Austin Avenue; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Austin Avenue to R Street; 
d.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour R Street to M Street; 
64.  M Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 16th Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 16th Street to North Bear Creek Drive; 
c.  Forty (40) miles per hour from North Bear Creek Drive to Olive Avenue; 
d.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Yosemite Avenue; 
e.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Yosemite Avenue to Cardella Road; 
f.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Cardella Road to Bellevue Road; 
65.  MacReady Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Grogan Avenue to Grogan Avenue; 
66.  Main Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from V Street to O Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from O Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to G Street; 
67.  Main Street, East: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from G Street to Yosemite Parkway; 
68.  Mansionette Drive: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Yosemite Avenue to Mercy Avenue; 
69.  Martin Luther King, Jr. Way: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from 13th Street to 21st Street; 
70.  McKee Road: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Alexander Avenue to Olive Avenue; 
b.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to North City Limit; 
71.  Meadows Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Devonwood Drive to Olive Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Loughborough Drive; 
72.  Merced Avenue: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Motel Drive to Parsons Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Coffee Street to East City Limits; 
73.  Mission Avenue: 
a.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from Coffee Street to East City Limits; 
74.  Motel Drive: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to Yosemite Parkway; 
75.  N Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 13th Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to Gerard Avenue; 
76.  O Street: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from 13th Street to 18th Street; 
77.  Olive Avenue: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Highway 59 to Meadows Avenue; 
b.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Meadows Avenue to G Street; 
78.  Olive Avenue, East: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from G Street to Lincoln Avenue; 
b.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Lincoln Avenue to McKee Road; 
c.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from McKee Road to East City Limit; 
79.  Olivewood Drive: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from M Street to R Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from R Street to Meadows Avenue; 
80.  Park Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Alexander Avenue; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from Alexander Avenue to G Street; 
81.  Parsons Avenue: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Coffee Street to Dinkey Creek Avenue; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Dinkey Creek Avenue to Yosemite Parkway; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Stretch Road to East 27th Street; 
d.  Forty (40) miles per hour from North Bear Creek Drive to Alexander Avenue; 
e.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Alexander Avenue to Olive Avenue; 
f.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Brookdale Drive; 
g.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Brookdale Drive to North City Limits; 
82.  Paulson Road: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from East Yosemite Avenue to North City Limit; 
83.  R Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to 13th Street; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 13th Street to 22nd Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 22nd Street to North Bear Creek Drive; 
d.  Forty (40) miles per hour from North Bear Creek Drive to Olive Avenue; 
e.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Olive Avenue to Yosemite Avenue; 
84.  Rambler Road: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
b.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from M Street to College Green Drive; 
85.  S Street: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from 16th Street to 24th Street; 
86.  San Jose Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Yosemite Avenue to Lehigh Drive; 
87.  Santa Fe Avenue, East: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from G Street to 6th Avenue; 
b.  Forty (40) miles per hour from 6th Avenue to Glen Avenue; 
c.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Glen Avenue to Stretch Road; 
88.  T Street: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour from 16th Street to 24th Street; 
89.  Thornton Avenue: 
a.  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour from Dickinson Ferry Road to Lopes Avenue; 
90.  Tower Road: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to Highway 140; 
91.  University Drive: 
a.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from San Jose Drive to M Street; 
92.  V Street: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from West Avenue to 13th Street; 
b.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from 16th Street to 23rd Street; 
c.  Thirty (30) miles per hour from 13th Street to 16th Street; 
93.  Wardrobe Avenue: 
a.  Forty (40) miles per hour from Thornton Road to West Avenue; 
94.  West Avenue: 
a.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from South of Childs Avenue; 
b.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from Childs Avenue to V Street; 
c.  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour from V Street to 8th Street; 
95.  Yosemite Avenue: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from R Street to M Street; 
b.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from M Street to G Street; 
c.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from R Street to Highway 59; 
96.  Yosemite Avenue, East: 
a.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from G Street to Paulson Road; 
b.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Paulson Road to Gardner Road; 
c.  Forty-five (45) miles per hour from Gardner Road to McKee Road; 
d.  Fifty (50) miles per hour from McKee Road to East City Limits. 
(Ord. 2262 §§ 1, 2, 2006; Ord. 2234 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2187 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2165 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2133 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1943 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1937 § 1, 1966: Ord. 1911 §§ 1, 2, 1995: Ord. 1889 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1883 §§ 1, 2, 1994: Ord. 1851 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1846 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1827 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1786 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1743 de§ 1, 1989: Ord. 1700 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1682 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1680 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1676 § 2, 1987: Ord. 1661 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1659 § 1987: Ord. 1617 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1372 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1158 § 1, 1976: prior code § 16.22). 
(Ord. No. 2370, § 1, 5-16-2011)  
10.16.020 - Regulating speed by traffic signals. 
The city engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections. The city engineer shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Prior code § 16.23).  
Chapter 10.20 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
10.20.010 - Installation authority. 
A.  The city engineer shall have the power to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances or resolutions of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances or resolutions. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code of this state requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the city engineer is authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
C.  The city engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of safety requirements, of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in the traffic ordinances or resolutions of this city or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 16.24).  
10.20.020 - Traffic laws unenforceable unless signs posted. 
No provision of the state Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Prior code § 16.25).  
10.20.030 - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances and resolutions of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Prior code § 16.26).  
10.20.040 - Location and installation of traffic signals. 
A.  The director of public works is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places were traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from an exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resorting to field observation, traffic counts, and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the traffic manual. 
(Ord. 2279 § 2, 2007: prior code § 16.27).  
10.20.050 - Installation of street name signs. 
Whenever the city engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at each intersection, street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic, unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Prior code § 16.28).  
10.20.060 - Lane markings on roadways. 
The city engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center line of the highway. 
(Prior code § 16.29).  
10.20.070 - No driving markings. 
Whenever the state department of public works determines by resolution and designates a distinctive roadway marking which indicates no driving over such markings, the chief of police and city engineer are authorized to designate by such marking those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department of public works pursuant to the provisions of the state Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 16.30).  
10.20.080 - Removal and relocation authority. 
The city engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the state law, this chapter or other ordinance or resolution of the city whenever it is determined in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or pertain. 
(Prior code § 16.31).  
10.20.090 - Hours of operation. 
The chief of police and city engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter or other ordinance or resolution of this city. 
(Prior code § 16.32).  
10.20.100 - Signs indicating turns at intersections—Authority. 
The chief of police and city engineer are authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The chief of police and city engineer are authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 16.33).  
10.20.110 - Signs indicating turns at intersections—Obedience. 
When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Prior code § 16.34).  
10.20.120 - Restricted turn signs—Authority. 
The chief of police and city engineer are authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turn may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Prior code § 16.35).  
10.20.130 - Restricted turn signs—Obedience. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior code § 16.36).  
10.20.140 - Prohibition of right turns at traffic signals—Authority. 
The city engineer and the chief of police are authorized to determine those intersections within any business or residence district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior code § 16.37).  
10.20.150 - Stop signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one (1) or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in Chapter 2, Article 1, Sections 21350 through 21355 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2316 § 21, 2008: prior code § 16.38).  
10.20.160 - Traffic control devices on private roads. 
The city council, by ordinance or resolution, and in accordance with law, may prescribe the erection of traffic control devices on a private road or driveway at designated locations, and when such traffic control devices have been so installed, it is unlawful for any person to disobey any such traffic control device. 
(Prior code § 16.38.1).  
10.20.170 - Warrants—Generally. 
The city engineer shall install and maintain traffic control devices, including but not limited to traffic signals, stop signals and yield right-of-way signs at any location, but only when the traffic and other conditions meet the warrants as set forth in this chapter and in the traffic manual. 
(Prior code § 16.200).  
10.20.180 - Warrants—School crossings. 
Traffic control measures for school crossing protection shall be in accordance with the traffic manual, except that the first sentence of Section 10-07.3 of the traffic manual, as adopted (Warrants for Assignment of Adult Crossing Guards) shall be deemed to read as follows: 
Adult crossing guards normally are assigned where official supervision of elementary school children is desirable while they cross a public street or highway, and at least forty elementary school age pedestrians in the fourth grade or under utilize the crossing on the way to or from school. 
(Ord. 1844 § 4, 1993: prior code § 16.201).  
10.20.190 - Warrants—Stop signs. 
Minimum warrants for installation of stop signs are: 
A.  On a street entering a legally established through highway or street; 
B.  On a minor street when the ability to see all potentially conflicting traffic is insufficient to allow a road user traveling at the posted speed, or the statutory speed (whichever speed is greater) to pass through the intersection or to stop in a reasonably safe manner; 
C.  On the less important road at its intersection with a major road where application of the normal right-of-way rule is unduly hazardous as evidenced by three (3) accidents reported and investigated during the preceding twelve (12) month period, if such investigations show such accidents were susceptible to correction by stop signs; 
D.  Where circumstances and collision history indicate that observing the normal right-of-way rule could still be hazardous, resulting in crashes; or 
E.  Where stop control would improve traffic operational characteristics of the intersection as determined by the traffic committee or the city engineer. 
(Ord. 2279 § 3, 2007: prior code § 16.202).  
10.20.200 - Warrants—Yield right-of-way signs. 
Minimum warrants for yield right-of-way signs are to be placed at the entrance to an intersection where it is desirable to assign the right-of-way but where a stop sign is unduly restrictive; provided: 
A.  Traffic volume on the approaches where these signs are to be used must be less than the volume on the other two (2) approaches. 
B.  The ability to see all potentially conflicting traffic on the approach having the minor volume is insufficient to allow a road user traveling at the posted speed, or the statutory speed (whichever speed is greater) to pass through the intersection or to stop in a reasonably safe manner. 
C.  There is a demonstrated hazardous condition existing at the intersection as demonstrated by the occurrence of at least two (2) right-angle collisions reported and investigated during the previous twelve (12) month period, such investigations showing these accidents susceptible to correction by the use of "yield" signs. 
(Ord. 2279 § 4, 2007: prior code § 16.203).  
10.20.210 - Traffic control at private parking facilities. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 21107.8 of the Vehicle Code, the city council finds that there are privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. 
B.  The following private parking facilities are subject to public traffic regulations and control when signs are in place giving notice thereof: 
Parking Facility 	Location 
Payless Plaza 	Generally located between G Street and College Avenue on north side of Olive Avenue (APN 6-121-10). 
Merced Mall 	Generally located between M and R Streets on north side of Olive Avenue (APN 6-340-17). 
Sears 	Generally located between M and R Streets on north side of Olive Avenue (APN 6-340-18). 
 
(Ord. 1555 § 1, 1984).  
Chapter 10.24 - PEDESTRIANS 
 
10.24.010 - Crosswalks. 
A.  The city engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within a business district, and at other places within or outside business districts where the city engineer determines that there is a particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length. Elsewhere, not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(Prior code § 16.39).  
10.24.020 - Standing in roadways. 
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. 
(Prior code § 16.40).  
Chapter 10.25 - MEDIAN ISLAND SAFETY 
 
10.25.010 - Declaration of purpose of medians. 
The city council hereby declares the purpose of medians within city streets is as follows: 
A.  To promote safety by separating vehicular traffic traveling in one direction from vehicular traffic traveling in the opposite direction; and, 
B.  To promote safety by providing a place of safety and respite for pedestrians while crossing city streets at intersections and other approved crossings, particularly for the elderly and disabled who may need additional time to safely cross city streets than traffic signals allow; and, 
C.  To improve the visual appeal of city streets. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Linger" means remaining in a median longer than two (2) traffic signal cycles, except in an emergency. 
B.  "Loitering" means standing or lingering in a median for any purpose other than to safely and lawfully cross the street, except in an emergency. 
C.  "Median" means a paved or planted area separating a street, or highway, into two (2) or more lanes or directions of travel. 
D.  "Motor vehicle" means any propelled vehicle or vehicle drawn by a power other than muscular power, other than a motorized wheelchair. 
E.  "Solicit" means any request made in person seeking an immediate request for or donation of money, food, cigarettes or any other items of value, or for the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. "Solicit" also means any verbal request, or any non-verbal request made with a sign, by a person seeking an immediate donation of money, food, cigarettes, or any other items of value or the request that items be purchased for any goods, wares, or merchandise or any article to be delivered in the future, or for services to be performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing, or repairing any article whatsoever for future delivery, or for subscriptions to periodicals or tickets of admission to entertainments or memberships in any clubs. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.030 - Prohibition of lingering, soliciting, or loitering on median. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to linger, solicit, or loiter on a median within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.040 - City median islands. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to medians on the following city streets: Auto Center Drive; G Street; M Street; Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; Boulevard; Olive Avenue; R Street; V Street; and Yosemite Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.050 - Signs or other objects prohibited. 
No person shall be allowed to bring any sign, material, or other object on the median island that will obstruct any traffic signal light or extend into a traffic lane or obscure any traffic sign on the median. No person, sign, material, or other object on the median island shall obstruct any traffic signal light or extend into a traffic lane or obstruct a traffic sign on such median. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.060 - Stepping off median. 
No person shall step off the median island to exchange any object with a vehicle occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.070 - Vehicles. 
No person, while standing on a median, shall exchange any object with an occupant of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.080 - Federal, state, and local laws. 
All persons shall be required to follow all applicable federal, state, and local laws while on the median. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.090 - Exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to freeway oriented solicitation prohibited by California Vehicle Code Section 22520.5. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to those persons occupying a median while conducting activities related to maintenance, surveying, construction, landscape maintenance, landscape improvements, law enforcement, responding to an emergency, or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
10.25.100 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  In addition, the city attorney shall also have the power to seek injunctive relief for any violation of this chapter. 
C.  In addition to any administrative penalty assessed for a violation of this chapter, any person or organization found in violation of this chapter will be charged abatement, actual, administrative and enforcement costs calculated to recover the total costs incurred by the city in enforcing the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2417, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Chapter 10.28 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
10.28.010 - Generally. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code, this code or other ordinances of this city, prohibiting of limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Prior code § 16.41).  
10.28.020 - Prohibited within parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Prior code § 16.42).  
10.28.025 - Parking within one hundred feet of any intersection—Restricted. 
No person shall park or stand a vehicle which is seven (7) feet or more in height (including any load thereon) on any street or highway within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection within the city. 
(Ord. 1606 § 1, 1986).  
10.28.026 - No parking at open-end access ways to bicycle paths. 
No person shall park or stand a vehicle on any street or highway within ten (10) feet of an open-end cul-de-sac and other similar access ways to bicycle paths. 
(Ord. 2171 § 1, 2004).  
10.28.030 - Seventy-two consecutive hours—Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street, alley or city parking lot for a consecutive period of more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. 1875 § 20, 1994: prior code § 16.43).  
10.28.040 - Seventy-two consecutive hours—Removal of vehicle. 
In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours in violation of Section 10.28.030, any member of the police department authorized by the chief of police may remove such vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 16.44).  
10.28.050 - Displaying or repairing vehicle on roadway. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
B.  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Prior code § 16.45).  
10.28.060 - Parallel parking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, parking on all streets in the city shall be parallel to the curb, whereby the right-hand wheels of any vehicle shall be within eighteen (18) inches of the curb, which parallel parking shall be that type of parking customarily used in the city wherein the vehicles are adjacent to one another. 
(Prior code § 16.46).  
10.28.070 - Angle parking—Markings. 
Whenever any provision of this code or other ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the city engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
(Prior code § 16.47).  
10.28.080 - Angle parking—Method. 
When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided by Section 10.28.070, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Prior code § 16.48).  
10.28.090 - Angle parking—Permitted where. 
In accordance with Sections 10.28.070 and 10.28.080 and when signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles may stand or park a vehicle only as indicated by such marks or signs on the following streets or portions thereof: 
Street 	Portion 
Both sides of K Street 	From the north line of West 16th Street to south line of West 18th Street. 
Both sides of Canal Street 	From the north line of West 16th Street northerly to the south line of the alley between West 16th Street and Main Street. 
South side of West 19th Street 	From the east line of N Street to the west line of M Street 
East side of N Street 	From the southwest property line of APN 031-054-024 to the south line of West 19 Street. 
West side of N Street 	From the north line of West 18th Street to the south line of West 19th Street. 
 
(Ord. 2131 § 1, 2003: Ord. 2059 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 16.49). 
(Ord. No. 2458, §§ 1, 2, 5-2-2016)  
10.28.100 - Adjacent to schools. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Prior code § 16.50).  
10.28.110 - Narrow streets. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this chapter, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Prior code § 16.51).  
10.28.120 - Posted dangerous areas. 
The city engineer shall appropriately sign or mark any place where he determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate dangerous traffic hazards and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of such places. 
(Prior code § 16.52).  
10.28.150 - Vehicle transporting property for hire. 
No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city council which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(Prior code § 16.55).  
10.28.160 - Revocation of permits. 
Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of Sections 10.28.140 and 10.28.150 and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be immediately revoked by the city council upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the city council. No permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 16.56).  
10.28.170 - Emergency no parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the chief of police shall determine than an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Prior code § 16.57).  
10.28.180 - Curb markings—Generally. 
The city engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter to place, and when required shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations. Such curb markings have the following meanings: 
A.  Red means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the state Vehicle Code; provided, that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone; 
B.  Yellow means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between six a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; 
C.  White means no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between six a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or church the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theatre the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theatre is closed; 
D.  Green means no standing or parking for longer than the period indicated by signs properly posted on any day except Sundays and holidays; 
E.  Blue means no standing or parking except for vehicles bearing a special license plate or special placard issued for disabled persons pursuant to Section 9105 or Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code; provided, that there shall also be posted a sign as provided in Chapter 10.36. Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty-four (24) hours a day, Sundays and holidays included. 
(Ord. 1208 § 1, 1978: prior code § 16.58).  
10.28.190 - Curb markings—Violation. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of Section 10.28.180. 
(Prior code § 16.59).  
10.28.210 - Zones determined by city council. 
The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, determine those streets, parts of streets, alleys or other locations, upon which parking shall be limited to stated periods of time, or to certain vehicles or shall be prohibited, and the city engineer shall designate such streets or parts of streets, alleys or other locations by appropriate signs, parking space markings or curb markings. 
(Prior code § 16.61).  
10.28.214 - Limited time parking lots—Thirty minutes. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 1 	Two spaces in the most easterly row of parking, being the fifth and sixth spaces from the northerly end of the lot moving southerly. 
 
(Ord. 2178 § 1, 2004).  
10.28.215 - Limited time parking lots—Two hours. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two (2) hours between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 1 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, all of row 1, except the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth spaces moving from the north to the south; all of rows 2, 3, and 4; and all of row 5, except the fifth and sixth spaces moving from the north to the south. 
Lot No. 3 	Starting from the westerlymost row and moving easterly, all of rows 4 and 5. 
 
(Ord. 2277 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2254 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2178 § 2, 2004). 
(Ord. No. 2472, § 1, 2-6-2017)  
10.28.220 - Limited time parking lots—Three hours. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than three (3) hours between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 4 	The most westerly row of parking spaces, being row 1; 
No. 6 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, all of rows 1 and 2; 
Transpo Center Parking Lot 	All parking spaces on the northerly side of the Transpo Center buildings. 
 
(Ord. 1875 § 5, 1994: Ord. 1849 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1838 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1782 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1722 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1703 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1673 §§ 1, 2, 1987: Ord. 1644 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1589 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1463 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1453 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1416 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1277 § 4, 1979: Ord. 1256 § 1, 1979: prior code § 16.61.1).  
10.28.222 - Limited time parking lots—Eight hours. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than eight (8) hours between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
Lot No. 3 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, all of rows 1, 2, and 3; 
Lot No. 4 	All parking spaces in such Lot No. 4; 
Lot No. 6 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, all of rows 3 and 4. 
 
(Ord. 2277 § 2, 2007: Ord. 1935 §§ 1, 2, 1996: Ord. 1875 § 6, 1994: Ord. 1849 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1838 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1796 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1782 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1722 § 2, 1988: Ord. 1673 §§ 3, 4, 1987: Ord. 1589 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1455 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1416 § 2, 1981: prior code § 16.61.2).  
10.28.224 - Limited time parking lots—Seventy-two hours. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than seventy-two (72) hours of any consecutive days except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
Lot No. 14 	Starting from the westerlymost row and moving easterly, all of rows 13 and 14. 
 
(Ord. 2277 § 4, 2007).  
10.28.226 - Limited time parking lots—Ten days. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than ten (10) days within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
Transpo Center Parking Lot 	All parking spaces on the southerly side of the Transpo Center buildings. 
 
(Ord. 1796 § 2, 1991).  
10.28.230 - No parking zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle at any time on any day along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
Both sides of G Street 	Beginning at the north property line of 14th Street, thence northerly to the north city limit. 
Both sides of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at the west line of R Street, thence westerly 420 feet. 
North side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at the east line of R Street, thence easterly 170 feet. 
Both sides of Austin Avenue 	Beginning at the north line of Olive Avenue, thence north 110 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 75 feet east of the east line of M Street, thence 110 feet easterly. 
North side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the east property line of Burbank School, thence easterly 20 feet. 
South side of East 15th Street 	Beginning at a point which is the easterly property line of G Street, thence east a distance of 968± feet along the southerly curb of East 15th Street to a point, thence east 40± feet. 
West side of M Street 	From a point which is the centerline of West 12th Street extended, thence north along the curb line a distance of 49± feet to the point of beginning, thence northerly 30 feet. 
West side of M Street 	From a point which is the centerline of West 12th Street extended, thence south along the curb line a distance of 40± feet to the point of beginning, thence southerly 30 feet. 
North side of alley between 12th and 13th Streets 	Beginning at the west line of N Street, thence westerly to the east line of O Street. 
North side of alley between 12th and 13th Streets 	Beginning at the west line of O Street, thence westerly to the east line of P Street. 
West side of West Avenue 	Beginning at the projection of the south property line of Childs Avenue, thence northerly to the south property line of Wardrobe Avenue. 
East side of West Avenue 	Beginning at the north property line of Childs Avenue, thence northerly to a point 320 feet north of the north property line of U Street. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of R Street, thence westerly 175 feet. 
North side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of R Street, thence westerly 110 feet. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the east property line of R Street, thence easterly 187 feet. 
North side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the east property line of R Street, thence easterly 165 feet. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of O Street, thence westerly 10 feet. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 162 feet west of the west line of N Street, thence westerly 5 feet. 
North side of alley between 20th and 21st Streets 	Beginning at the west line of O Street, thence westerly to the east line of P Street. 
South side of 13th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of R Street, thence westerly 150 feet. 
North side of 13th Street 	Beginning at the east property line of R Street, thence easterly 136 feet. 
North side of 13th Street 	Beginning at the east property line of V Street, thence easterly 114 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at the north property line of 13th Street, thence northerly to the south property line of 14th Street. 
West side of M Street 	Beginning at the north property line of 13th Street, thence northerly to the south property line of 14th Street. 
North side of Main Street 	Beginning at the east property line of G Street, thence easterly 100 feet. 
North side of Main Street 	Beginning at the east property line of Cedar Avenue, thence easterly to Yosemite Parkway. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 204 feet west of the west line of T Street, thence westerly 60 feet. 
North side of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the east property line of M Street, thence easterly to the west property line of G Street. 
South side of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the east property line of M Street, thence easterly to the west property line of G Street. 
West side of M Street 	Beginning at the north property line of Yosemite Avenue, thence northerly to the city limit line. 
East side of West Avenue 	Beginning at a point which is 15 feet south of V Street, thence northerly 15 feet to V Street. 
Both sides of V Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 13th Street, thence southerly to the alley between West 11th Street and West 12th Street. 
South side of 13th Street 	Beginning at the west line of T Street, thence westerly 100 feet. 
Both sides of Paulson Road 	Beginning at the north line of East Yosemite Avenue, thence northerly to south line of Kinglet Court. 
West side of R Street 	Beginning at the south property line of West 16th Street, thence southerly towards the railroad right-of-way, 160 feet. 
South side of Yosemite Parkway 	Beginning at a point that is 175 feet east of the east line of Rose Avenue, thence easterly 130 feet. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at the north line of the alley between 17th Street and 18th Street, thence north 20 feet. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at a point that is 22 feet south of the alley between 17th Street and 18th Street thence south 20 feet. 
South side of West 26th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet east of the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 20 feet 
South side of alley between 22nd and 23rd Streets 	Beginning at the west line of K Street, thence westerly to the east line of Canal Street. 
North side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point 5 feet east of the east property line of M Street, thence east 190 feet. 
North side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point on the west property line of Canal Street, thence west 21 feet. 
South side of Colony Lane 	Beginning at the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 230 feet. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 495 feet west of the west line of B Street, thence 20 feet westerly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 568 feet west of the west line of B Street, thence 20 feet westerly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 385 feet west of the west line of B Street, thence 20 feet westerly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 451 feet west of the west line of B Street, thence 20 feet westerly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 172 feet east of the east line of D Street, thence 20 feet easterly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 214 feet east of the east line of D Street, thence 22 feet easterly. 
South side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 258 feet east of the east line of D Street, thence 20 feet easterly. 
Both sides of Eagle Street 	Beginning at the west line of West Avenue, thence westerly to the east line of Condor Drive. 
North side of Eagle Street 	Beginning at a point that is 370 feet from the west line of West Avenue, thence westerly 60 feet. 
South side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet from the west line of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence westerly 250 feet. 
South side of 11th Street 	Beginning at a point which is 20 feet west of the west line of I Street, thence easterly 120 feet. 
South side of 11th Street 	Beginning at a point which is 23 feet west of the west line of H Street, thence easterly 124 feet. 
West side of G Street 	Beginning at a point which is 332 feet south of the south line of 11th Street, thence south 169 feet. 
West side of G Street 	Beginning at a point which is 679 feet south of the south line of 11thStreet, thence south 120 feet. 
West side of G Street 	Beginning at a point which is 954 feet south of the south line of 11th Street, thence south 176 feet. 
West side of G Street 	Beginning at a point which is 1,255 feet south of the south line of 11th Street, thence south 124 feet. 
West side of G Street 	Beginning at a point which is 1,430 feet south of the south line of 11th Street, thence south 128 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at a point which is 280 feet east of the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 112 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at a point which is 520 feet east of the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 117 feet. 
South side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the east property line of G Street, thence easterly 188 feet. 
North side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the east property line of G Street, thence easterly 150 feet. 
North side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly to a point 30 feet east of the east line of Canal Street. 
South side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 100 feet. 
South side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the north line of Yosemite Parkway, thence westerly 40 feet. 
North side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the east line of G Street, thence easterly 100 feet. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at the West line of G Street, thence westerly 100 feet. 
North side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 25 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly 25 feet. 
North side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 25 feet. 
East side of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence south 25 feet. 
East side of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 	Beginning at the north line of West 18th Street, thence north 25 feet. 
West side of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 	Beginning at the north line of West 18th Street, thence north 25 feet. 
North side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
North side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 25 feet. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 25 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 13th Street, thence northerly 25 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 13th Street, thence northerly 25 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 13th Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 13th Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
East side of V Street 	Beginning at a point that is 108 feet south of the south line of West 15th Street, thence south 150 feet to the Highway 99 off ramp. 
North side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of Canal Street, thence westerly 45 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at the west property line of Canal Street, thence westerly 45 feet. 
North side of Collins Drive 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly 160 feet. 
South side of Collins Drive 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly 160 feet. 
South side of Yosemite Parkway 	Beginning at the west line of Shirley Street, thence west 76 feet. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 255 feet east of the southwest corner of Lot 3 of Western Industrial Park Subdivision, thence east 165 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is 88 feet north of the north line of West 14th Street, thence north 80 feet. 
South side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the west property line of G Street, thence westerly 130 feet. 
South side of Wardrobe Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is the northeast corner of Lot 48, Merced Airport Industrial Park, thence west 15 feet. 
Southwesterly side of Buckner Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of Gerard, thence southeasterly 170 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of T Street, thence westerly 100 feet. 
South side of Pier Road 	Beginning at the west line of Paulson Road, thence westerly 95 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point which is 87 feet north of the north line of the alley north of West 23rd Street, thence north 10 feet. 
East side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of East Olive Avenue, thence southerly 170 feet. 
South side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly 140 feet. 
North side of West Main 	Beginning at the west line of R Street, thence westerly to the east line of T Street. 
South side of West Main 	Beginning at the west line of R Street, then westerly to the east line of T Street. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence southerly to the north line of West Main Street. 
West side of S Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence southerly to the north line of West Main Street. 
South side of Fairfield Drive 	Beginning at the west line of M Street, thence westerly 50 feet. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 6 feet west of the southwest corner of Lot 3 of Western Industrial Park, thence westerly 162 feet. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 222 feet west of the southwest corner of Lot 3 of Western Industrial Park, then westerly 162 feet. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 528 feet west of the southwest corner of Lot 3 of Western Industrial Park, then westerly 162 feet. 
South side of Wardrobe Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is five feet east of the northeast corner of Lot 47, Merced Airport Industrial Park, Volume 20, Page 53, thence westerly 55 feet. 
South side of Wardrobe Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 230 feet west of the northeast corner of Lot 47, Merced Airport Industrial Park, Volume 20, Page 53, thence westerly 150 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at the north city limit line, thence southerly to the north line of West 16th Street. 
West side of M Street 	Beginning at the south line of Black Rascal Creek, thence southerly to the north line of West 16th Street. 
Parking Lot No. 1 	The northerlymost curb 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is the west line of N Street, thence westerly 530 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 20th Street, thence southerly 20 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 20th Street, thence southerly 20 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 20th Street, thence northerly 20 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 20th Street, thence northerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 82 feet. 
South side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at the west line of K Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of Olive Avenue 	Beginning at the east property line of North Highway 59 (Snelling Highway), thence easterly to the east line of North El Capitan Avenue. 
South side of Gerard Avenue 	Beginning at the east line of Parsons Avenue, thence easterly to the west line of Brimmer Road. 
North side of Olive Avenue 	Beginning at the east property line of North Highway 59 (Snelling Highway), thence easterly to the east line of North El Capitan Avenue. 
North side of 21st Street 	Beginning at the west line of G Street, thence westerly 180 feet. 
North and south sides of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the west line of G Street, thence westerly 230 feet. 
North and south sides of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the east line of G Street, thence easterly 150 feet. 
South side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at a point 20 feet east of the easterly Macready Drive, thence west to 20 feet west of the westerly Macready Drive. 
East and west sides of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of Oregon Drive, thence southerly to the north line of North Bear Creek Drive. 
East and west sides of Austin Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of West Olive Avenue, thence southerly 540 feet. 
North side of Wardrobe Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 1,600 feet west of the east line of West Avenue, thence westerly 300 feet. 
North side of West 25th Street 	Beginning at the east line of R Street, thence easterly 100 feet. 
North side of Colony Lane 	Beginning at the west line of G Street, thence west and north to the south line of West 15th Street. 
North side of Donna Drive 	Beginning at the west line of Paulson Road, thence westerly 330 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the west line of M Street, thence westerly 200 feet. 
Both sides of Cormorant Drive 	Beginning at the east line of Mansionette Drive, thence easterly to the end of the street. 
North side of West 15th Street 	From the west line of G Street, thence westerly 380 feet. 
North side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet west of the west line of Oleander Avenue, thence westerly 50 feet. 
East side of R Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 13th Street, thence northerly to the north city limit. 
West side of R Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 13th Street, thence northerly to the northerly city limit. 
Both sides of 16th Street 	From the west line of G Street to the east line of V Street. 
Both sides of Agnes Way 	From a point that is 450 feet from the south line of East 27th Street, thence southerly to the end. 
North side of West 18th Street 	From the west line of M Street to the east line of N Street. 
South side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at a point that is 850 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 215 feet. 
Both sides of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 	Beginning at the north line of West 13th Street, thence northerly to the south line of West 16th Street. 
Both sides of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the west line of M Street, thence westerly to the east line of R Street. 
Both sides of Mansionette Drive 	Beginning at the south line of Cormorant Drive, thence southerly 450 feet. 
Both sides of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at a point that is 300 feet west of R Street, thence easterly to a point that is 300 feet easterly of R Street. 
North side of West 11th Street 	From the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 50 feet. 
South side of West 11th Street 	From the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 100 feet. 
Both sides of West 13th Street 	From the east line of V Street, thence easterly 700 feet. 
Both sides of Auto Center Drive 	From the west line of V Street to the westerly end of Auto Center Drive. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Commencing at the east line of X Street, thence easterly 150 feet. 
East side of X Street 	Commencing at the south line of West 13th Street, thence southerly 10 feet and stopping; thence resuming 65 feet from the original commencement point to 150 feet from the original commencement point. 
West side of X Street 	Beginning at the north line of State Route 140, thence northerly to the northerly end of X Street at West 13th Street. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at the west line of R Street, thence westerly 80 feet. 
Both sides of Midge Avenue 	From a point that is 550 feet from the south line of East 27th Street, thence southerly to the end. 
The northerlymost, easterlymost, and southerlymost sides of Century Circle 	Beginning at the northerlymost side of Century Circle and its intersection with the east line of Paulson Road, thence following the northerlymost edge easterly, thence the easterlymost edge southerly, and the southerlymost edge, westerly to its intersection with the east line of Paulson Road. 
Both sides of alley between Yosemite Avenue and Doe Court 	From the west line of Paulson Road, thence westerly to the end of such alley. 
South side of West 18th Street between M Street and Canal Street 	From the east line of M Street thence easterly 120 feet. 
Both sides of alley between 20th and 21st Streets 	Beginning at the west line of O Street, then westerly to the east line of R Street. 
Both sides of alley between 21st and 22nd Streets 	Beginning at the west line of O Street, then westerly to the east line of R Street. 
North side of 16th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 288 feet east of G Street, then easterly to the Highway 99 off ramp. 
East side of Gateway Place 	Beginning at the south line of Gateway Drive, thence south 128 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the west line of Watertown Drive, thence westerly 300 feet. 
West side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of Childs Avenue, thence southerly 860 feet. 
South side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at a point that is 20 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 270 feet. 
North side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at the west line of the BiRite Liquors' driveway, thence westerly 77 feet. 
West side of Paulson Road 	Beginning at the north line of Donna Drive, thence northerly 100 feet. 
North side of Park Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 647 feet west of the west line of G Street, thence westerly 62 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 118 feet east of the east line of O Street, thence easterly 4 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 289 feet east of the east line of O Street, thence easterly 76 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 577 feet east of the east line of O Street, thence easterly 8 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is the west line of South N Street, thence westerly 352 feet. 
South side of 19th Street 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly 75 feet. 
North side of 19th Street 	Beginning at the west line of M Street, thence westerly 50 feet. 
Both sides of Malibu Court 	Beginning and ending with the east line of Heron Way. 
South side of Hawk Drive 	Beginning at a point that is 651 feet from the east line of Thornton Road, thence easterly to the east line of Heron Way. 
North side of Hawk Drive 	Beginning at the east line of Thornton Road, thence easterly to the east line of Heron Way. 
Both sides of Heron Way 	Beginning at the east line of Thornton Avenue, thence easterly 302 feet. 
North side of 14th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly to the east line of Canal Street. 
North side of McSwain Road 	Beginning with the west line of Highway 99 off ramp, thence westerly to east line of X Street. 
North side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at the west line of West Avenue, thence westerly to the east line of MacReady Drive. 
South side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 80 feet west of the west line of MacReady Drive, thence westerly 700 feet. 
South side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 50 feet east of the east line of MacReady Drive, thence easterly 523 feet. 
East side of MacReady Drive Intersection 	Beginning at the south line of Grogan Avenue, thence southerly 50 feet. 
West side of MacReady Drive Intersection 	Beginning at the south line of Grogan Avenue, thence southerly 50 feet. 
South side of MacReady Drive and the drive aisle within the parking lot at the Merced Municipal Airport 	From the Airport Terminal Building to a distance of a minimum of 300 feet. 
East side of southbound MacReady Drive, north side of eastbound MacReady Drive and west side of northbound MacReady Drive 	Beginning at the south line of Grogan Avenue, southerly along the easterly side of the southbound MacReady Drive, thence following the northerly side easterly, thence following the westerly side of the northbound movement of MacReady Drive to Grogan Avenue. 
South side of Gateway Circle 	Beginning at a point that is 150 feet south of the south line of Gateway Drive, thence southerly and easterly, thence northerly to a point on the north side of Gateway Drive for a distance of 805 feet. 
North side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the east line of X Street, thence easterly 329 feet. 
South side of Wardrobe Avenue 	Beginning at the west line of Grogan Avenue, thence westerly 235 feet. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the west line on M Street, thence westerly 75 feet. 
East side of Paulson Road 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet south of Century Circle, thence southerly 80 feet. 
West side of Paulson Road 	Beginning at a point that is 20 feet north of Doe Court, thence northerly 75 feet. 
Both sides of "V" Street 	Beginning at the north line of 11th Street, thence northerly 25 feet. 
Both sides of "V" Street 	Beginning at the south line of 11th Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
West side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the north line of East Olive Avenue, thence northerly 113 feet. 
Both sides of 20th Street 	Beginning at the west line of R Street, thence westerly 100 feet. 
Both sides of 20th Street 	Beginning at the east line of R Street, thence easterly 100 feet. 
Both sides of "N" Street 	Beginning at the north line of 22nd Street, thence northerly 20 feet. 
North side of 22nd Street 	Beginning at the east line on "N" Street, thence easterly 20 feet. 
North side of 22nd Street 	Beginning at the west line of "N" Street, thence westerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 196 feet east of the east line of "N" Street, thence easterly 22 feet. 
North side of 
Park Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 548 feet west of the west line of G Street, thence westerly 148 feet. 
South side of 
South East Bear Creek Drive 	Beginning at the east line of 6th Avenue, thence easterly 240 feet. 
Both sides of "N" Street 	Beginning at the south line at the end of the curb radius, thence southerly 20 feet. 
Both sides of 26th Street 	Beginning at the west line at the end of the curb radius, thence westerly 20 feet. 
Both sides of "N" Street 	Beginning at the north line at the end of the curb radius, thence northerly 20 feet. 
Both sides of 26th Street 	Beginning at the east line at the end of the curb radius, thence easterly 20 feet. 
South side of MacReady Drive and the drive aisle within the parking lot at the Merced Regional Airport 	From the airport terminal building to a distance of a minimum of 300 feet. 
North side of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of Yosemite Avenue and R Street to the northeast corner of San Augustine Avenue. 
South side of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the southeast corner of San Augustine Avenue to the southwest corner of Yosemite Avenue and R Street. 
North side of Destiny Drive 	Beginning at the northwest corner of Destiny Drive and Gardner Road westerly 1,242 feet. 
South side of Destiny Drive 	Beginning at the southwest corner of Destiny Drive and Gardner Road to the southeast corner of Destiny Drive and Cresendo. 
South side of Destiny Drive 	Beginning at the southeast corner of Cresendo to the westerly end of Destiny Drive. 
East side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the northeast corner of Childs Avenue to the southeast corner of East Highway 140. 
West side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of Childs Avenue to the southwest corner of East Highway 140. 
South side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of APN 059-450-47, 55 feet to the east commencing at the curb return of the driveway entrance 100 feet east. 
South side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of APN 059-450-47 beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance 100 feet west. 
North side of Santa Fe Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of Santa Fe Avenue 100 feet west of the intersection. 
East side of Nottingham Avenue 	Beginning at the northeast corner of Brookdale Drive and Nottingham Avenue north to the end of Nottingham Avenue. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point 370 feet from the west line of 'M' Street, thence westerly 222 feet. 
North side of Golden Oak Lane 	Beginning at the northeast corner of Golden Oak Lane thence westerly 50 feet. 
South side of Golden Oak Lane 	Beginning at the southeast corner of Golden Oak Lane thence westerly to the southeast corner of Kelly Avenue. 
West side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of Brookdale Drive thence northerly to 25 feet past the beginning of the right turn lane. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at the southwest corner of 2525 Cooper Avenue beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance, then westerly 40 feet. 
North side of Cooper Avenue 	Beginning at the southeast corner of 2525 Cooper Avenue beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance, then easterly 40 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of 618 East Alexander Avenue beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance, then westerly 8 feet 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the northeast corner of 618 East Alexander Avenue beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance, then easterly 8 feet 
North side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at the eastern return of Sarasota Avenue, thence easterly 25 feet 
North side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at western return of Sarasota Avenue, thence westerly 25 feet 
North side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at the eastern return of San Isidro Avenue, thence easterly 25 feet 
North side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at western return of San Isidro Avenue, thence westerly 25 feet 
South side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of West Avenue, thence westerly 170 feet. 
East side of West Avenue 	Beginning at the northern return of West 2nd Street, thence northerly 130 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of West Avenue, thence easterly 455 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of South S Street, thence westerly 150 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of South R Street, thence westerly 453 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of South R Street, thence westerly 370 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of Q Street, thence westerly 225 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of Q Street, thence easterly 967 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of South M Street, thence westerly 165 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of South M Street, thence westerly 372 feet. 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of West 5th Street, thence westerly 200 feet 
North side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence westerly 215 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of South G Street, thence westerly 1,383 feet. 
South side of Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of South G Street, thence easterly 1,575 feet. 
South side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at the southeast corner of North Highway 59, thence easterly 15 feet. 
South side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at western return of the west driveway at 3360 North Highway 59, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of Buena Vista Drive 	Entire length between both driveways at 3360 North Highway 59. 
South side of Buena Vista Drive 	Beginning at eastern return of the east driveway at 3360 North Highway 59, thence easterly 25 feet. 
West side of V Street 	Beginning at the northern curb return of West 20th Street, thence northerly 20 feet 
East side of V Street 	Beginning at the southern curb return of West 20th Street, thence southerly 20 feet 
North side of West 25th Street 	Beginning at western [curb] return of R Street, thence westerly 15 feet 
South side of West 25th Street 	Beginning at western curb return of R Street, thence westerly 21 feet 
Both sides of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at the east side of G Street, thence easterly to the east city limit 
North side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at the southwest corner of 2051 Grogan Avenue beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance, thence westerly 25 feet 
North side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at the southeast corner of 2051 Grogan Avenue beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance, thence easterly 45 feet 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the northwest corner of 672 E. Alexander Avenue beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance, then westerly 8 feet 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the northeast corner of 672 E. Alexander Avenue beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance, then easterly 8 feet 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance to 506 E. Alexander Avenue, then westerly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance to 506 E. Alexander Avenue, then easterly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance to 634 E. Alexander Avenue, then westerly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern returnof the driveway entrance to 634 E. Alexander Avenue, then easterly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance to 712 E. Alexander Avenue, then westerly to the eastern return of the driveway entrance to 686 E. Alexander Avenue. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance to 712 E. Alexander Avenue, then easterly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance to 730 E. Alexander Avenue, then westerly 8 feet. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance to 730 E. Alexander Avenue, then easterly to the crosswalk. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the western return of the driveway entrance to 756 E. Alexander Avenue, then westerly to the crosswalk. 
South side of Alexander Avenue 	Beginning at the eastern return of the driveway entrance to 756 E. Alexander Avenue, then easterly to the western return of the driveway entrance to 780 E. Alexander Avenue. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the southern return of the driveway facing Canal Street for the entrance to 459 West 25th Street, then southerly 8 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the northern return of the driveway facing Canal Street for the entrance to 459 West 25th Street, then northerly 8 feet. 
East side of N Street 	Beginning at the point that is 84 feet north of the eastern curb return of West 18th Street, the northerly to the northwest property line of APN 031-054-022 
South side of West 14th Street 	Beginning at the west line of V Street, then westerly through the entire radius of the cul-de-sac 
East side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at the southern curb return of Childs Avenue, thence southerly to the northwest property line of APN 061-400-083. 
South side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at the northeast property line of APN 236-310-007, thence westerly 20 feet. 
West side of Kibby Road 	Beginning 185 feet north of the southeast property line of APN 061-340-017, thence northerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 22 nd Street 	Beginning at the point that is 117 feet west of the western curb return of M Street, thence westerly 7 feet. 
South side of West 22 nd Street 	Beginning at the point that is 149 feet west of the western curb return of M Street, thence westerly 15 feet. 
North side of West Childs Avenue 	Beginning at the northeast curb return, thence easterly to the westerly driveway approach of 1055 W. Childs Avenue. 
West side of Cypress Way 	Beginning at the southern return of the driveway entrance to 1705 Cypress Way, then southerly 15 feet. 
West side of Park Avenue 	Beginning at the northern return of both driveway entrances to 2813 Park Avenue, then northerly 15 feet. 
West side of Park Avenue 	Beginning at the southern return of both driveway entrances to 2813 Park Avenue, then southerly 15 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2302 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2295 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2290 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2282 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2279 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2262 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2258 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2242 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2238 §§ 1, 2, 2006; Ord. 2223 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2219 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 2209 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2196 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2187 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2180 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2176 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2170 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2164 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2160 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2159 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2158 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2147 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2145 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2142 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2141 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2138 §§ 1, 2, 2003; Ord. 2124 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2119 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2114 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2110 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2104 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2086 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 2075 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2071 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2067 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2041 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2036 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2026 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2019 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2013 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1995 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1993 §§ 1, 2, 1998: Ord. 1991 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1975 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1967 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1952 §§ 1, 4, 1997: Ord. 1957 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1946 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1945 §§ 1, 3, 1996: Ord. 1938 §§ 1, 2, 1996: Ord. 1933 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1930 §§ 1, 3, 1996: Ord. 1919 §§ 1, 2, 1995: Ord. 1917 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1916 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1914 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1911 § 3, 1995: Ord. 1904 §§ 1, 2, 1995: Ord. 1887 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1884 §§ 1, 2, 1994: Ord. 1883 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1881 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1875 § 9, 1994: Ord. 1866 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1864 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1859 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1851 §§ 2, 3, 1993: Ord. 1835 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1833 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1827 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1814 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1812 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1770 §§ 1, 2, 1990: Ord. 1763 §§ 1, 2, 1990: Ord. 1759 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1744 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1732 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1715 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1712 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1706 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1702 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1681 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1676 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1673 §§ 5, 6, 1987: Ord. 1669 §§ 1, 2, 1987: Ord. 1661 § 2, 1987: Ord. 1658 §§ 1, 2, 1987: Ord. 1652 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1644 § 3, 1987: Ord. 1641 §§ 1, 2, 1986: Ord. 1624 §§ 1, 2, 1986: Ord. 1618 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1610 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1608 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1605 §§ 1, 2, 1986: Ord. 1602 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1594 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1587 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1586 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1576a § 1, 1985: Ord. 1572 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1574 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1560 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1552 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1547 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1532 § 3, 1984: Ord. 1525 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1524 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1522 §§ 1, 2, 1984: Ord. 1517 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1511 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1507 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1498 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1493 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1484 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1480 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1477 § 2, 1983: Ord. 1473 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1465 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1452 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1444 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1435 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1349 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1331, 1980: Ord. 1281 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1277 § 6, 1979: prior code § 16.61.5). 
(Ord. No. 2327, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 2328, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 2332, § 1, 3-20-2009; Ord. No. 2343, § 15, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 2347, § 1, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 2368, § 1, 3-21-2011; Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 4-4-2011; Ord. No. 2373, § 1, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 2383, § 1, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 2392, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2401, § 1, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 2408, § 1, 6-3-2013; Ord. No. 2411, § 1, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2415, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2422, § 1, 4-21-2014; Ord. No. 2423, § 1, 4-21-2014; Ord. No. 2429, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 2430, § 1, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2435, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2437, § 1, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 2448, § 1, 10-5-2015; Ord. No. 2453, § 1, 1-4-2016; Ord. No. 2455, § 1, 3-7-2016; Ord. No. 2458, § 3, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2459, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2466, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 2472, § 2, 2-6-2017; Ord. No. 2481, § 1, 12-18-2017)  
10.28.231 - No truck parking zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any truck, trailer or semi-trailer along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of Grogan Avenue 	Beginning at the west side of West Avenue westerly to the east line of MacReady Drive. 
South side of Cone Avenue 	Beginning at the East Avenue line of G Street, thence easterly to the east city limits. 
Both sides of Yosemite Parkway 	Beginning at the east line of Highway 99, thence easterly to the west line of Bradley Overpass. 
Both sides of State Highway 140 	Beginning at the east line of Massasso Street thence easterly to the west line of X Street. 
East side of X Street 	Beginning at the north line of State Route 140, thence northerly to the northerly end of X Street at West 13th Street. 
 
(Ord. 2187 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2180 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2160 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2153 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2127 § 1, 2003). 
(Ord. No. 2403, § 1, 2-4-2013; Ord. No. 2415, § 3, 11-18-2013)  
10.28.232 - Recreational vehicle parking. 
When signs are erected in accordance with Section 10.28.210 to give notice thereof, no person, except in a recreational vehicle, shall park a vehicle in a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 9 	The southerlymost space in row 11 and the second space from the south end of row 10. 
No. 10 	The southerlymost space in row 8 and the second space from the south end of row 9. 
 
(Ord. 1875 § 19, 1994).  
10.28.233 - No parking zones—Limited hours. 
When signs are erected in accordance with Section 10.28.210 to give notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle at any time on any day between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
Both sides of Nottingham Avenue 	Beginning at the north line of Brookdale Drive, thence northerly to the end of Nottingham Avenue. 
 
(Ord. 1881 § 1, 1994).  
10.28.235 - Motorcycle parking. 
A.  Motorcycles—Generally. The city engineer shall designate parking spaces on-street and in public off-street parking which shall be reserved for motorcycles as defined in Section 400 of the California Vehicle Code. On-street parking for motorcycles shall be designated by sign or pavement marking. Off-street public parking stalls for motorcycles shall be designated by sign, pavement marking legend or motorcycle symbol. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle other than a motorcycle in a parking stall designated and identified by appropriate sign, symbol or legend reserved for motorcycles only. 
B.  Motorcycles—Parking lots. When signs are erected or marking is in place in accordance with subsection A of this section to give notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle other than a motorcycle in a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 7 	The area north of the northerlymost stall in the westerlymost row of parking spaces. 
No. 9 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, the area south of the southerlymost spaces in rows 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. 
No. 10 	Starting from the most westerly row of parking spaces and moving easterly, the area south of the southerlymost space in rows 2 through 13. 
 
C.  Motorcycles—On-street parking. When authorized signs or markings are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a motorcycle along the following portions of streets: 
Street 	Portion 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet south of the south line of 18th, thence southerly 10 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet north of the north line of Main Street, thence northerly 10 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet south of the south line of Main Street, thence south 10 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2101 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1887 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 4, 5, 1993: Ord. 1571 § 1, 1985).  
10.28.240 - Manner of parking inside markings. 
When the signs and parking space markings authorized by Section 10.28.230 are placed in the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked, other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Prior code § 16.62).  
10.28.245 - Large truck parking for Department of Motor Vehicle testing only. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraph are designated as large truck parking zones for Department of Motor Vehicle testing only during the time period of eight a.m. to five p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
West side of T Street 	Beginning at West 13th Street, thence south to West 12th Street. 
 
(Ord. 1727 § 2, 1988).  
10.28.250 - Overtime parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place on any street, alley or other public place, giving notice of time limitation on parking, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in any such street, alley or public place for a period of time longer than indicated by such signs or curb markings. Such signs or curb markings may indicate the hours and days during which such time limitations are in force. If no other hours or days are indicated upon such signs or curb markings, the time limitations shall be in force between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(Prior code § 16.63).  
10.28.260 - Official parking. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized to select and designate, and to install appropriate signs to identify certain parking stalls on streets or alleys and in public off-street parking lots, for use only by vehicles specifically authorized or permitted by the city. Any vehicle authorized or permitted to park in such designated and identified parking shall bear a distinctive insignia, seal, decal or other marking, identifying such vehicle as one so authorized or permitted. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to suffer or permit a vehicle of which he is the registered owner to be parked in any parking stall designated and identified by appropriate signs as reserved for official parking only, or, police vehicles only, or words of like or similar import, unless such vehicles bear a distinctive insignia, seal, decal or other marking issued by or approved by the city, identifying such vehicle as one authorized or permitted to park in such parking stall. 
(Prior code § 16.64).  
10.28.270 - Disabled persons—Generally. 
A.  The city engineer shall designate spaces on-street and in public off-street parking which shall be reserved for disabled persons to whom has been issued a special license plate or special placard authorized by Section 9105 of 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  On-street parking for disabled persons shall be designated by a blue curb as provided in Section 10.28.180 and, in addition to blue paint, the space may also be indicated by signs or other suitable means according to Vehicle Code Section 22511.7. 
C.  Off-street public parking stalls for disabled persons shall be designated in either of the following ways: 
1.  By posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background; 
2.  By outlining or painting the stall or space and outlining on the ground in the stall or space in white or suitable contrasting color a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant. 
D.  The posting required for an off-street parking facility owned or operated either privately or by a local authority shall consist of a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one (1) inch in height which clearly and conspicuously states the following: 
"Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense." 
E.  The sign shall be posted in either of the following locations: 
1.  Immediately adjacent to, or visible from, the stall or space; 
2.  In a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. 1589 § 5, 1985: Ord. 1208 § 2, 1978: prior code § 16.65).  
10.28.275 - Disabled persons—On-street parking. 
When signs are erected in accordance with Section 10.28.270 of this chapter to give notice thereof, no person, except a disabled person who has been issued a special license plate or placard by the state, shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle along the following portion of the following street: 
Street 	Portion 
North side of Madison Court 	Beginning at a point that is 75 feet west of the west line of Denver Avenue, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of West 6th Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 214 feet east of the west line of S Street, thence east 24 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 20th Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
South side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 120 feet east of the east line of H Street, thence easterly 25 feet. 
North side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 200 feet west of the west line of I Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 141.5 feet west of the centerline of Q Street, thence westerly 40 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 218 feet west of the centerline of P Street, thence westerly 40 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 187 feet west of the centerline of O Street, thence westerly 40 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 142 feet west of the centerline of N Street, thence westerly 40 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 133.5 feet east of the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence easterly 40 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 145.6 feet east of the centerline of I Street, thence easterly 40 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 100.5 feet east of the centerline of H Street, thence easterly 40 feet. 
West side of K Street 	Beginning at a point that is 77 feet south of the centerline of West Main Street, thence southerly 35 feet. 
West side of K Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet south of the south line of West 11th Street, thence southerly 50 feet. 
South side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet west of the west line of K Street, thence westerly 50 feet. 
West side of Saratoga Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 240 feet from the south line of Gettysburg Avenue, thence southerly 25 feet. 
West side of South Fork Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 214 feet from the north line of Westfall Avenue, thence northerly 25 feet. 
South side of 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 185 feet west of the west line of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence westerly 25 feet. 
North side of West 19th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 129 feet west of the west line of O Street, thence westerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 85 feet from the east line of Q Street, thence easterly 20 feet. 
South side of West 19th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 40 feet from the east line of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence easterly 25 feet. 
South side of West 21st Street 	Beginning at a point that is 80 feet east of the east line of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, thence easterly 20 feet. 
North side of West 21st Street 	Beginning at a point that is 133 feet east of the east line of "R" Street, thence easterly 20 feet. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at a point that is 358 feet south of the south line of West 22nd Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
East side of K Street 	Beginning at the northeast curb return, thence northerly through the distance of two angled on-street disabled persons parking spaces. 
 
(Ord. No. 2322, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2320, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. 2312 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2311 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2308 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2303 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2296 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2295 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2258 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2242 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2238 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2229 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2206 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2187 § 5, 2005; Ord. 2180 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2160 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2159 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2147 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2138 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2137 § 3, 2003; Ord. 2101 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2103 §§ 1, 2, 2002; Ord. 2086 §§ 3, 4, 2002; Ord. 2080 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2053 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2044 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2041 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2036 §§ 2, 3, 2000: Ord. 2034 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2019 § 2, 1999: Ord. 2014 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2001 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1990 §§ 1, 2, 1998: Ord. 1971 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1968 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1846 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1835 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1626 § 1, 1986). 
(Ord. No. 2334, § 1, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 2335, § 1, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 2339, § 1, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 2352, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2355, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 2356, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 2357, § 1, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 2378, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2391, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2419, § 1, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 2472, § 3, 2-6-2017)  
10.28.280 - Disabled persons—Parking lots. 
When signs are erected in accordance with Section 10.28.270 to give notice thereof, no person, except a disabled person who has been issued a special license plate or placard by the state, shall park a vehicle in a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 1 	Starting from the most westerly boundary of the lot and moving easterly, the northerlymost and southerlymost spaces in the fifth row. 
No. 3 	Two spaces in the most easterly row of parking, being the sixth and seventh spaces from the northerly end of the lot moving southerly. 
No. 4 	Three spaces southerlymost in the most easterly row of parking, located nearest 18th Street. 
No. 5 	The 11th and 12th spaces in the southerlymost row adjacent to 16th Street from the westerly end of the lot moving easterly, being the first and second spaces westerly of the driveway; and the northerlymost space in the fifth row. 
No. 7 	The northerlymost space in the westerly row, located nearest Main Street. 
No. 8 	The southerlymost space in the westerly row and the southerlymost space in the easterly row. 
No. 9 	Starting from the west and moving easterly, the most southerly space in the second row from the east, being row 13; the two most northerly spaces in the easterlymost row nearest Canal Street, being row 14; and the most easterly space in the southerly row along West 16th Street nearest Canal Street. 
No. 10 	The most northerly spaces in row 8 and row 9, the most southerly space in the easterlymost row nearest K Street, being row 14; and the most easterly space in the southerly row along 16th Street nearest K Street. 
No. 12 	The two most northerly spaces in the most easterly row. 
No. 13 	Two spaces in the row along 18th Street, one on each side of the driveway opening. 
No. 14 	The southerlymost space in the westerlymost row; and the space west of the driveway entrance at 18th Street. 
No. 15 	The northerlymost space in the easterly row adjacent to N Street. 
Stefani Parking Lot 	Starting from the most easterly boundary of the lot, the southerlymost two (2) spaces in the easterly row. 
 
(Ord. 2290 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1935 §§ 3, 4, 1996: Ord. 1908 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1838 § 5, 1992: Ord. 1722 § 4, 1988: Ord. 1589 § 6, 1985: Ord. 1503 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1257 § 1, 1979: prior code 16.65.1).  
10.28.285 - City employee parking. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person except in a city vehicle or in a vehicle bearing an authorized city placard shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a city parking lot or portion thereof between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within a city parking lot or portion thereof as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
Lot No. 15 	All parking spaces in such Lot No. 15. 
Ralph 
Shannon 
Parcade 	Starting from the top of the structure moving down, the first 68 spaces shall be reserved specifically for city vehicles and/or city employee use as determined by the city manager. On the second deck, the nine spaces fronting the westerlymost wall and the three most westerly spaces on the northern wall shall be reserved for city vehicle and/or city employee use as determined by the city manager. 
 
(Ord. 2277 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2041 § 3, 2000: Ord. 1959 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1935 § 5, 1996: Ord. 1875 § 11, 1994: Ord. 1838 § 7, 1992: Ord. 1722 § 5, 1988: Ord. 1589 § 7, 1985: Ord. 1416 § 5, 1981: prior code § 16.65.2).  
10.28.290 - Commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, upon any street within any residential district of the city, if such vehicle has a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, for any purpose other than making pickups or deliveries of persons, goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure, located on such street or for any purpose other than delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. A residential district of the city is any area of the city which is classified as residential under the provisions of Title 18. 
(Ord. 1271 § 1, 1979: prior code § 16.66).  
10.28.293 - Parking of trailers on Wardrobe Avenue prohibited. 
A.  A person shall not park any trailer or semitrailer upon Wardrobe Avenue unless the trailer or semitrailer is at all times while so parked attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semitrailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley, public way or public place. 
B.  This section shall not apply to trailers or semitrailers in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semitrailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semitrailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, public way or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking. 
(Ord. 1962 § 1, 1997).  
10.28.294 - Parking of trucks, trailers, and semitrailers—Limited time parking zones. 
No person shall park any truck, trailer or semitrailer between the hours of three-thirty a.m. and five-thirty a.m. along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
Both sides of Grogan Avenue 	From Wardrobe Avenue to West Avenue. 
Both sides of Macready Drive 	From Grogan Avenue to the southerly end of Macready Drive. 
Both sides of Hawk Drive 	From Thornton Avenue to Heron Way. 
Both sides of Heron Way 	From Hawk Drive to Thornton Avenue. 
Both sides of Eagle Street 	From Condor Drive to West Avenue. 
Both sides of 
Falcon Way 	From Condor Drive to the end of Falcon Way. 
Both sides of Malibu Court 	From Heron Way to the east end of Malibu Court. 
Both sides of Fly-In Way 	From Condor Drive to the end of Fly-In Way. 
Both sides of 
Flamingo Avenue 	From Falcon Way to West Avenue. 
Both sides of 
Cooper Avenue 	From State Route 59 (Snelling Highway) to Ashby Road. 
 
(Ord. 1978 § 1, 1997).  
10.28.295 - Limited time parking zones—Three hours. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than three hours between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
West side of I Street 	Beginning at the south line of Main Street, thence southerly 250 feet to the north line of the alley between Main Street and 16th Street. 
North side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 250 feet east of the east line of V Street, thence easterly 350 feet. 
Both sides of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of G Street, thence westerly to the east line of I Street. 
Both sides of H Street 	Beginning at the south line of West Main Street, thence southerly to the alley between West Main Street and West 16th Street. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 130 feet east of the west line of V Street, thence easterly 230 feet. 
North side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 80 feet east of the east line of R Street, thence easterly 220 feet. 
East side of Martin Luther King Jr. Way 	Beginning at a point that is 88 feet north of the north line of 16th Street, thence northerly 46 feet. 
East side of Martin Luther King Jr. Way 	Beginning at a point that is 200 feet north of the north line of 16th Street, thence northerly 66 feet. 
West side of N Street 	Beginning at the south line of Main Street, thence southerly to the north line of 16th Street. 
East side of Martin Luther King Jr. Way 	Beginning at a point that is 16 feet north of the alley, between West Main Street and West 18th Street, thence northerly 89 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the point that is 158 feet from the west line of 'G' Street, thence westerly 46 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2258 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2223 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2145 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2101 § 3, 2002; Ord. 2086 § 5, 2002; Ord. 2048 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2038 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2013 § 2, 1999: Ord. 1959 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1890 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1875 § 12, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 6, 7, 1993: Ord. 1849 § 3, 1993: Ord. 1838 § 10, 1992). 
(Ord. No. 2393, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2393, § 1, 8-6-2012)  
10.28.300 - Two-hour parking zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Sundays or holidays along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
West 19th Street 	Between a point 22 feet east of the easterly property line of Canal (L) Street, and 87 feet easterly thereof. 
North side of West 19th Street 	From a point which is 70 feet east of the easterly property line of M Street to a point which is approximately 310 feet easterly. 
West side of Canal Street 	From a point on the north property line of a 20-foot dedicated alley which runs east to west between West 18th and West 19th Street, thence north approximately 24 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the east property line of U Street, thence easterly 115 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the east property line of U Street, thence east a distance of 110 feet. 
East side of I Street 	From the north property line of West Main Street, north to the south property line of a 20-foot alley which runs east to west between West Main Street and West 18th Street. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point which is 20 feet west of the west property line of M Street, thence westerly 127 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of Q Street, thence westerly to the east line of R Street. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of P Street, thence westerly to the east line of R Street. 
West side of Parsons Avenue 	From the south line of Childs Avenue, thence southerly 350 feet. 
East side of I Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence south 50 feet. 
West side of O Street 	Beginning at the south property line of West 22nd Street, thence southerly 165 feet to the alley between West 21st and West 22nd Streets. 
West side of O Street 	Beginning at the north property line of West 21st Street, thence northerly 150 feet to the alley between West 21st Street and West 22nd Street. 
North side of West 21st Street 	Beginning at the west property line of O Street, thence westerly 100 feet along the north line of West 21st Street. 
West side of I Street 	Beginning at a point that is on the north line of West Main Street, thence northerly 150 feet to the alley between West Main and West 18th Streets. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of U Street, thence westerly 250 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Between a point 75 feet east of the easterly property line of R Street and extending 132 feet easterly thereof. 
South side of West 26th Street 	Beginning at the east line of M Street, thence easterly 200 feet. 
West side of N Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence southerly 150 feet. 
North side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 62 feet. 
North side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 107 feet west of the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 245 feet. 
South side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 64 feet west of Canal Street, thence westerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 120 feet west of Canal Street, thence westerly 73 feet. 
North side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 55 feet west of Canal Street, thence westerly 65 feet. 
Both sides of Heron Way 	Beginning at a point that is 302 feet from the east line of Thornton Avenue, thence easterly to the west line of Hawk Drive. 
Both sides of West 18th Street 	Beginning at the west line of N Street, thence easterly to the east line of O Street. 
West side of Canal Street 	From a point on the north property line of West 18th Street to the south property line of the east-west dedicated alley between West 18th Street and West 19th Street. 
East side of Canal Street 	From a point on the north property line of West 18th Street to the south property line of the east-west dedicated alley between West 18th Street and West 19th Street. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at the west line of U Street, thence westerly 250 feet. 
Both sides of Barclay Way 	Beginning at the southern line of Mandeville Lane, thence southerly to the northern line of Gilmore Drive. 
 
(Ord. 2258 §§ 4, 5, 2006; Ord. 2223 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2187 § 7, 2005; Ord. 2160 § 4, 2004; Ord. 2145 §§ 3, 4, 2004; Ord. 2125 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2101 §§ 4, 5, 2002; Ord. 2062 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2050 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2013 §§ 3, 4, 1999: Ord. 1995 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1959 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1933 §§ 2, 3, 1996: Ord. 1875 § 13, 14, 1994: Ord. 1849 § 4, 1993: Ord. 1838 § 8, 1992: Ord. 1803 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1776 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1753 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1715 § 3, 1988: Ord. 1706 § 2, 1988: Ord. 1681 §§ 2, 3, 1987: Ord. 1669 § 3, 1987: Ord. 1661 §§ 3, 4, 1987: Ord. 1644 § 4, 1987: Ord. 1641 §§ 3, 4, 1986: Ord. 1618 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1594 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1589 § 8, 1985: Ord. 1532 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1464 § 2, 1982: Ord. 1432 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1391 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1390 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1377 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1366 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1362 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1343 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1329 §§ 1, 2, 1980: Ord. 1277 § 1, 1979: Ord. 1274 § 2, 1979: Ord. 1272 § 1, 1979: prior code § 16.68). 
(Ord. No. 2363, § 1, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2395, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 2418, § 1, 1-6-2014; Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2453, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
10.28.305 - Two-hour parking zones—Midweek. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park to any vehicle for a period of time longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays or holidays along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of Fairfield Drive 	From M Street to Collins Drive. 
East side of Collins Drive 	From Olive Avenue thence northerly to a point that is 325 feet east of the east line of M Street. 
West side of Collins Drive 	From Olive Avenue thence northerly to a point that is 556 feet east of the east line of M Street. 
South side of West 23rd Street 	From the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 200 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	From the south line of West 23rd Street, thence southerly to the alley between West 22nd and West 23rd Streets. 
East side of Park Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of College Green Drive, thence southerly to a point that is 160 feet north of the north line of Alexander Avenue. 
West side of Park Avenue 	Beginning at the south line of College Green Drive, thence southerly to a point that is 160 feet north of the north line of Alexander Avenue. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 6 feet west of the west property line of N Street, thence easterly 112 feet to a point that is 6 feet east of the east line of N Street. 
South side of West 27th Street 	From the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 150 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2134 §§ 2, 3, 2003; Ord. 1990 §§ 3, 4, 1998: Ord. 1968 §§ 2, 3, 1997: Ord. 1952 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1946 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1938 § 4, 1996: Ord. 1814 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1782 § 3, 1991: Ord. 1641 § 7, 1986).  
10.28.320 - One-hour parking zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than one (1) hour at any time between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. of any day, except Sundays or holidays, along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet west of the west line of O Street, thence west 50 feet. 
South side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 50 feet west of the west line of Q Street, thence west 50 feet. 
West side of O Street 	From the alley between Main and 18th Streets, north 150 feet to 18th Street. 
South side of 18th Street 	From O Street westerly 150 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2038 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1851 §§ 8, 9, 1993: Ord. 1602 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1366 § 3, 1980: Ord. 1277 § 3, 1979: prior code § 16.67).  
10.28.330 - Thirty-minute parking zones—Nine a.m. to five p.m. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between nine a.m. and five p.m., except Sundays and holidays along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
North side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 23 feet westerly of the westerly line of M Street, thence westerly 177 feet. 
East side of V Street 	Beginning at a point that is the intersection of the north line of West Main Street and the east line of V Street, thence northerly 122 feet. 
East side of Q Street 	Beginning at the north line of West Main Street, thence northerly to the alley between West Main and West 18th Street. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point that is 97 feet north of the north line of West Main Street, thence northerly 22 feet. 
West side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point that is 97 feet north of the north line of West Main Street, thence northerly 22 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 153 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 22 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 147 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 22 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 171 feet west of the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 22 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 182 feet west of the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 18 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 155 feet east of the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 18 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 140 feet east of the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 18 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 135 feet east of the east line of K Street, thence easterly 18 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 172 feet west of the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 18 feet. 
East side of N Street 	Beginning at a point that is 38 feet north of the alley between 16th Street and Main Street, thence northerly 22 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is 25 feet south of the south line of the alley, thence southerly 20 feet. 
North side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 160 feet west of the west line of K Street, thence westerly 20 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 60 feet westerly of the west line of Canal Street, thence westerly 24 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 172 feet east of the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 24 feet. 
North side of 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 67 feet from the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 22 feet. 
South side of 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 96 feet from the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 22 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at the north line of West 8th Street, thence northerly 90 feet. 
North side of West 8th Street 	From the east line of M Street, thence easterly 50 feet. 
North side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at the west line of G Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
North side of Main Street 	Beginning at a point which is 15 feet west of the westerly property line of N Street, thence west 23 feet. 
South side of West 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 42 feet from the west line of G Street, thence westerly 20 feet. 
South side of Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 158 feet from the west line of G Street, thence westerly 109 feet. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 75 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 95 feet. 
North side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 160 feet east of the northwest intersection of West Main Street and "O" Street, thence easterly 44 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2258 §§ 6, 7, 2006; Ord. 2243 §§ 1, 2, 2006; Ord. 2206 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2153 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2145 § 5, 2004; Ord. 2141 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2101 § 6, 2002; Ord. 2054 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1995 § 3, 1998: Ord. 1945 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1908 § 2, 1995: Ord. 1901 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1887 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1875 § 16, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 10, 11, 1993: Ord. 1849 § 5, 1993; Ord. 1838 § 9, 1992: Ord. 1800 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1753 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1744 § 3, 1989: Ord. 1732 § 2, 1989: Ord. 1731 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1673 § 7, 1987: Ord. 1661 § 5, 1987: Ord. 1644 § 5, 1987: Ord. 1608 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1602 § 3, 1985: Ord. 1594 § 3, 1985: Ord. 1587 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1579 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1577 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1545 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1532 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1481 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1469 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1451 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1388 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1366 § 4, 1980: Ord. 1277 § 5, 1979: prior code § 16.71). 
(Ord. No. 2389, § 1, 6-4-2012; Ord. No. 2393, § 2, 8-6-2012)  
10.28.335 - Thirty-minute parking zones—All day. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes along the following portion of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 82 feet east of the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly 90 feet. 
North side of West 19th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet west of the west line of G Street, thence westerly 50 feet. 
North side of West 11th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 117 feet east of the east line of N Street, thence easterly 36 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2229 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1938 § 5, 1996: Ord. 1904 § 3, 1995).  
10.28.340 - Thirty-minute parking zones—Eight a.m. to four p.m. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between eight a.m. and four p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays along the following portion of the following street: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 146 feet east of the east line of S Street, thence easterly 96 feet. 
East side of E Street 	Beginning at the northeast corner of E Street and 11th Street, thence northerly 105 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2036 § 5, 2000). 
(Ord. No. 2383, § 2, 12-19-2011)  
10.28.341 - Thirty-minute parking zones—Eight-thirty a.m. to one-thirty p.m. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays along the following portion of the following street: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 206 feet west line of R Street, thence westerly 80 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2330, § 1, 4-6-2009)  
10.28.350 - Ten-minute parking zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes at any time between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays or holidays along the following portions of the following streets: 
Street 	Portion 
West side of I Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 18th Street, thence south 50 feet. 
South side of West 26th Street 	Beginning at the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 80 feet. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at a point that is 80 feet south of the south line of West 22nd Street, thence southerly 72 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2295 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2101 § 7, 2002; Ord. 2036 § 4, 2000: Ord. 1959 § 4, 1997: Ord. 1875 § 18, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 12, 13, 1993: Ord. 1800 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1718 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1605 § 3, 1986: Ord. 1274 § 1, 1979: prior code 16.69).  
10.28.360 - Stop intersections. 
The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, determine those streets at which vehicles trav eling on intersecting streets shall be brought to a full stop before entering such intersection, and the city engineer shall designate such streets and intersections by appropriate signs or markings. 
(Prior code § 16.100).  
10.28.370 - Two-way stop intersections. 
The driver of any vehicle upon approaching the entrances of any of the following intersections signposted with a stop sign shall stop: 
A.  At a limit line if marked, otherwise, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if not marked, then before entering the intersection; or 
B.  At any point within the intersection as required by a stop sign; and after such stop the driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles on that part of any street protected by any stop sign which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he can proceed with reasonable safety. A driver, having yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on that part of the street protected by the stop sign shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle about to enter or cross the protected part of the street. 
Approaching Streets 
Required to Stop 	At Any Entrance 
Thereof With 
	
11th Street 	P Street 
12th Street 	H Street 
12th Street 	Q Street 
East 23rd Street 	Orchard Lane 
West 9th Street 	S Street 
West 9th Street 	T Street 
West 10th Street 	T Street 
West 11th Street 	Canal Street 
West 11th Street 	O Street 
West 11th Street 	Q Street 
West 11th Street 	T Street 
West 12th Street 	Canal Street 
West 12th Street 	P Street 
West 13th Street 	B Street 
West 14th Street 	Canal Street 
West 14th Street 	O Street 
West 15th Street 	D Street 
West 19th Street 	I Street 
West 21st Street 	O Street 
West 20th Street 	H Street 
West 22nd Street 	Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 
West 22nd Street 	U Street 
West 23rd Street 	Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 
West 23rd Street 	U Street 
West 24th Street 	U Street 
West 26th Street 	Canal Street 
Almond Avenue 	Motel Drive 
Ballantyne Drive 	Laughlin Lane 
Beals Avenue 	Yosemite Avenue 
Branco Avenue 	SE Bear Creek Drive 
Brookdale Avenue 	Parsons Avenue 
Calimyrna Avenue 	East 20th Street 
Cherokee Avenue 	Columbia Avenue 
Childs Avenue 	Highway 99 Off-Ramp 
College Drive 	Yosemite 
College Green Drive 	Park Avenue 
Conestoga Drive 	Austin Avenue 
Cooper Avenue 	Frontage Road 
Cooper Avenue 	Snelling Highway (Hwy. 59) 
Creekwood Drive 	Snelling Highway (Hwy. 59) 
Del Rio Court 	Paseo Verde Drive 
Del Sol Court 	Paseo Verde Drive 
E Street 	East 13th Street 
East 13th Street 	B Street 
East Donna Drive 	Cascade Creek Avenue 
El Portal Drive 	Campus Drive 
F Street 	East 22nd Street 
Flamingo Avenue 	West Avenue 
Gove Road 	Dickenson Ferry 
Green Street 	Santa Fe Avenue 
Grogan Avenue 	Wardrobe Avenue 
Hansen Avenue 	Oleander Avenue 
I Street 	West 12th Street 
I Street 	West 19th Street 
I Street 	West 20th Street 
K Street 	West 12th Street 
K Street 	West 21st Street 
K Street 	West 25th Street 
K Street 	West 26th Street 
K Street 	West 27th Street 
Kibby Road 	California Route, Hwy. 140 
Kibby Road 	Childs Avenue 
Lopez Avenue 	West Avenue 
Los Verdes Avenue 	Buena Vista Drive 
MacReady Drive 	Grogan Avenue 
Main Street (East) 	Yosemite Park Way 
Merced Avenue 	Motel Drive 
Motel Drive 	Yosemite Park Way 
N Street 	West 11th Street 
O Street 	22nd Street 
O Street 	West Main Street 
Orchard Lane 	East 20th Street 
P Street 	West 22nd Street 
Park Avenue 	West Alexander Avenue 
Parsons Avenue 	Childs Avenue 
Parsons Avenue 	Gerard Avenue 
Parsons Avenue 	Yosemite Park Way 
Paseo Redondo Drive 	Paseo Verde Drive 
Paseo Verde Drive 	Buena Vista Drive 
Pine Street 	Almond Avenue 
Q Street 	West 22nd Street 
Rice Court 	El Portal Drive 
Rose Avenue 	Merced Avenue 
S Street 	2nd Street 
S Street 	23rd Street 
S Street 	West 11th Street 
S Street 	West 19th Street 
S Street 	West 22nd Street 
Saint Michelle 	Park Avenue 
San Felipe Court 	Buena Vista Drive 
San Jacinto Court 	Buena Vista Drive 
San Mateo Court 	Buena Vista Drive 
San Ramon Court 	Buena Vista Drive 
Santa Fe Avenue (West) 	U Street 
Shirley Street 	Merced Avenue 
Snowbird Court 	Donna Drive 
Steamboat Drive 	Donna Drive 
Sundance Drive 	Donna Drive 
Sydney Lane 	McSwain Road 
T Street 	West 19th Street 
T Street 	West 22nd Street 
T Street 	23rd Street 
Teak Avenue 	Parsons Avenue 
Thornton Road 	Dickenson Ferry 
Tower Road 	California Route, Hwy. 140 
Tower Road 	Childs Avenue 
U Street 	West 11th Street 
U Street 	West 19th Street 
W Street 	West 9th Street 
W Street 	West 11th Street 
Wathen Avenue 	Donna Drive 
West 10th Street 	S Street 
West Avenue 	Wardrobe Avenue 
West 3rd Street 	S Street 
West 10th Street 	N Street 
West 9th Street 	O Street 
West 7th Street 	Canal Street 
 
(Ord. 2279 § 6, 2007; Ord. 2271 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2264 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2243 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2238 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2234 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2229 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2223 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2176 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2104 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2101 § 8, 2002; Ord. 2084 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2058, 2001: Ord. 2041 §§ 4, 5, 2000: Ord. 1979 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1914 § 2, 1995: Ord. 1911 § 4, 1995: Ord. 1904 § 4, 1995: Ord. 1901 § 2, 1995: Ord. 1896 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1860 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1851 §§ 14, 15, 1993: Ord. 1804 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1800 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1793 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1785 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1753 § 3, 1990: Ord. 1730 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1718 § 7, 1988: Ord. 1681 § 4, 1987: Ord. 1652 § 2, 1987: Ord. 1624 § 3, 1986: Ord. 1608 § 3, 1986: Ord. 1587 § 3, 1985: Ord. 1586 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1524 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1518 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1516 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1439 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1428 § 2, 1982: Ord. 1383 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1373 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1296 § 1, 1980: prior code § 16.100.1). 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 4-6-2009; Ord. No. 2394, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 2435, § 2, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2448, § 2, 10-5-2015)  
10.28.380 - Stop intersections designated. 
The driver of any vehicle upon approaching any entrance of any of the following intersections signposted with a stop sign shall stop: 
A.  At a limit line, if marked, otherwise before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if not marked, then before entering the intersection; or 
B.  At any point within the intersection as required by a stop sign; and after such stop the driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles on that part of any street protected by any stop sign which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he can proceed with reasonable safety. A driver having yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on that part of the street protected by the stop sign shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle about to enter or cross the protected part of the street. 
Intersection of North Rambler Road and West Alexander Avenue; 
Intersection of Alexander Avenue and Tahoe Drive; 
Intersection of Alexander Avenue and Oleander Avenue; 
Intersection of Glen Avenue and Santa Fe Drive; 
Intersection of 13th Street and M Street; 
Intersection of 13th Street and G Street; 
Intersection of West Main Street and V Street; 
Intersection of West 19th Street and H Street; 
Intersection of Brookdale Drive and Shamrock Avenue; 
Intersection of Brookdale Drive and Cherokee Avenue; 
Intersection of West 8th Street and R Street; 
Intersection of West 8th Street and M Street; 
Intersection of West 20th Street and O Street; 
Intersection of West 18th Street and Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
Intersection of Childs Avenue and Parsons Avenue; 
Intersection of West 12th Street and O Street; 
Intersection of West 7th Street and T Street; 
Intersection of West 11th Street and K Street; 
Intersection of West 15th Street and O Street; 
Intersection of East Olive Avenue and McKee Road; 
Intersection of West 8th Street and W Street; 
Intersection of East Donna Drive and Cordova Avenue; 
Intersection of El Portal Drive and Cordova Avenue; 
Intersection of El Portal Drive and Vernal Avenue; 
Intersection of Brookdale Drive and El Capitan Avenue; 
Intersection of Donna Drive and Wathen Avenue; Intersection of Parsons Avenue and Alexander Avenue; 
Intersection of 22nd and I Street; 
Intersection of West 21st Street and U Street; 
Intersection of West 8th Street and Canal Street; 
Intersection of Yosemite Avenue and Mansionette Avenue; 
Intersection of 4th Avenue and East 26th Street; 
Intersection of Loughborough Drive and Bismarck Drive; 
Intersection of Loughborough Drive and Denver Avenue; 
Intersection of West 27th Street and Canal Street; 
Intersection of West 27th Street and I Street; 
Intersection of Gerard Avenue and Coffee Street; 
Intersection of West 13th Street and Canal Street; Intersection of Park Avenue and West Alexander Avenue; 
Intersection of Sonora Avenue and Cordova Avenue; 
Intersection of Carol Avenue and Merced Avenue; 
Intersection of Quail and Partridge Avenues; 
Intersection of West 26th and I Street; 
Intersection of West 25th and I Street; 
Intersection of Grogan Avenue and West Avenue; 
Intersection of West 26th Street and K Street; 
Intersection of West 25th Street and K Street; 
Intersection of West 18th Street and K Street; 
Intersection of West 4th Street and T Street; 
Intersection of West 4th Street and S Street; 
Intersection of West 6th Street and T Street; 
Intersection of West 6th Street and S Street; 
Intersection of Mansionette Drive and Cormorant Drive; 
Intersection of West 15th Street and M Street; 
Intersection of El Portal Drive and Joerg Avenue; 
Intersection of Paulson Road and Donna Drive; 
Intersection of Green Street and East 27th Street; 
Intersection of 11th Street and D Street; 
Intersection of 11th Street and E Street; 
Intersection of 22nd Street and S Street; 
Intersection of West 21st Street and Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
Intersection of East Olive Avenue and Parsons Avenue; 
Intersection of East South Bear Creek Drive and 4th Avenue; 
Intersection of Childs Avenue and G Street; 
Intersection of Paulson Road and Cormorant Drive; 
Intersection of West 19th Street and O Street; 
Intersection of Dinkey Creek Avenue and Manzanita Drive; 
Intersection of Dinkey Creek Avenue and Watertown Drive; 
Intersection of G Street and 11th Street; 
Intersection of Yosemite Avenue and El Redondo Drive; 
Intersection of Yosemite Avenue and San Augustine Avenue; 
Intersection of Yosemite Avenue and Gardner Avenue; 
Intersection of Silverado Avenue and Cypress Point Drive; 
Intersection of G Street and Gerard Avenue; 
Intersection of N Street and 23rd Street; 
Intersection of West 18th Street and "N" Street; 
Intersection of Yosemite Avenue and Stadium Way; 
Intersection of Lopes Avenue and Linda Lane; 
Intersection of Sydney Lane and Wind Rose Lane/Rose Marie Lane; 
Intersection of Lopes Avenue and Alexis Avenue; 
Intersection of Dinkey Creek Avenue and Squaw Valley Drive; 
Intersection of Cone Avenue and G Street; 
Intersection of East South Bear Creek Drive at Parsons Avenue, east and west side; 
East and west side of the intersection of West 27th Street at K Street; 
East and west side of the intersection of Baxter Drive at Alviso Drive; 
Intersection of West 15th Street and Canal Street; 
The intersection of West Main Street and T Street; 
The intersection of Blix Avenue and Albert Drive/Azalea Court; 
The intersection of East South Bear Creek Drive and Glen Avenue; 
Intersection of R Street and Childs Avenue. 
(Ord. 2307 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2306 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2304 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2296 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2295 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2290 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2286 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2280 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2278 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2268 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2242 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2234 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2223 § 5, 2006; Ord. 2187 § 8, 2005; Ord. 2164 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2160 § 5, 2004; Ord. 2145 § 6, 2004; Ord. 2142 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2116 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2109 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2086 § 6, 2002; Ord. 2080 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2063 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2061 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2052 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2041 § 6, 2000: Ord. 2037 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2029 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2028 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1980 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1979 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1975 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1953 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1948 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1914 § 3, 1995: Ord. 1901 § 3, 1995: Ord. 1889 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1883 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1860 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1851 §§ 16, 17, 1993: Ord. 1835 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1816 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1804 § 2, 1992: Ord. 1783 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1753 § 4, 1990: Ord. 1706 § 3, 1988: Ord. 1681 § 5, 1987: Ord. 1610 § 2, 1986: Ord. 1608 § 4, 1986: Ord. 1510 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1506 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1383 § 2, 1981: Ord. 1365 § 1, 1980). 
(Ord. No. 2336, § 1, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 2342, § 1, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 2361, § 2, 11-15-2010; Ord. No. 2362, § 1, 11-15-2010; Ord. No. 2383, § 3, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 2387, § 1, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 2388, § 1, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 2394, § 2, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2432, § 1, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2448, §§ 3, 4, 10-5-2015; Ord. No. 2472, § 4, 2-6-2017)  
10.28.390 - Through streets requiring arterial stops at intersections therewith. 
A.  The following named streets presently or hereafter within the city limits are designated and declared to be through streets or highways at the entrance or entrances to which, as herein indicated, the driver of any vehicle is required to stop when signs are posted giving notice thereof, and to yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through street or highway or which are approaching so closely on the through street or highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, and who shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he can proceed with reasonable safety. 
B.  A driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the through street or highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so about to enter or cross the through street or highway: 
1.  West 8th Street: From the east line of V Street to the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, except at its intersection with R Street, M Street, and Canal Street; 
2.  East 13th Street: From the east line of G Street to the west line of B Street; 
3.  West 13th Street: From the east line of V Street to the west line of G Street; 
4.  East 16th Street: From the east line of G Street to the west line of Yosemite Park Way (California Route, Highway 140); 
5.  West 16th Street: From the west city limits to the west line of G Street; 
6.  West 18th Street: From the east line of V Street to the west line of G Street; 
7.  West 19th Street: From the east line of R Street to the west line of M Street, except at its intersection with Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
8.  West 20th Street: From the east line of V Street to the west line of M Street; 
9.  East 21st Street: From the east line of G Street to the easterly city limit; 
10.  West 21st Street: From the east line of Canal Street to the west line of G Street, except at its intersection with Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
11.  G Street: From the north line of Childs Avenue to the north city limits; 
12.  Martin Luther King, Jr. Way: From the south city limit line to the south line of West 21st Street, except at its intersection with West 18th Street; 
13.  K Street: From the north line of West 18th Street to the south line of West 25th Street, except at its intersection with West 21st Street; 
14.  M Street: From the north city limits to the south city limits; 
15.  R Street: From the north line of Childs Avenue to the north city limits; 
16.  V Street: From the west line of West Avenue to the south line of West 24th Street; 
17.  East Alexander Avenue: From a point 120± feet west of the westerly line of Nottingham Lane to the west line of Parsons Avenue; 
18.  East North Bear Creek Drive: From the east line of G Street to the easterly city limits; 
19.  West North Bear Creek Drive: From the west line of Creekwood Drive to the west line of G Street; 
20.  Canal Street: From the north line of West 13th Street to the south line of West 27th Street, except at its intersections with West 21st Street and West 26th Street; 
21.  Childs Avenue: From the east line of West Avenue to the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
22.  Childs Avenue: From the east line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to the easterly city limits, except at its intersection with Parsons Avenue; 
23.  Gerard Avenue: From Parsons Avenue to the easterly city limits; 
24.  Glen Avenue: From the north line of Yosemite Park Way to the south line of South East Bear Creek Drive, except at its intersection with Santa Fe Avenue; 
25.  West Main Street: From the east line of V Street to the west line of G Street; 
26.  East Main Street: From the east line of G Street to the north line of Yosemite Park Way (California Route, Highway 140); 
27.  McKee Road: From the northerly city limits, except at its intersection with Olive Avenue; 
28.  McSwain Road (California Route, Highway 140): From the west city limits to the west line of V Street; 
29.  East Olive Avenue: From the easterly city limits, except at its intersection with McKee Road; 
30.  West Olive Avenue: From the west city limit line to the west line of G Street; 
31.  Santa Fe Avenue: From the east line of G Street to the easterly city limits, except at its intersection with Glen Avenue; 
32.  West Avenue: From a point 1,000± feet south of Flamingo Road to the south line of Highway 140; 
33.  Yosemite Park Way: From the east line of Edwards Avenue to the Bradley Overpass; 
34.  Yosemite Park Way: From the State Highway 99 off-ramp to the south line of East 21st Street; 
35.  East Alexander Avenue: From the east line of Parsons Avenue to the west line of McKee Road; 
36.  Loughborough Drive: From the north line of Olive Avenue to the west line of R Street; 
37.  Parsons Avenue: From the south line of Childs Avenue to the north line of Gerard Avenue; 
38.  Lopes Avenue: From the west line of West Avenue to the westerly city limit line, except at its intersections with Linda Lane and Alexis Avenue; 
39.  Donna Drive: From the east line of G Street to the easterly city limit line, except at Cordova Avenue; 
40.  El Portal Drive: From the east line of G Street to the easterly city limit line, except at Cordova Avenue, Vernal Avenue, and Joerg Avenue; 
41.  Yosemite Avenue: From the westerly city limit line to the easterly city limit line; 
42.  Buena Vista Drive: From the west line of M Street to the westerly city limit line, except at its intersection with R Street; 
43.  Alfarata Boulevard: From the south line of Gerard Avenue to the north line of Mission Avenue; 
44.  East 27th Street: From Glen Avenue to McKee Road; 
45.  Gardner Road: From Yosemite Avenue to the northerly city limit line; 
46.  Thornton Road: From State Route 140 to Dickinson Ferry Road; 
47.  Cormorant Drive: From G Street to Paulson Road, except at its intersection with Mansionette Drive; 
48.  Carmen Way: From G Street to Las Brisas Street; 
49.  Joerg Avenue: From Yosemite Avenue to El Portal Drive; 
50.  Paulson Road: From Yosemite Avenue to the north city limit line, except at its intersection with Cormorant Drive; 
51.  Gerard Avenue: From the east line of Highway 59 to the east city limit, except at its intersection with G Street. 
(Ord. 2307 § 3, 2008; Ord. 2304 §§ 2, 3, 2008; Ord. 2286 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2280 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2229 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2145 §§ 7, 8, 2004; Ord. 2116 §§ 2, 3, 2003; Ord. 2109 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2086 § 7, 2002; Ord. 2080 §§ 2, 3, 2002; Ord. 2070 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2001: Ord. 2014 § 2, 1999: Ord. 2013 § 5, 1999: Ord. 1979 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1946 §§ 3, 4, 1996: Ord. 1911 § 5, 1995: Ord. 1860 § 3, 1993: Ord. 1851 §§ 18, 19, 1993: Ord. 1804 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1783 § 2, 1991: Ord. 1755 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1753 § 5, 1990: Ord. 1702 § 2, 1988: Ord. 1706 § 5, 1988: Ord. 1661 § 6, 1987: Ord. 1608 §§ 5, 6, 1986: Ord. 1594 § 4, 1985: Ord. 1518 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1454 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1383 § 3, 1981).  
10.28.400 - Alley stop intersections. 
The driver of any vehicle upon approaching the entrances of any of the following alley intersections signposted with a stop sign shall stop: 
A.  At a limit line, if marked, otherwise before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if not marked, then before entering the intersection; or 
B.  At any point within the intersection as required by a stop sign; and after such stop the driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles on that part of any street protected by any stop sign which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he can proceed with reasonable safety. A driver, having yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on that part of the street protected by the stop sign shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle about to enter or cross the protected part of the street: 
Approaching Streets 
Required to Stop 	At Any Entrance 
Thereof With 
The alley between West 16th Street and West 17th Street (westbound only) 	K Street 
The alley between West 16th Street and West 17th Street (westbound only) 	L Street 
The alley between West 16th Street and West 17th Street (westbound only) 	M Street 
The alley between West 16th Street and West 17th Street (westbound only) 	N Street 
The alley between West 17th Street and West 18th Street (eastbound only) 	K Street 
The alley between West 17th Street and West 18th Street (eastbound only) 	L Street 
The alley between West 17th Street and West 18th Street (eastbound only) 	M Street 
The alley between West 17th Street and West 18th Street (westbound only) 	O Street 
The alley between West 23rd Street and West 24th Street (eastbound only) 	L Street 
 
(Ord. 1383 § 4, 1981).  
10.28.410 - Yield intersections. 
A.  The driver of any vehicle upon approaching the entrance of any of the following intersections signposted with a yield sign shall not enter such intersection at a speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, and shall slow down and stop if necessary and yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from an intersecting street or which are approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute an immediate hazard and shall continue to yield the right-of-way to such approaching vehicles until such time as he can proceed with reasonable safety. 
B.  A driver, having so yielded, may then proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to him: 
1.  Eastbound traffic on West Olive Avenue yields to southbound traffic on G Street on the southwest corner of the intersection; 
2.  Northbound traffic on G Street yields to eastbound traffic on East North Bear Creek Drive at the southwest corner of the intersection; 
3.  Southbound traffic on G Street yields to westbound traffic on West North Bear Creek Drive at the northwest corner of the intersection; 
4.  Q Street yields to traffic on West 25th Street; 
5.  On Childs Avenue eastbound traffic turning north onto B Street yields to westbound traffic turning north on B Street; 
6.  On East 27th Street, eastbound and westbound traffic yield to southbound and northbound traffic on 4th Avenue; 
7.  H Street yields to traffic on West 22nd Street; 
8.  On Quail Avenue, northbound and south-bound traffic yield to eastbound and westbound traffic on Mallard Drive; 
9.  On 21st Street, eastbound and westbound traffic yield to southbound and northbound traffic on "T" Street. 
(Ord. 2295 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2290 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2282 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2243 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1883 § 5, 1994: Ord. 1428 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1383 § 5, 1981).  
10.28.420 - Leased parking spaces. 
A.  Leased parking spaces shall be located in city lots, parking authority lots, the Shannon Parcade and the Merced Center Garage in a manner that will promote the public good and enhance customer access to downtown businesses. The number and location of such spaces shall be designated by the Director of Economic Development of the City of Merced for city-owned parking lots (including the Shannon Parcade) and the executive director of the parking authority or his/her designee for parking authority owned parking lots (including the Merced Center Garage). Any parking space in any city lot, parking authority lot, the Shannon Parcade or the Merced Center Garage described in this section shall become a leased parking space when signed or marked to indicate its reserved status. The provisions of this section shall supersede any other designation in this chapter except those spaces provided for the disabled. In the event a parking space is released from the lease program by the director of economic development or the executive director of the parking authority, it shall revert to its current designation in this chapter. 
1.  When a space is signed or marked indicating that it is a leased space, no person, except the person who has been issued a lease permit by the city or parking authority, shall park a vehicle in the spaces so designated as follows: 
Parking Lot 	Portion 
No. 1 	Row 1 (most westerly) and all of Row 2. 
No. 1 Extension 	All spaces in rows 2 and 3, and five (5) most northerly spaces in row 4. 
No. 5 	Row adjacent to West 16th Street running east to west. 
No. 7 	3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th spaces from the alley in Row 2. 
No. 8 	Four spaces in Row 1 closest to the alley. 
No. 9 	Row adjacent to West 16th Street running east to west. 
No. 10 	Row adjacent to West 16th Street running east to west. 
No. 12 	Row 1 
No. 14 	Rows 1 and 10 and the row adjacent to West 18th Street. 
Transpo Parking Lot 	All spaces on the southerly side of the Transpo Center Building. 
Ralph Shannon Parcade 	All of the interior rows of the second and third levels of the garage. 
Merced Center Garage 	All spaces on all levels of the garage. 
 
B.  Persons desiring to lease reserved parking spaces shall apply to the city finance department for a permit and pay the first quarter lease amount in advance. The cost of a lease permit shall be set by resolution of the city council. No refund will be issued for any unused portion for the quarter or in the event parking is unavailable due to special events or maintenance shutdowns. The permit shall be transferable. Permits to lease such spaces shall entitle the possessor of such permit to use any reserved space in the lot number designated on the permit from the hours of seven a.m. through six p.m. Monday—Friday. The permit shall be displayed in the vehicle by attaching it to the rear view mirror of the vehicle as directed. 
C.  Any person parking in a reserved space which has been signed or marked shall be guilty of an infraction and shall pay a fine as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2253 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1935, § 6, 1996: Ord. 1901 § 4, 1995: Ord. 1890 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1887 §§ 4, 5, 1994: Ord. 1876 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1839 § 1, 1992). 
(Ord. No. 2324, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 2428, § 1, 6-2-2014)  
10.28.430 - Downtown parking. 
In accordance with Section 10.28.210, when signs are erected giving notice of "customer parking only," no business owner, employee, or student shall park within the customer parking area while working at a place of business or attending school, or cause, allow, suffer or permit any motor vehicle owned, operated or controlled by any of them to be so parked between the hours of nine a.m. and four p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays. 
(Ord. 1875 § 1, 1994).  
10.28.440 - Information required of businesses. 
Every business owner or public educational institution whose business or classroom is located within the customer parking area shall furnish the finance officer with the following information: 
A.  By no later than August 1, 1994, and then annually by January 1 of each year, the full name of all such owners, employees and students working or attending class within the customer parking area, and the license number of every vehicle owned, operated or controlled by any of them. 
B.  Any change to the information provided in subsection A above within ten (10) calendar days of such change. 
C.  The information required by this section shall be supplied in a manner and on forms prescribed by the finance officer or his/her designee. 
D.  No person who receives or has knowledge or possession of information required by this section may divulge in any manner such information to any person not associated with the administration or enforcement of this section and Section 10.28.430. 
(Ord. 1875 § 2, 1994).  
10.28.450 - Definitions. 
For purposes of Sections 10.28.430 and 10.28.440, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Business" refers to a commercial, professional service enterprise, or public or private educational institution. 
B.  "Customer parking area" is that area within the city of Merced described as follows: 
Commencing at a point that is the intersection of the centerline of West 18th Street and the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, said point being the true point of beginning; 
1.  Thence southwesterly along the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to a point on the centerline of West 16th Street; 
2.  Thence northwesterly along said centerline of West 16th Street to a point on the centerline of N Street; 
3.  Thence northeasterly along said centerline of N Street to its intersection with the centerline of the alley between West 18th Street and West 19th Street; 
4.  Thence southeasterly along the centerline of said alley to a point in the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; 
5.  Thence southwesterly along said centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to its intersection with the centerline of West 18th Street said point being the point of commencement. 
C.  "Employee" means any person who is working for a business, whether paid or unpaid. 
D.  "Student" means any person who is scheduled to attend a class held by a public educational institution for fifteen (15) or more hours per week. 
(Ord. 1875 § 3, 1994).  
10.28.460 - Penalty. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person upon conviction of each violation of Section 10.28.430 or 10.28.440 shall pay a fine as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1875 § 4, 1994).  
Chapter 10.32 - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
10.32.010 - Permit—Generally. 
The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to allow the backing of a vehicle to the curb or parking in alleys where parking is otherwise prohibited, for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials or performing work or services on adjacent property, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this chapter, and it is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Prior code § 16.73).  
10.32.020 - Zones—Indicated by curb marking. 
A.  Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow painted line upon the top of all curbs within such zones and appropriate signs. 
B.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line on the top of all curbs in such zones and appropriate signs. 
(Prior code § 16.74).  
10.32.025 - Zones—Indicated by crosshatched line. 
A.  Passenger loading zones within a parking lot or parking facility may be marked by crosshatched lines and if so marked are exclusively designated for the loading and unloading of vehicles. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle within the area designated for the loading and unloading of vehicles pursuant to subsection A of this section in any off-street parking facility whether publicly or privately owned and maintained. 
C.  The fine for parking within an area marked by crosshatched lines adjacent to a stall or space designated for disabled persons and disabled veterans shall be the same fine that is imposed for violation of subsection (a) of Section 22507.8 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1902 § 1, 1995).  
10.32.030 - Zones—Administration. 
The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, determine those locations to be used for passenger loading zones and freight and passenger loading zones, and the city engineer shall designate such places by appropriate signs, parking signs or curb markings. 
(Prior code § 16.76).  
10.32.040 - Zones—Restrictions. 
No automobile or other vehicle shall be parked or stopped in any freight and passenger loading zone, except those legitimately engaged in loading or unloading materials or passengers, and the parking time shall not exceed the time legitimately required for the purpose of loading or unloading materials or passengers. 
(Ord. 1277 § 7 (part), 1979: prior code § 16.77(1)).  
10.32.050 - Freight and passenger loading zones—Locations. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as freight and passenger loading zones during the time period of nine a.m. to five p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
West side of M Street 	Beginning at the intersection of the north line of the alley south West 13th Street, thence northerly 150 feet. 
North side of Teak Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 160 feet east of the east line of Parsons Avenue, thence easterly 30 feet. 
North side of East 16th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 683 feet east of the east line of G Street, thence easterly 25 feet. 
West side of Laurel Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet south of the south line of East 19th Street, thence southerly 58 feet. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 379 feet east of the east line of O Street, thence easterly 20 feet. 
South side of West Main Street 	Beginning at a point that is 43 feet west of the west line of M Street, thence westerly 25 feet. 
South side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 99 feet west of the west line of R Street, thence westerly 72 feet. 
East side of N Street 	Beginning at the point that is 44 feet north of the eastern curn return of West 18th Street, then northerly 40 feet. 
North side of East 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 45 feet from the east line of G Street, thence easterly 65 feet 
 
(Ord. 2182 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2104 § 3, 2002: Ord. 2048 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2001 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1975 § 2, 1997: Ord. 1901 § 5, 1995: Ord. 1890 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 20, 21, 1993: Ord. 1778 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1608 § 7, 1986; Ord. 1545 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1519 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1366 § 5, 1980: Ord. 1343 §§ 3, 4, 1980: Ord. 1329 § 4, 1980: Ord. 1277 § 7 (part), 1979: prior code § 16.77(2)). 
(Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 5-3-2010; Ord. No. 2458, § 4, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2459, § 3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 2466, § 3, 9-6-2016)  
10.32.051 - Freight and passenger loading zones—Locations—Seven a.m. to four p.m. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as freight and passenger loading zones during the time period of seven (7) a.m. to four (4) p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
South side of East 20 th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 24 feet west of the centerline of Willow Avenue, thence easterly 66 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2466, § 4, 9-6-2016)  
10.32.055 - Passenger loading zones—Locations—Nine a.m. to five p.m. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as passenger loading zones during the time period of nine a.m. to five p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
South side of 19th Street 	Beginning at a point which is 202 feet east of the easterly property line of N Street, thence easterly 48 feet. 
North side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point which is 261 feet east of the easterly property line of M Street, thence easterly 30 feet. 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 162 feet west of the west line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence westerly 26 feet. 
East side of Canal Street 	Beginning at a point that is 37 feet south of the south line of West 20th Street, thence south 72 feet. 
West side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is 50 feet north of the alley between Main Street and 18th Street, thence southerly 30 feet. 
East side of M Street 	Beginning at a point on the east line of M Street that is 24 feet north of the north line of West 18th Street, thence northerly 70 feet. 
East side of P Street 	Beginning at a point that is 32 feet south of the south line of West 20th Street, thence southerly 25 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2313 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2057 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1928 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1887 § 6, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 22, 23, 1993: Ord. 1850 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1782 §§ 4, 5, 1991: Ord. 1661 § 7, 1986: Ord. 1641 § 5, 1986: Ord. 1521 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1519 § 2, 1984).  
10.32.056 - Passenger loading zones—Permanent. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as passenger loading zones at all times, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
West side of Laurel Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is 100 feet north of Yosemite Park Way, thence northerly 30 feet. 
South side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 20 feet east of the east line of M Street, thence west 40 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2137 § 4, 2003; Ord. 2134 § 4, 2003; Ord. 2086 § 8, 2002; Ord. 1763 § 3, 1990).  
10.32.057 - Passenger loading zones—Locations—Seven a.m. to four p.m. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as a passenger loading zone during the time period of seven a.m. and four p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Street 	Portion 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at the south line of West 21st Street, thence southerly to the north line of West 20th Street. 
South side of 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 240 feet west of the west line of Ashwood Drive, thence westerly 60 feet. 
South side of east 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 204 feet east of the east line of "F" Street, thence easterly 20 feet. 
South side of West 8th Street 	Beginning at a point that is 80 feet west of the west line of "N" Street, thence westerly 500 feet. 
 
(Ord. 2278 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2182 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2036 § 6, 2000). 
(Ord. No. 2363, § 2, 12-6-2010)  
10.32.058 - Passenger loading zones—Locations—Seven a.m. to eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. to three-thirty p.m. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following are designated as a passenger loading zone during the time period of seven a.m. to eight-thirty a.m., and one-thirty p.m. to three-thirty p.m., excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays: 
Street 	Portion 
South side of West 22nd Street 	Beginning at a point that is 206 feet west line of R Street, thence westerly 80 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2330, § 2, 4-6-2009)  
10.32.059 - Accessible passenger loading zones. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, the locations described in the following paragraphs are designated as accessible passenger loading zones at all times, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Street: 	Portion: 
East side of N Street 	Beginning at the point that is 24 feet north of the eastern curb return of West 18th Street, then northerly 20 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2458, § 5, 5-2-2016)  
10.32.060 - Use of alleys—Generally. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley lying within, forming the boundary of, or immediately adjacent to, property zoned C-2, as provided in Title 18, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same and in no event for longer than sixty (60) minutes; except as provided in Sections 10.32.070 and 10.32.080; however, at no time shall the alley be blocked so as to hinder, delay or prevent the free passage of police and fire equipment or other vehicles thereon. 
(Prior code § 16.78 (part)).  
10.32.070 - Use of alleys—Permit. 
The chief of police in the instances mentioned in Section 10.32.080 may extend the commercial loading and unloading time limit provided for in Section 10.32.060 to such additional time as in his discretion he may deem necessary for loading or unloading purposes, which extension of time shall be evidenced by a written permit issued by him. 
(Prior code § 16.78 (part)).  
10.32.080 - Use of alleys—Permit—Conditions. 
The chief of police may issue a permit to delivery or service vehicles as provided in Section 10.32.070 for parking in alleys without regard to time limit on the following conditions: 
A.  The vehicle for which the permit is issued must have either a valid commercial license or a passenger commercial license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles under the appropriate laws of the state and rules and regulations of the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
B.  The firm or person receiving the permit for the vehicle must have a business license from the city and must make application to the chief of police for a special permit for exemption from the provisions of Section 10.32.060. 
C.  The chief of police, before approving the application and issuing the permit, must find that the applicant has no other suitable place to park his delivery or service vehicle and that it is actually necessary to the transaction of the applicant's business. 
D.  The applicant shall pay an initial application fee of five dollars ($5.00) and a yearly fee of thirty-six dollars ($36.00) payable in advance of the issuance of the permit. The permit shall be for a period of one (1) year and, if applicant desires to have it extend beyond the one-year period, application must be made for a renewal upon the conditions of this section; provided, however, that no initial application fee shall be charged the applicant. 
E.  The permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if the privilege of parking without regard to time limit is abused in any way. The permit shall be usable only on the vehicle for which it was issued and will be nontransferable to any other vehicle; provided, however, that in the event the vehicle is replaced by the permittee, a replacement permit may be issued by the chief of police upon proof by the permittee to the chief of police of such replacement and surrender of the original permit. The replacement permit in such event shall be valid for the duration of the time remaining on the original permit. 
(Prior code § 16.78 (part)).  
10.32.090 - Bus zones—Generally. 
A.  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish bus zones. 
B.  The city engineer shall paint a red line upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as bus zones and erect appropriate signs. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, except a bus, in a bus zone. 
(Prior code § 16.79).  
10.32.100 - Bus zones—Location. 
When signs are erected in accordance with Section 10.32.090 to give notice thereof, no person, between eight a.m. and four p.m. on days school is in session, shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus, in the following locations: 
Street 	Portion 
On East 19th Street on the northerly curb line 	Beginning at a point which is the southerly end of an eighty-four (84) foot curb return on Laurel Avenue, thence westerly along East 19th Street a distance of two hundred twenty (220) feet. 
On the north side of West 25th Street 	Beginning at a point which is the west property line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, extended, thence easterly three hundred sixty (360) feet. 
On the easterly curb line of S Street 	Beginning at a point which is fifty-seven (57) feet south of the south property line of West 22nd Street, thence south eighty-three (83) feet. 
On the easterly curb line of T Street 	Beginning at a point six (6) feet south of the centerline of West 5th Street, thence south a distance of two hundred forty (240) feet. 
On the south side of East 15th Street 	Beginning at a point which is thirty (30) feet west of the centerline of D Street, thence westerly a distance of thirty-five (35) feet. 
On the north side of East 15th Street 	Beginning at a point which is the west property line of D Street extended, thence westerly a distance of forty (40) feet. 
On Canal Street, south of Bob Hart Square 	Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the north property line of the alley which runs east and west between West 16th Street and Main Street, and the east property line of Canal Street, thence west fifteen (15) feet to a point on the curb; thence following this curb line which is concave to the north and running generally west for a distance of sixty (60) feet. 
On the south side of East 20th Street 	Beginning at a point that is three hundred ninety (390) feet east of the east line of G Street, thence easterly one hundred seventy-eight (178) feet. 
On the westerly curb line of N Street 	Beginning at the southerly property line of an alley which runs east and west between West 12th Street and West 13th Street, thence south eighty-four (84) feet. 
On the west side of M Street 	Beginning at a point which is the centerline of West 12th Street extended, thence north along the curb line a distance of seventy-nine plus or minus (79±) feet to the point of beginning, thence northerly forty (40) feet. 
On the east side of E Street 	Beginning ten feet north of the north property line of East 11th Street, thence north seventy (70) feet. 
On N Street on the easterly curb line 	Beginning at a point that is thirty-six (36) feet north of the north property line of West Main Street, thence northerly twenty-two (22) feet along said curb line. 
On the easterly curb line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way 	Beginning at a point that is twenty (20) feet north of the north property line of West Main Street, thence northerly twenty (20) feet along said curb line. 
On the west side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between Main Street and 18th Street, thence southerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the west side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 20th and 21st Streets, thence southerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the west side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 22nd and 23rd Streets, thence southerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the west side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 25th and 26th Streets, thence southerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the west side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 18th Street and 19th Street, thence southerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the east side of G Street 	Beginning at the north line of Childs Avenue, thence northerly fifty-five (55) feet. 
On the east side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 18th Street and 19th Street, thence northerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the east side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 20th Street and 21st Street, thence northerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the east side of G Street 	Beginning at the alley between 22nd Street and 23rd Street, thence northerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the east side of G Street 	Beginning at the north line of East 25th Street, thence northerly twenty (20) feet. 
On the east side of M Street 	Beginning at the south line of 13th Street, thence south twenty-five (25) feet. 
On the east side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is thirty-eight (38) feet from the north line of the alley between 18th and 19th Streets, thence northerly twelve (12) feet. 
On the west side of M Street 	Beginning at a point that is eighty (80) feet north of the alley between Main Street and 18th Street, thence southerly fifty (50) feet. 
On the south side of West 27th Street 	Beginning at a point that is one hundred forty (140) feet east of the east line of M Street, thence east twenty (20) feet. 
On the south side of West 18th Street 	Beginning at a point that is sixty-four (64) feet east of the east line of N Street, thence easterly forty-eight (48) feet. 
On the south side of West 15th Street 	Beginning at a point that is two hundred (200) feet east of the east line of Canal Street, thence easterly seventy (70) feet. 
On the east side of Parsons Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is three hundred ten (310) feet north of the north line of Childs Avenue, thence northerly one hundred five (105) feet. 
On the south side of Gerard Avenue 	Beginning at the east line of Buckner Road, thence easterly to the west line of Brimmer Road. 
On the west side of West Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is three hundred fifteen (315) feet north of Lopes Avenue, thence northerly one hundred (100) feet. 
On the north side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is ten (10) feet west of the line of D Street, thence easterly eighty (80) feet. 
On the north side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at a point that is forty (40) feet east of the east line of D Street, thence easterly thirty (30) feet. 
On the south side of East 13th Street 	Beginning at the east line of D Street, thence easterly sixty (60) feet. 
On the south side of West 13th Street 	Beginning at the west line of N Street, thence westerly seventy (70) feet. 
On the south side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at a point on the east line of Santa Rosa Court, thence easterly seventy (70) feet. 
On the north side of Loughborough Drive 	Beginning at a point on the east line of Santa Rosa Court, thence easterly fifty-five (55) feet. 
On the north side of West 24th Street 	Beginning at a point that is fifty (50) feet west of the center line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, thence easterly sixty (60) feet. 
On the east side of Meadows Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is sixty (60) feet from the south line of Olivewood Drive, thence southerly twelve (12) feet. 
On the south side of Yosemite Avenue 	Beginning at a point that is twenty (20) feet from the west line of Parsons Avenue, thence westerly twelve (12) feet. 
East side of S Street 	Beginning at a point that is sixty-seven (67) feet from the beginning of the southeast line of West 22nd Street, thence southerly two hundred twenty-six (226) feet. 
 
(Ord. 2170 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2101 § 9, 2002; Ord. 2045 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2010 §§ 1, 2, 1999: Ord. 1949 §§ 1, 2, 1996: Ord. 1928 §§ 2, 3, 1996: Ord. 1900 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1887 § 7, 1994: Ord. 1851 §§ 24, 25, 1993: Ord. 1827 § 3, 1992: Ord. 1727 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1661 § 8, 1987: Ord. 1641 § 6, 1986: Ord. 1610 § 3, 1986: Ord. 1608 § 8, 1986: Ord. 1499 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1492 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1479 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1468 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1442 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1366 § 6, 1980: Ord. 1353 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1298 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1267 § 1, 1979: prior code § 16.79.1). 
(Ord. No. 2351, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
10.32.105 - School bus loading zones. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person between seven a.m. and four p.m. on days school is in session, shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus, in the following locations: 
Street 	Portion 
	
East side of E Street 	Beginning at a point two hundred fifty-one (251) feet south of the south line of 13th Street, thence southerly one hundred fourteen (114) feet. 
 
(Ord. 2223 § 6, 2006; Ord. 1914 § 4, 1995). 
(Ord. No. 2363, § 3, 12-6-2010)  
10.32.110 - Taxicab zones—Generally. 
A.  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish taxicab zones and stands. 
B.  The city engineer shall place appropriate signs or curb markings to indicate such designated zones or stands. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, except a taxicab, in a taxicab zone or stand. 
(Ord. 1176 § 1, 1976: prior code § 16.80).  
10.32.120 - Mail deposit zone. 
The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish mail deposit zones for vehicles. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a mail deposit zone except for the time necessary to deposit mail from such vehicle into the mailbox adjacent to the curb in such designated mail deposit zones. 
(Ord. 1176 § 3, 1976: prior code § 16.80.1).  
Chapter 10.40 - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
10.40.010 - Designated. 
The following named streets in the city are designated as truck routes: 
A.  West 13th Street from G Street to V Street; 
B.  West Highway 140 (Mc Swain Road) from its intersection with V Street to the westerly city limits; 
C.  West 16th Street from the westerly city limits to G Street; 
D.  East 16th Street from G Street to Yosemite Parkway; 
E.  Yosemite Parkway from its intersection with East 16th Street to the easterly city limits; 
F.  G Street from the northerly city limits to 13th Street; 
G.  Martin Luther King, Jr. Way from West 16th Street to Childs Avenue; 
H.  V Street from West 16th Street to West Avenue; 
I.  Childs Avenue from westerly city limit to Highway 99; 
J.  West Olive Avenue from Highway 59 to the easterly city limits; 
K.  Kibby Road from Yosemite Parkway to Childs Avenue; 
L.  Parsons Avenue from Yosemite Parkway to Childs Avenue; 
M.  West Avenue from V Street to Childs Avenue; 
N.  Highway 59 (Snelling Road) from 16th Street to northerly city limits. 
O.  M Street from West 16th Street to Olive Avenue; and, 
P.  East Childs Avenue from Highway 99 to the easterly city limits; however, trucks shall be prohibited on this segment between the hours of seven a.m. to nine a.m. and from one p.m. to four p.m. Mondays through Fridays unless a local delivery is being made that is accessible only by using this road segment during the restricted hours. 
(1)  Subsection P above shall automatically be repealed by the earlier occurrence of one (1) of the following events: 
(i)  The passage of the date of September 3, 2010, without the completion of the Campus Parkway segment to Childs Avenue; or 
(ii)  The completion of the Mission Interchange and Campus Parkway segment to Childs Avenue that allows trucks to directly access to and from the McLane-Pacific facility from the Mission Interchange, unless a later enacted Ordinance extends or shortens the duration of Subsection P. 
(Ord. 1952 § 3, 1997: Ord. 1851 §§ 26, 27, 1993: Ord. 1550 § 1, 1984: prior code § 16.95). 
(Ord. No. 2325, § 1, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 2346, § 1, 2-1-2010)  
10.40.020 - Trucks exceeding weight limit—Prohibited where. 
It is unlawful for any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of six tons to use any street in the city, other than those designated in Section 10.40.010, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 16.96).  
10.40.030 - Direct route deliveries. 
Any vehicle to which this chapter is applicable may use any street by direct route to or from a street the use of which is not restricted, for the purpose of delivering or loading for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Prior code § 16.97).  
10.40.040 - Signs. 
The city engineer is authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs either indicating those streets affected by this chapter or those streets not so affected. 
(Prior code § 16.98).  
10.40.050 - Exception. 
Any passenger stage or vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Section 50-1/2 of the Public Utilities Act shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 16.99).  
Chapter 10.44 - BICYCLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2491, § 1, adopted August 20, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 10.44, §§ 10.44.010—10.44.170, and enacted a new Ch. 10.44 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.44 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior Code; Ord. 1153, adopted 1975; Ord. 1558, adopted 1984; and Ord. 1851, adopted 1993. 
 
10.44.010 - Bicycle defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "bicycle" means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears, and which has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.020 - Bicycle registration. 
No person shall ride, operate or use a bicycle upon any public street or highway in the city without first registering the bicycle on a national bicycle registry. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.030 - Registration—Operation restricted. 
When registered, bicycle registration shall entitle the owner to ride such bicycle for which the registration has been issued upon all the streets, public highways and designated bicycle trails of the city. Bicycles may also be ridden on all the sidewalks of the city except the following, when appropriate signs are displayed thereon: Main Street from G to V Street, 18th Street from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to N Street, I Street from 16th to 18th Street, Martin Luther King, Jr. Way from 16th to 18th Street, K Street from 16th to 18th Street, Canal Street from 16th to 18th Street, M Street from 16th to 20th Street and N Street from 16th to 18th Street. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.040 - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
The operator of any bicycle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.050 - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing and in no event at a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit applicable to motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.060 - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalks or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.070 - Riding on sidewalks. 
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. At the intersection of two (2) or more sidewalks, where the vision of the operator of a bicycle is so restricted by hedges, bushes, buildings, or any other obstruction so that the approach of a pedestrian cannot be observed and there is danger of a collision with the pedestrian, the operator of a bicycle shall dismount and walk through the intersection of the sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.080 - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon any public street, sidewalk, bicycle lane, or bicycle path in such a way that it impedes pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to the penalties provided by Chapter 1.08, the court may impound and retain possession of any such bicycle, the subject of such violation, and may retain possession thereof until the registration provided for in this chapter has been obtained by the person required so to do. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
10.44.100 - Report—Secondhand dealer. 
Persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to make a report to the chief of police within one (1) week of purchase of a secondhand bicycle specifying: 
A.  The name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased; 
B.  The description of each bicycle purchased; 
C.  The frame number thereof; and, 
D.  The number of the license plate, tag or sticker found thereon, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2491, § 1, 8-20-2018)  
Chapter 10.45 - ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES* 
 
10.45.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Skateboard" means any platform of any composition or size to which two (2) or more wheels are attached and which is intended to be ridden or propelled by one (1) or more persons standing or kneeling upon it and to which there is not affixed to it any seat or any device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. 
B.  "Roller skate" means any shoe, boot or other footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which one (1) or more wheels are attached, including wheels that are "in line," also known as "roller blades." 
C.  "Coaster device" means any platform of any composition or size to which two (2) or more wheels are attached and which can be ridden or propelled by one (1) or more persons. "Coaster de-vice" does not include wheel chairs, bicycles, or motorized vehicles. 
D.  "Private Property" means any property held by private interests that is used primarily for business, commercial, residential, office space, business park, religious, multifamily, or recreational purposes. This shall also include the parking facilities for these "private property" areas. 
E.  "Public Property" means any property owned or maintained by the city, any public agency or public school district and any public utility within the geographical boundaries of the city, including any public square, street, sidewalk or highway. 
F.  "Public facility" means any building, park, plaza, courtyard, parking lot, walkway, path, loading dock or other facility that is owned or maintained by the city, any public agency or public school district, or any public utility. "Public facility" does not include sidewalks. 
G.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street or highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or delineation for pedestrian travel. 
H.  "Nuisance" means any activity which (1) threatens injury to persons or property, (2) creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists, or (3) generates loud or unreasonable noise. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.020 - Use of skateboards, roller blades or similar devices—Where prohibited. 
No person shall ride, use or propel any skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or other coaster device, whether powered by human or motorized means: 
A.  In or upon any privately owned, operated, or controlled property, including, but not limited to, parking lots or structures, without first obtaining the consent of the property owner, his or her designee, or a lawful occupant; 
B.  In or upon any public facility, including, but not limited to, parking lots or structures, with the exception of any facility that is specifically designated for such use; 
C.  On any ramp designed or built to afford access to buildings or structures by disabled persons; 
D.  In a manner which creates a nuisance as defined in Section 10.45.010; 
E.  While the skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or other coaster device, or the user or rider is attached or in any manner connected to any streetcar or vehicle on the roadway; 
F.  While under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug; 
G.  On any roadway when visibility is poor because of weather conditions, lighting, or other conditions; or 
H.  In or upon any public right-of-way, roadway, pavement, including cross-streets, parking lot or sidewalk, or any improvement constructed or placed on a sidewalk, located within the following area: 
1.  The area bounded by 16th Street from G Street to V Street; V Street from 16th Street to 18th Street; 18th Street from V Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; Martin Luther King, Jr. Way from 18th Street to Main Street; Main Street from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, to G Street. 
a.  Notwithstanding subsection (H)(1) of this section, the use of skateboards, roller blades, roller skates or other coaster devices used in a lawful manner as a means of transportation shall not be prohibited on the sidewalks adjacent to 16th Street, I Street, O Street, or P Street. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection (H)(1) of this section, the use of roller blades or roller skates used in a lawful manner as a means of transportation shall not be prohibited outside the area bounded by 16th Street from Martin Luther King, Jr. Way to N Street; N Street from 16th Street to 18th Street; 18th Street from N Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Way; Martin Luther King, Jr. Way from 18th Street to 16th Street. 
2.  The public works department is hereby directed to post and maintain signs providing notice that the use of skateboards, roller blades, roller skates, or other coaster devices is prohibited in the applicable areas as described by this subsection. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.030 - City council's authority to prohibit the use of skateboards, roller blades or similar devices. 
The city council may by resolution prohibit skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating, or the use of other coaster devices on public streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other public property when it is determined to be necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of pedestrians, motorists or persons operating said skateboards on said streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.040 - Use of skateboards, roller blades and similar devices not prohibited on designated bike paths. 
This code does not prohibit travel by human powered skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or other similar coaster device upon designated city bike paths so long as they do not interfere with use of the path and the rider or user abides by all rules which apply to such pathways, and are not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.050 - Grant of approval for use of skateboards, roller skates or other coaster devices in prohibited areas. 
The city council may, by resolution, grant approval for the use of roadways, city-owned streets, parking lots, parking structures and sidewalks for organized skating events of community-wide interest and importance. In granting such approval, the council may impose such conditions, restrictions and requirements as it deems necessary or desirable in order to protect the public interest and promote the general welfare. Furthermore, the city manager in his sole discretion may suspend the enforcement provisions of this chapter to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.060 - Use of skateboards, roller blades and similar devices on school campuses—Posting signs. 
A.  Prior to the enforcement of the prohibition of skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating or use of other coaster devices at any school campus, and only when these activities create a nuisance as defined in Section 10.45.010, a sign announcing a school's policy prohibiting these activities must be posted along with a sign announcing the section of this article pertaining to the regulation of skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating, and the use of coaster devices, Section 10.45.020. 
B.  Notwithstanding Section 10.45.020, school officials may permit skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating or the use of coaster devices on a posted campus as part of a school-supervised recreational or athletic activity. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.070 - Manner of operation of skateboards, roller blades and similar devices. 
A.  When riding in or upon a roadway, persons riding, using, or propelling skateboards, roller blades, roller skates or other coaster devices, as otherwise permitted under this chapter, shall obey all vehicle code provisions which regulate the operation of bicycles and which are reasonably applicable to the use of skateboards, roller skates or other coaster devices. No person riding, using, or propelling any skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or other coaster device, whether powered by human or motorized means, shall fail to obey any traffic control signal or pedestrian traffic control signal. 
B.  When riding upon a sidewalk, persons riding, using, or propelling skateboards, roller skates or other coaster devices, as otherwise permitted under this chapter, shall obey the following rules of the road: 
1.  Riders or users shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians whenever and wherever they are encountered; and, 
2.  Riders or users shall proceed with due care and at a safe speed. 
C.  No person shall ride, use or propel a skateboard, roller skate or other coaster device recklessly, or in such a manner as to cause or threaten to cause injury to himself or others, or to cause or threaten to cause damage to public or private property. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.080 - Exemptions—Use of human or motor-propelled devices by disabled persons; transportation of infants; transportation of goods or merchandise. 
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  The use of human or motor-propelled devices on any sidewalk, street, public right-of-way, or upon any land, property, or facility owned or controlled by the City of Merced by any person who is disabled or handicapped, or whose ability to walk is impaired as shown by medical evidence; 
B.  Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants; or 
C.  The transportation of goods or merchandise to and from the place of purchase or storage. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.090 - Safety equipment required at skating facilities. 
Every person skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating, or using any other coaster device at a publicly owned or operated facility for such use shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads while so skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating or using any other coaster device. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.100 - Signs at skateboard parks. 
The public works department is hereby directed to post and maintain signs at all publicly owned skate parks within the city providing notice that any person riding a skateboard, skates, or using any other coaster device in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under Section 10.45.090 for an infraction pursuant to Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.110 - Seizing of skateboard. 
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe a skateboard was used or is being used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the police officer may seize the skateboard. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.120 - Violation/infraction—Misdemeanor. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from pursuing criminal, civil, administrative, or any other legal remedy to address violations of this chapter. The penalty for the first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by an administrative, criminal, or civil fine in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The second violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). The third violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, four (4) or more times is guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  An additional optional penalty for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be forfeiture of any skateboard used in violation of this chapter, unless it is proven that the defendant does not own the skateboard and the owner did not or could not have reasonably known that the skateboard would be used in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 16, 10-19-2009)  
10.45.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person authorized to enforce ordinances may issue a citation to any person who violates this chapter. 
B.  The citation shall set forth the section or sections of this chapter so violated; the date; the approximate time thereof; the location where the violation occurred; the amount of the fine; a statement printed on the notice indicating that payment of the fine is required to be made not later than twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of citation issuance; the procedure for the alleged violator to deposit the amount of the fine with the finance officer or to contest the citation pursuant to Section 10.45.140; and an appropriate notice to the recipient of his or her right not to contest the violation and appropriate instructions and procedures for payment, as prescribed by the finance officer. 
C.  Any person to whom a ticket is issued may, within twenty-one (21) days of receipt, pay the amount of the fine in lieu of contesting the violation. Upon timely payment under this section, unless it is determined that the penalty for the violation shall include forfeiture of a skateboard used in violation of this chapter, the police department shall make any skateboard seized under this section available for return to the offender pursuant to the procedures established by the police department. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.140 - Contesting citations. 
A.  For a period of twenty-one (21) calendar days from the issuance of the citation, a person may request an initial review of the citation by the issuing agency. The request may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. There shall be no charge for this review. 
B.  If, following the initial review, the issuing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur, or that extenuating circumstances make dismissal of the citation appropriate in the interest of justice, the issuing agency shall cancel the citation. The issuing agency shall advise the finance officer of the cancellation. The issuing agency or the finance officer shall mail the results of the initial review to the person contesting the citation. 
C.  If the person is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the person may request an administrative hearing of the violation no later than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the mailing of the results of the issuing agency's initial review. The request may be made by telephone, in writing, or in person. The person requesting an administrative hearing shall deposit the amount of the fine with the finance officer. 
D.  The finance officer shall provide a written procedure to allow a person to request an administrative hearing without payment of the fine upon satisfactory proof of an inability to pay the amount due. Notice of this procedure shall be provided to all persons requesting an administrative hearing. 
E.  The administrative hearing shall be held within ninety (90) calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing. The person requesting the hearing may request one (1) continuance, not to exceed twenty-one (21) days. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.150 - The administrative hearing process. 
The administrative hearing process shall include the following: 
A.  The city manager or his duly authorized representative shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from the accused violator and any witnesses. 
B.  The person requesting a hearing shall have the choice of a hearing by mail or in person. 
C.  If the person requesting a hearing is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for the violation of this chapter without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The hearing may proceed against the minor in the same manner as against as adult. If it is determined that a minor has violated this chapter, and if the minor cannot pay the fine for the violation, the minor's parents may be held liable for the amount of the fine. 
D.  The administrative hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the finance officer and approved by the city manager. The hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair, and impartial review of contested violations under this chapter. 
E.  The police officer or person who issues a citation may, but shall not be required to, participate in an administrative hearing. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the citation or copy thereof. The documentation in proper form shall be prima facie evidence of the violation. 
F.  The examiner's decision following the administrative hearing may be personally delivered to the person by the examiner or sent by first-class mail. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
10.45.160 - Payments collected by director of finance. 
Contested charges shall be resolved, fines shall be imposed, and payments shall be collected and processed by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 2107 § 1, 2002).  
Chapter 10.46 - INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINALS AND ACCESS 
 
10.46.010 - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the public necessity, health, safety and general welfare through the establishment of procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a federally designated highway system. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided, that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the vehicle code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage. 
A.  "Terminal" means any facility at which is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded or at which interstate trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
B.  "Interstate truck" means a truck tractor and semitrailer or truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the vehicle code. 
C.  "Terminal access" means any exit from the designated highway system on a locally designated route to a locally designated terminal. 
D.  "Route capability" means a route which has adequate sight distances, geometric design, structural strength and general traffic safety to accommodate the traffic volumes generated by interstate trucks. 
E.  "Large truck terminal sign" means a type G-66-56 state sign with blue legend on white reflective background. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.030 - Application process. 
A.  Any person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from federally designated highways must submit an application on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the engineering department, and appropriate fees to the city. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application, the city engineer will investigate the route capability. A determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of the geometric design of and structural strength of streets, intersections and public works improvements along said route. The city engineer will also consider general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes for safe operation. 
C.  The application shall include a map describing the route, the terminal being served and the location of the anticipated connection to the Federal Highway Administration's designed system. 
D.  The city engineer shall either approve the route as presented, approve the route with modifications, or disapprove the route. Approval by the State Department of Transportation shall also be required. If the route is approved by the city engineer and the state, the city engineer shall issue a permit authorizing the applicant to travel on the route. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.040 - Cost recovery. 
A.  Upon application for a route permit, a deposit of two hundred fifty dollars will be required to cover the cost of an engineering investigation and administrative procedures. Applicant will either receive a refund or be billed for additional costs based upon the actual cost of the investigation and administrative procedures. 
B.  If the application for route permit is approved, the applicant will be required to pay seventy-five dollars per sign for the purchase, installation and maintenance of all necessary signs. The large truck-terminal signs will be required at every point on the route to the terminal where the truck driver has a choice of driving on alternate roads. 
C.  An annual renewal application and fee of fifty dollars will be required in order to keep the terminal identification current and to cover the cost of sign maintenance. 
(Ord.1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.050 - Revocation of route permit. 
The city engineer is authorized to revoke any approved permit if the designated route proves to be a safety hazard for vehicular traffic. "Safety hazard" includes the inability of an interstate truck to negotiate the route or said truck causing unsafe driving conditions for the vehicle traffic or pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.060 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Any order or decision of the city engineer concerning a route permit may be appealed within five days of the decision or order to the city council by the applicant, or any other person aggrieved by the decision or order, in the following manner: 
A written appeal and appeal fee of two hundred fifty dollars shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall file it with the city council. The appeal must state the substance of the decision or order appealed from, and specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of direction by the city engineer. 
B.  Within thirty days following filing of the appeal, the city council shall conduct a public hearing at which the person filing the appeal, the applicant, the city engineer, and/or their representatives shall be heard. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and the person(s) filing the appeal at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice shall also be given in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
C.  Within thirty days following completion of the hearing, the city council shall confirm, modify or reject the decision or order of the city engineer on the basis of the evidence submitted at the hearing. 
D.  When written notice is required to be given under any section of this chapter, it shall b e given by first class mail, postage prepaid, and addressed as follows: 
1.  To the applicant at the address appearing on the application for the permit; 
2.  To any other person at the address given to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.070 - Ramp, intersection and roadway improvements. 
A.  If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are deemed unsatisfactory by the city engineer, the applicant may request public works improvements be made to provide adequate capability. All costs of engineering, construction and inspection required for said improvements will be borne by the applicant. The improvements will be performed by the city or by a contractor acceptable to it, except when the said improvements fall within the jurisdiction of the State Department of Transportation. 
B.  Prior to the undertaking of improvements by the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the city engineer. Adjustments between the estimated and actual cost shall be made after completion of the work and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant as the case may be. 
C.  If at any time within five years from the date of completion of the public works improvements, should any new applicant seek terminal approval to use the route upon which such improvements were made, any such applicant's fee shall include that applicant's proportionate share of the improvements, which fee shall be disbursed by the city to the original applicant who paid for the improvements as well as to any other applicant(s) who contributed to the cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
10.46.080 - Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or business requiring terminal access in the city to exit from a federally designated highway without first obtaining and maintaining a valid permit authorizing such access. 
(Ord. 1566 § 1 (part), 1985).  
Chapter 10.50 - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT ZONES 
 
10.50.010 - Establishment. 
Upon the recommendation of the traffic committee or the filing with the city clerk of a verified petition containing the valid signatures of at least sixty-seven percent (67%) of the residents and owners of real property in a specific residential area, council shall conduct a public hearing to consider whether that residential area should be designated as a residential parking permit zone. Upon a finding by council that the area proposed for designation has unique residential parking problems, due to the nature, location, frequency or duration of activities or events causing such problems, that outweigh the needs of the general public for access to the area and its facilities, the council may by resolution establish a residential parking permit zone for said residential area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such resolution shall state the findings of necessity for the zone designation, the boundaries of the residential parking permit zone, the applicable time limitations, the day or days of restriction, and such other conditions as council deems necessary and in the public interest. Persons occupying residences with frontage on streets within a residential parking permit zone shall be exempt from the general restrictions of parking. Such exemptions shall be evidenced by a valid parking sticker affixed to the left front window of the parked vehicle. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.020 - Definitions of words and phrases. 
(a)  The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
(b)  Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but are now or hereafter defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall b e deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter as though set forth in full. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.030 - Vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means an automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other motor-driven form of transportation. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.040 - Owner. 
"Owner" means a natural person over the age of sixteen (16) years who has at least a one-quarter ownership interest in a parcel of real property within a residential permit parking zone designated pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.050 - Resident. 
"Resident" means a person over the age of sixteen (16) years who lives in a residential permit parking zone as his or her permanent place of residence, either as a tenant or owner. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.060 - Residential area. 
"Residential area" means a contiguous or substantially contiguous area, containing public streets or highways or parts thereof, in which residents dwell and/or which has been zoned by the City of Merced as R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.070 - Resident parking permit. 
"Resident parking permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.080 - Residential permit parking zone. 
"Residential permit parking zone" means a residential zone as designated in this chapter in which vehicles displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be exempt from the general parking restrictions herein established. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.090 - Posting of residential permit parking zone. 
Upon the adoption of a resolution by the council designating a residential permit parking zone and appropriate parking time restrictions, the city engineer shall erect signs in such area indicating prominently thereon the time limitation in days and hours during which parking shall be restricted. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.100 - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a violation of this section, unless expressly provided to the contrary herein, for any person to park a vehicle on a street in a residential permit parking zone within the parking time limit posted by signs giving notice thereof and erected pursuant to this chapter, without a valid resident parking permit for that zone properly affixed to such vehicle. 
(b)  It is unlawful and a violation of this section for a person falsely to represent himself or herself as eligible for a resident parking permit or to furnish false information in an application for any such permits. 
(c)  It is unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to use or display, or permit the use or display of, a resident parking permit or a sticker pertaining thereto on a vehicle other than that vehicle for which such permit or sticker was issued. 
(d)  It is unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to sell, transfer, or convey, or to offer to sell, transfer, or convey, any parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter, whether for money or other consideration or without money or consideration. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995). 
(Ord. No. 2406, § 1, 5-20-2013)  
10.50.110 - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any vehicle on which is properly affixed or displayed a valid resident parking permit, as provided for herein, maybe parked on a street in the residential permit parking zone pertaining thereto without limitation of the time restrictions established for vehicles without a valid resident parking permit. Such parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve the holder thereof an on-street parking space on a street in such residential permit parking zone or exempt the vehicle from any other applicable parking restrictions, ordinances, or state or local laws. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to ambulances, fire department vehicles, police vehicles, public utility vehicles, or other official or emergency vehicles during conduct of official business if such vehicles are identified as such by an official seal or logo. 
(c)  Clearly marked vehicles with commercial license plates parked for the purpose of and actively engaged in loading or delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure in a residential permit parking zone or delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling, construction, or reconstruction of any such building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained, or vehicles used for commercial residential maintenance, including but not limited to landscapers and repairers doing work for residents in the zone, shall b e exempt from the time restrictions established for vehicles without a permit. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.120 - Duration and issuance of permits. 
There shall be a limit of two annual permits issued to any residential address within a residential permit parking zone, provided that the resident can prove ownership or control of each of the vehicles for which an annual permit is issued. A separate application shall be filed for each motor vehicle. Each residential parking permit issued by the police chief shall be valid for a maximum of one calendar year unless otherwise stated on the permit. The police chief shall cause to be prepared and issued, effective on January 1st of each year, a distinctively colored sticker for issuance to permittees of residential parking zones, which sticker shall b e affixed to the motor vehicle as required herein. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.130 - Display of permits. 
Residential parking permits shall be affixed to a motor vehicle at the lower left corner of the front windshield. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.140 - Fees for issuance. 
The council may establish, by resolution, fees for the issuance of residential parking permits, and for the replacement of lost, damaged, or destroyed permits or decals. There shall be no refund for or setoff of any unused portion of any decal or permit. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.150 - Termination of permits. 
Permits shall terminate upon any of the following events: 
(a)  The transfer or sale of the vehicle for which a permit has been issued. 
(b)  The relocation of the permittee from his or her residence within a residential parking area to another residence, whether within or outside said zone. 
(c)  Upon expiration of the time period for which a permit has been issued. 
(Ord.1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.160 - Regulations. 
Issuance of resident parking permits shall be administered in accordance with regulations promulgated from time to time by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
10.50.170 - Termination. 
At any time the council may by resolution terminate one or more of the residential parking permit zones then in existence. 
(Ord. 1915 § 1 (part), 1995).  
Title 12 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - OFFICIAL PLAN 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Official plan lines" means lines as indicated on a map of a precised section of a major street or highway, the distance between such lines indicating the right-of-way width as proposed for such major street or highway. 
B.  "Building setback lines" means lines as indicated on a map of a precised section of a major street or highway, and measured from the official plan lines the distance as is indicated on such map of official plan lines or the distance as is required by Title 2o and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Prior code § 17A.2).  
12.04.020 - Official plan—Adopted. 
In order to conserve and promote the public health, safety and general welfare, an official plan of streets and highways is adopted in accordance with the Conservation and Planning Act, as now existing and as hereafter amended, as a part of the comprehensive general plan of the city. 
(Prior code § 17A.1).  
12.04.030 - Official plan—Scope. 
The official plan for major streets and highways and of other streets and traffic ways shall designate by precised sections of the major street and highway plan the proposed widths of rights-of-way, the location of buildings and other improvements with respect to existing or planned rights-of-way, the building line setbacks, the recommended treatment of major streets and highways and other streets and traffic ways. 
(Prior code § 17A.3).  
12.04.040 - Maps. 
A.  The official plan lines of streets and highways shall be established as particularly set forth on maps, each of which shall have the title of "Official Plan Lines Map, being a part of the Comprehensive General Plan of the City of Merced, California." 
B.  Such maps and all notations, information and data appearing thereon, (as adopted in the manner prescribed by law) shall by reference be incorporated and made a part of this chapter and shall constitute portions of this section, each of which maps shall be designated by section number "12.04.040(B)," followed by a number in parentheses. 
(Prior code § 17A.4).  
12.04.050 - Annexation. 
A.  In the event of any annexation of any territory to the city, in which territory is contained, a street or highway upon which the official plan lines have been duly adopted in accordance with by the county, such official plan lines may be. adopted upon recommendation of the planning commission by action of the city council without public hearings. 
B.  Up on such adoption, such official plan lines shall become part of thus chapter and shall constitute portions of this section, each of which maps shall be designated by section number "12.04.050(8)," followed by a number in parentheses. 
(Prior code § 17A.5).  
12.04.060 - Interim period—Permit. 
In the event of the introduction of an amendment to this chapter for the purpose of adopting an official plan lines map, as provided for in this chapter, at a duly. constituted meeting of the city council, no permit shall be issued for any structure, not complying with the official plan lines map as proposed, on any property fronting, facing or located adjacent to such street as indicated on such proposed official plan lines map. In the event such amendment is not adopted, permits shall be issued immediately upon rejection of such amendment by the city council. 
(Prior code § 17A.6).  
12.04.070 - Building setback lines. 
All building setback lines (front yards) in R residential zones, as designated by Title 20, shall be measured from the official plan lines as set forth on maps on and after the effective date of such maps. Building setback lines as measured from the official plan lines shall be in the amount as designated from the respective zoning classifications in Title 20. Building setback lines as indicated on the official plan lines map shall be in the amount as indicated on such maps without regard to the zoning classification of the property in question. 
(Prior code § 17A.7).  
12.04.080 - Restrictions—Permit. 
No building, structure or other improvements, whether publicly or privately owned, shall hereafter be erected, altered, moved in or placed within the official plan lines of streets and highways as adopted by this chapter, or closer to the street lines than the building setback line as determined by Title 20 or as established by map as provided in this chapter, and no permit or approval in any other manner therefor shall be issued by an official or employee of the city. Any permit or approval issued in violation of this chapter, unless approved by proper procedure for a variance as outlined in this chapter, shall be null and void. This section shall not apply to gardens or to other ordinary front yard uses, or to front yard fences or other more or less nonpermanent structures otherwise permitted under this code. 
(Prior code § 17A.8).  
12.04.090 - Subdivisions. 
The street and highway design of any subdivision of land falling under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state and other subdivision laws as may subsequently be adopted by the city shall be based upon the official plan of streets and highways as adopted by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 17A.9).  
12.04.100 - Recording of maps. 
The secretary of the planning commission shall record in the office of the county recorder a full, true and correct copy, duly attested, of all maps of the official plan lines which are hereafter added to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 17A.10).  
12.04.110 - Variance—Generally. 
A.  When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter occur through a strict interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission may in the manner provided in this chapter, upon the verified application of any property owner, grant such variance from the terms of this chapter it deems necessary to assure that its spirit and purpose will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
B.  The granting of such variance shall conform substantially to the following procedures and considerations: 
1.  Upon the filing of a verified application by a property owner, the planning commission shall hold a hearing not less than ten days nor more than thirty days after the filing of an application. 
2.  The planning commission shall give public notice of its intention to consider the granting of a variance not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing. 
(Prior code § 17A.11).  
12.04.120 - Variance—Requirements. 
Before any variance may be granted it shall be shown: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or conditions attached to the property upon which the proposed building, structure or other improvement is sought to be erected or placed; 
2.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; 
3.  That the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive general plan of the city, or result in material damage or prejudice to other property in the same vicinity. 
(Prior code § 17A.12).  
12.04.130 - Variance—Conditions. 
In recommending the granting of any variance under the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission shall: 
A.  Designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, result in the adjustment causing the minimum possible interference with the purposes of this chapter, and with the ultimate accomplishment of the objectives of the aforesaid official plan of streets and highways; and 
B.  Report its findings with respect thereto, and all facts in connection therewith to the city council and specifically set forth any adjustment or variance which is recommended and the conditions designated in connection therewith. 
(Prior code § 17A.13).  
12.04.140 - Variance—Commission action. 
A.  The planning commission shall record its action by formal resolution and shall, within ten days thereafter, report the same to the city council. 
B.  Upon the completion of a public hearing the planning commission shall, not later than thirty days thereafter, render its decision on the matter so heard. 
C.  Failure of the planning commission to so act within thirty days shall serve to automatically and immediately thereafter refer the whole matter to the city council far such action as it deems warranted. 
(Prior code § 17A.14).  
12.04.150 - Variance—Referral to city council. 
Upon receipt of the planning commission report, the city council shall, by resolution, make its decision on either approving or rejecting the application for a variance. If the decision approves the granting of the variance, the permit applied for shall be issued, subject to the conditions designed by the planning commission, or such modifications thereof as the city council approves. In all cases, in which variances are granted, the city council shall require such guarantees, upon recommendation of the planning commission, as it may deem necessary in connection with the granting of such variance. 
(Prior code § 17A.15).  
12.04.160 - Variance—Time limitation. 
Any permission granted by an application shall be null and void and automatically expire six months after its effective date, unless the use or construction petted is actually commenced within such time. 
(Prior code § 17A.16).  
12.04.170 - Variance—Fee. 
A fee of twenty dollars shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each application for the purpose of defraying the expense of investigations, posting and other costs incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 17A.17).  
12.04.180 - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any building, stature or property situated within the city, owned, leased, controlled, operated or occupied by the United States, the state, the county, the city, the city school district, or by any other public or quasi public agency, corporation or association. 
(Prior code § 17A.18).  
Chapter 12.08 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
12.08.020 - Sign, showcase, stand or rack—Abatement. 
The construction, erection, placing, keeping or maintaining of any sign, showcase, stand, rack, frame or other device for the storage, display or sale of any merchandise of any kind, or the construction of any structure, obstruction, or anything along, under, over or upon any public street, curb, sidewalk, alley gar public way in the city is a nuisance, and the city engineer is directed to abate the same. 
(Prior code § 24.2).  
12.08.040 - Discharging wastewater. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be discharged any wastewater from any premises owned or controlled by him into or upon any street, sidewalk, gutter or alley in the city; provided, that wastewater is not construed to mean stormwaters. 
(Prior code § 24.6).  
12.08.050 - Playing on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to play upon or in any of the streets of the city on which electroliers have been constructed, baseball, football, basketball or any other game in which any ball or other device is thrown, struck or otherwise propelled into the air and which if it struck any electrolier or other lighting device would break or otherwise damage such electrolier or other lighting device. 
(Prior code § 24.8).  
12.08.060 - Taking down or injuring street signs. 
It is unlawful for any person to willingly run into, knock down, take down, deface, destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, any sign or other device placed at the intersections of any of the streets of the city by order of the city council for the purpose of directing or controlling traffic on the streets of the city. 
(Prior code § 24.9).  
12.08.080 - Burning on paved streets. 
No person shall set fire to or burn, or cause to be set fire to or burned, any rags, paper, wood, rubbish or other combustible material upon any street, alley, public place or sidewalk paved with or constructed of asphaltum or any other combustible matter. 
(Prior code § 24.4).  
12.08.090 - Discharging oil. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place or discharge, or to cause, suffer or permit to be deposited, placed or discharged, any oil, petroleum, naphtha, liquid asphaltum or any kindred substance, water or refuse mixed with any of those substances in or upon any public street, alley, place or sewer of the city or upon any private property in the city in such a manner that the same will run into or upon any public street, alley, place or sewer of the city. 
(Prior code § 24.5).  
12.08.095 - Illegal sale of controlled substances. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity defined as offenses in Chapter 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. For purposes of this section, it shall be declared a nuisance for any person to cause or pest the illegal sale of controlled substances from any premises owned or controlled by him within the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 1956 § 1, 1997).  
Chapter 12.12 - UTILITY PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Public way defined. 
As used in this chapter, "public way" means any street, alley, right-of-way or other property devoted to a public use. 
(Prior code § 24.11).  
12.12.020 - Removal of property that directly interferes with public work—Written notice of demand. 
The city council, or its duly authorized agent may, by written notice of demand, require any owner of a public utility or franchise or license, operating or conducting its business within the city, and who has placed or maintains within the city, any pole, pole line, pipe, pipe line, conduit or any other property or facility, upon, under or through any public way, to move the same at its own cost and expense to a different location whenever necessary to insure the safety of the public, or to permit work to be lane upon or improvement to be made in, on or through such public way and when such property or facility is situated where it interferes with any portion of the actual structure of any such work or improvement; provided, that no such change of location is required for a temporary purpose, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 24.12).  
12.12.030 - Written notice of demand—Generally. 
The written notice of demand referred to in Section 12.12.020 shall require the removal of the property or facility immediately and shall describe it with reasonable certainty as to its character and location and shall be personally served an such owner or his agent. In lieu of personal service, such notice may also be made by registered mail and by pasting for a period of five days, a copy of the notice at the point of the interference described in the notice. 
(Prior code § 24.13).  
12.12.040 - Written notice of demand—Failure to comply. 
The city council may remove, or cause to be removed, at the cost and expense of such owner, any such property or facility mentioned in Section 12.12.020, which is not removed, or the removal of which is not commenced and thereafter diligently prosecuted, prior to the expiration of five days from and after the service of the notice, and has an action to recover the costs and expenses of such removal, costs and expenses of suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee, and, in addition thereto, the sum of ten dollars for each day the property or facility remains after the expiration of five days from the service of the notice. 
(Prior code § 24.14).  
12.12.050 - Removal of property that indirectly interferes with public work—Written notice of demand. 
Where, in the judgment of the city engineer the expeditious and economical performance of any public work requires the temporary or permanent removal or support of the property of any owner of a public utility or franchise or license, where the same does not occupy the place that is to be occupied by some structural portion of such public work, or whenever in the judgment of the city engineer the performance of the work endangers any of the property wherever situated, the contractor or other person doing such work shall make arrangements with the owner of the property for the temporary or permanent removal or support of the property by the owner immediately, or for other changes that may be necessary to more rapidly perform such work, or to avoid or obviate any danger to any of the property, and the cost and expense of such removal or support or changes shall be borne by the contractor or other person doing the work. In the event the owner refuses to make such arrangements or perform the work required, the city engineer may serve on the owner or his agent a written notice of demand in the same form and substance and in the same manner as provided in Section 12.12.030. 
(Prior code § 24.15).  
12.12.060 - Failure to remove property described in Section 12.12.050—Liability. 
The city council may do the work, or remove or cause to be removed any property or facility mentioned in Section 12.12.050, which is not removed, or the removal of which or work in connection therewith is not commenced and thereafter diligently prosecuted, prior to the expiration of five days from and after the service of the notice provided for in Section 12.12.050, and has an action against the owner to recover the sum of ten dollars per day for each day such property or facility remains, or the work is not performed, after the expiration of five days from the service of the notice. 
(Prior code § 24.16).  
12.12.070 - Failure to comply with chapter—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who does not remove, or cause to be removed, his property in the manner and with the time as provided in Sections 12.12.020 and 12.12.030 is, in addition to any civil liability therefor, guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 24.17).  
12.12.080 - Enforcement designated. 
The city council designates the city engineer as its agent to enforce the provisions of this chapter and may, from time to time, by resolution, designate other agents for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 24.18).  
Chapter 12.16 - HOUSE NUMBERING 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Conforms to chapter. 
All space and house numbering in the city shall, from and after January 1, 1944, be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter and be under the supervision and direction of the building official. 
(Ord. 1317 § 12, 1980: prior code § 24.20.)  
12.16.020 - Duty of owner. 
All entrances to buildings and enclosures from the public streets of the city must be numbered as provided in this chapter, and the duty of so numbering the same is imposed upon the owner and also upon the occupant of the building or enclosure to which any such entrance belongs or appertains. 
(Prior code § 24.21).  
12.16.030 - Numeral size. 
The appropriate numbers in figures not less than two inches in height must be placed upon the building or enclosure or in some conspicuous place visible from the street in front thereof. 
(Prior code § 24.22).  
12.16.040 - Spacing within block. 
One hundred numbers are allotted to each block (including the two sides of a street), a number to each and every twelve and one-half feet frontage. 
(Prior code § 24.23).  
12.16.050 - Even south and east—Odd north and west. 
The even numbers shall be an the south and east sides of the streets and the odd numbers on the north and west sides of the streets. 
(Prior code § 24.24).  
12.16.060 - Streets running north and south. 
On streets running north and south, the numbers shall begin "101" and "102" on the respective sides of the numbered streets at First Street; the numbers running consecutively upward save as affected by the provision allotting one hundred numbers to each block north and south from First Street to the city limits. 
(Ord. 1317 § 13, 1980: prior code § 24.25).  
12.16.070 - Streets running east and west. 
On streets running east and west, the numbers shall begin with "1" and "2" on the respective sides of the numbered streets at G Street; the numbers running consecutively upward save as affected by the provision allotting one hundred numbers to each black east and west from G Street to the city limits. 
(Ord. 1317 § 14, 1980: prior code § 24.26).  
12.16.080 - Failure to comply—Misdemeanor. 
All owners or persons in charge of buildings or enclosures shall cause the proper numbers to be placed upon the same as provided in conformity with the numbers required by this chapter and upon the failure to do so when required by the building official such person is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1317 § 15, 1980: prior code § 24.27).  
12.16.090 - Defacing or destroying—Misdemeanor. 
No person shall willfully remove, destroy or mutilate any correct number placed as required by this chapter without immediately replacing it with another such number. Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 24.28).  
Chapter 12.20 - MOVING BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Compliance with chapter required. 
It is unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building or structure into, upon, across, along or over the public streets, alleys or highways in the city, or otherwise to obstruct the free passage and use of the streets, alleys or highways, without complying with the provisions of this chapter, and, when applicable, the provisions of the building code. 
(Prior code § 24.29).  
12.20.020 - Permit—required. 
No person shall move or have moved any building or structure into, upon, across, along or over the streets, alleys or highways of the city without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 24.30).  
12.20.030 - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to move or have moved any building or structure into, upon, across, along or over the streets, alleys or highways shall file an application far a permit in writing, signed by such person with the city engineer setting forth and specifically describing the size, type of construction and location of the building or structure to be moved; the route over which the building or structure is to be moved; the location to which the building or structure is to be moved, and the time when such building or structure is to be moved. 
(Prior code § 24.31).  
12.20.040 - Permit—Granted—Denied. 
Upon the filing of any application under Section 12.20.030 it shall be the duty of the city engineer to determine if the building or structure can be moved along the route proposed with safety and without serious inconvenience to the public and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state applicable thereto. In the event it appears that the building or structure can be moved along the route proposed with safety and without serious inconvenience to the public and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state applicable thereto, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to notify the person desiring to move such building or structure that a permit therefor will be issued upon compliance by such person with the provisions of Section 12.210.050. In the event it appears that the moving along the route proposed of such building or structure cannot be accomplished with safety or without serious inconvenience to the public and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state applicable thereto, then and in that event it shall be the duty of the city engineer to notify such person of his decision and the reasons therefor. 
(Prior code § 24.32).  
12.20.050 - Permit—Bond—Generally. 
No permit shall be granted by the city engineer for the moving of any building or structure until the applicant has filed a bond executed t0 the city in the sum of one thousand dollars. The bond shall be for the benefit of the owners of any and all property, either public or private, which is lawfully maintained on any street, alley or highway within the city and shall be signed by two good and sufficient sureties who shall justify for the amount of the bond over and above all their just debts and liabilities and over and above all property owned by such sureties which is exempt from execution, or in lieu thereof such bond may be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. Such bond shall be filed with the city engineer for his approval. 
(Prior code § 24.33 (part)).  
12.20.060 - Permit—Bond—Conditions. 
The condition of the bond shall be that if the moving of any building or structure into, upon, across, along or over any street, alley or highway fully complies with the provisions of this chapter and that if the principal on such bond pays any and all damages to the streets, alleys or highways and to any and all property, either public or private, lawfully thereon which may result by reason of the moving of any building or structure in the city by the principal, or by the employees, agents, contractors or servants of such principal, then the obligation shall be void, but in the event such principal fails faithfully to comply with any provisions of this chapter and refuses to comply with such provision after notice from the city engineer, then the city engineer may cause the streets, alleys or highways into, upon, across, along or over which such building or structure was moved to be cleaned of all debris and all damage to the streets, alleys, highways and public or private property, including fireplugs, hydrants, sewers, manholes, culverts and the like, and the wires, apparatus and appurtenances of any police, fire alarm and public utility system, and any other wires, apparatus, appurtenances and public or private property lawfully thereon, to be repaired or replaced and the actual cost and expense of such work shall be collectible from the principal and surety or sureties on such bond. 
(Prior code § 24.33 (part)).  
12.20.070 - Permit—Bond—Renewal. 
All bonds as required in this chapter must be renewed on the first day of July of each year. 
(Prior code § 24.33 (part)).  
12.20.080 - Permit—Bond—Additional liability. 
The fling of the bond provided for in this chapter by any person desiring to move any building or structure into, upon, across, along or over the public streets, alleys or highways in the city and the approval of the bond by the city engineer does not relieve such person from responsibility for damages in excess of the amount of such bond to the streets, alleys or highways and to any and all property, either public or private, lawfully thereon. 
(Prior code § 24.33 (part)).  
12.20.090 - Permit—Issuance. 
Upon approval of any bond filed with the city engineer in conformity with the provisions of Section 12.20.080, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to issue a permit to the person making application therefor. 
(Prior code § 24.34).  
12.20.100 - Property damage—Permittee liable. 
It is unlawful for any holder of any permit authorizing the moving of any building or structure, or for any employee, agent, contractor or servant of any holder of such permit, to displace, cut, remove or otherwise injure or disturb any part of any property, either public or private, which is maintained on any street, alley or highway within the city. 
(Prior code § 24.35).  
12.20.110 - Property damage—Owner's duty. 
Whenever the moving of a building or structure requires the temporary displacement, cutting or removal of any property referred to in Sections 12.20.050 through 12.20.100 it shall be the duty of the person owning, operating or controlling such property to displace, cut or remove the same, so far as may be necessary to effect the removal of such building to the point to which the removal thereof is authorized 
(Prior code § 24.36)  
12.20.120 - Property damage—Notice. 
A.  At least seventy-two hours in advance of reaching any property referred to in Sections 12.20.100 and 12.20.110 the holder of the permit under which the proposed moving is to be done shall notify the person owning, operating or controlling such property to displace, cut or remove the same to permit the moving of such building or structure and shall at the time exhibit to such person the properly issued permit authorizing the moving of such building or structure. It shall then be the duty of such person promptly to displace, cut or remove such property sufficiently to allow the passage of the building or structure along the street, alley or highway; provided, that the holder of the permit has first made arrangements satisfactory to the person owning, operating or controlling such property to guarantee payment of the cost of such displacement, cutting or removal of such property, and the replacement thereof, including the wages of persons employed therefor. 
B.  In every case in which the wires or other property of the city are involved the seventy-two-hour advance notice required in this section shall be served upon the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.37).  
12.20.130 - Across railway tracks—Consent. 
No building or other structure shall be moved across any railway tracks unless with the consent of the person controlling such tracks. 
(Prior code § 24.38).  
12.20.140 - Service pipes disconnected and sealed. 
No building shall be moved until all sewers, water pipes, gas pipes and other services are disconnected and sealed, at least one foot outside the property line. The work of disconnecting such services shall comply with Chapter 17.15 and shall require such permits and inspection as provided in the Chapter 17.15. 
(Prior code § 24.39).  
12.20.150 - City not liable. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as rendering the city, city engineer or any officer or employee of the city, personally liable for any damage arising out of a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 24.40).  
Chapter 12.24 - CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall construct any sidewalk, curb, gutter or other work or improvement within, along, upon or under any of the streets of tile city, without the owner first having received a permit to do so from the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.41).  
12.24.020 - Permit—Granted by city engineer. 
The city engineer may grant any permit for any such work provided for in this chapter, where, in the opinion of the city engineer, such work may not result in the creation of a hazard to public peace, health or safety or may not create or constitute a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 24.42).  
12.24.030 - Permit—Application. 
Application for the permit required in this chapter shall be made in writing to the city engineer and shall contain the following information: the name of the property owner, his mailing address, the official description of his property adjacent to which the work is proposed to be done and a brief description of the proposed work. 
(Prior code § 24.43).  
12.24.040 - Permit—Fee. 
Before any permit is issued for doing work under this chapter, there shall be paid to the city as a deposit toward the fee for issuing the permit, an amount established by the city engineer sufficient to cover estimated engineering and inspection costs for the authorized work. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual engineering and inspection costs incurred by city in support of such work. Any moneys due the city shall be paid prior to final acceptance of the work. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual cost, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1223 § 2, 1978: prior code § 24.45).  
12.24.050 - Permit—Not granted in improvement district. 
No application for a permit under this chapter shall be considered, nor any permit issued by the city engineer for any such work within the area included in any improvement district after the city council has passed any resolution of intention to do such work under an improvement district proceeding. 
(Prior code § 24.46).  
12.24.060 - Curb openings—Permit. 
For reasons of pedestrian and traffic safety it is the intent of this chapter to limit the number, the length and the location of curb openings. It is unlawful for any person to remove or open any curb or portion thereof on any of the streets of the city; provided, however, that curbs within the city may be removed or opened for the purpose of constructing a standard driveway, as defined in Section 12.24.180, for property contiguous thereto, after a permit to do so has been obtained from the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.47).  
12.24.070 - Curb openings—Permit—Limitations. 
Permits for the removal or opening of curbs or portions thereof may be issued by the city engineer, of the city for the purpose of providing driveways from streets onto the property contiguous thereto, limited, however, as provided in this chapter. When a permit is issued in accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall remove the curb specified within the permit and shall then immediately construct a standard driveway. 
(Prior code § 24.48).  
12.24.080 - Curb openings—Maximum for driveway. 
No more than twenty feet of any curb shall be removed or left open for the purpose of providing a driveway for any residence. Where the street frontage of any lot exceeds seventy-five feet, a permit may be issued for two separate driveways. The combined length of curb to be removed for the two driveways shall not exceed twenty-four feet. 
(Prior code § 24.50).  
12.24.090 - Curb openings—Maximum for commercial driveway. 
A.  No more than thirty feet of any curb shall be removed or left open for any single commercial driveway; provided, however, that in no event shall the total length of curb left open for all driveways exceed fifty per cent of the frontage of the property occupied by the business. 
B.  On a corner lot the amount of curb left open for driveway purposes along one street frontage shall not exceed fifty per cent of the frontage along the street. 
(Prior code § 24.50.1).  
12.24.100 - Curb openings—Maximum for industrial driveway. 
There shall be no limit to the amount of curb to be left open for any driveway in an industrial zone where the property contiguous thereto is used for industrial purposes, subject, however, to the conditions set forth in Section 12.24.130. 
(Prior code § 24.50.2).  
12.24.110 - Inspection—Fee. 
There shall be paid to the city a deposit in the amount determined by the city engineer as sufficient to cover the estimated cost of engineering and inspection of said public improvements. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual costs to the city of such engineering and inspection. Final acceptance of the work shall be withheld until all moneys due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city, the finance officer shall refund the difference to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1223 § 3, 1978: prior code § 24.51).  
12.24.120 - Curb removal—Permit—Authorization. 
The city engineer may issue permits for the removal of curb in addition to the amount specified in Sections 12.24.080, 12.24.090, and 12.24.100 only after being authorized to do so by the city council. 
(Prior code § 24.52).  
12.24.130 - Curb removal—Permit—Denial. 
In any permit issued by him, the city engineer shall designate the portion of curb to be removed or left open. The city engineer may deny the permit for the removal of the curb within the curb return area created by the prolongation of the property lines within two feet of any fire hydrant, within two feet of any catch basin or drainage structure, or in other locations where the construction of the driveway conflicts with the public use of the street right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 24.53).  
12.24.140 - Curb removal—Permit—Application. 
Every person desiring a permit to remove or leave open a curb under the provisions of this chapter shall first present a written application therefor to the city engineer. The application shall be upon a form provided by the city. 
(Prior code § 24.54).  
12.24.150 - Curb removal or opening—Permit—Contents. 
All permits issued by the city engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall be signed by the city engineer, or his duly authorized representative, and shall set forth among other things the following: 
A.  Name of the person to whom the permit is granted; 
B.  Location of the premises to which the driveway is leading; 
C.  The number of feet and the location of the curb to be removed or left open; 
D.  The amount of fees paid. 
(Prior code § 24.55).  
12.24.160 - Disposition of fees. 
All fees paid to the city engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid by him to the city finance officer. 
(Prior code § 24.56).  
12.24.170 - Grade set by city engineer. 
No grade or line for any sidewalk, curb, gutter or other work, as described in this chapter, to be done within, along, upon or under the streets of the city, shall be set by any person other than the city engineer or his authorized representative, or some competent person designated by him. 
(Prior code § 24.44).  
12.24.180 - Standard driveway defined. 
"Standard driveway," as used in this chapter, means a driveway constructed in accordance with the standard drawing prepared by the city engineer and on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.49).  
Chapter 12.28 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall cut or open any public street, alley, lane, court or place in the city for the purpose of laying therein any water or gas pipe, box, flume, conduit, electrical or otherwise, or for any other purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining a permit in writing from the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.58).  
12.28.020 - Permit—Application. 
Whenever any person desires the privilege of cutting, opening or making any ditch, trench, hole or other excavation upon any public streets, lanes, alleys, courts or places in the city, he shall make an application in writing to the city engineer on a form to be furnished by him and set forth such information as may be required in the form and any additional information which may be required by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 24.59).  
12.28.030 - Permit—Deposit. 
Before granting any permit, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in the amount determined by the city engineer as sufficient to cover the estimated expense of surface replacement, inspection and supervision of the work from its start to the completion of the work of replacement and repair of the area affected in the same condition that it was before the work was started; the amount shall be stated in the permit. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual cost to the city of such work. Final acceptance of the work shall be withheld until all moneys due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual cost of the work, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1223 § 4, 1978: prior code § 24.60).  
12.28.040 - Permit—Bond. 
Before granting a permit under this chapter, the city engineer may require the applicant to file with the division of engineering of the city, a satisfactory bond payable to the city in such amount as the city engineer deems sufficient, conditioned on the proper compliance by the permittee with the provisions of this chapter, and further, to reimburse the city for any expense occasioned by any failure of repair occurring within one year from the completion of any work done by the permittee. 
(Prior code § 24.63).  
12.28.050 - Rules and regulations—Authority. 
The city engineer is empowered to establish such rules and regulations as he may deem proper to be followed in the doing of any work, or incidental to any work, authorized under this chapter and to carry out the provisions hereof. 
(Prior code § 24.64).  
12.28.060 - Waiver of application. 
The city engineer may, in cases of emergency, waive the requirement for the application as set forth in this chapter, except the fee requirement, but in such event verbal authorization must be obtained from the city engineer to do any of the acts enumerated in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 24.65).  
12.28.070 - Work performance standard. 
Any person granted a permit under this chapter shall perform all of the work to the extent, in the manner, and in and during the time set forth in the permit in a good and workmanlike manner. He shall also repair and replace the area affected so that it will be in as goad condition as existed before the work was done. Such repair and replacement work shall also be done in a good and workmanlike manner. Any and all such work shall also be performed in such a manner as to minimize any inconvenience to individuals or the public and in general to protect the public safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 24.61).  
12.28.080 - Delay of work—Cost. 
If any permittee under the provisions of this chapter shall, in the opinion of the city engineer, cause unreasonable delay in the completion of the work as set forth in the application, in the permit and in Section 12.28.070, and such unreasonable delay, in the opinion of the city engineer, adversely affects the public convenience or safety, the city engineer, upon the giving of ten days' notice in writing to the permittee to perform the work immediately, may proceed with city facilities and labor or by any other facilities or means, to complete the work and charge the cost thereof to the permittee. 
(Prior code § 24.62).  
Chapter 12.32 - NEW RACKS 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - Restrictions—In roadway. 
No person shall install, use, or maintain any news rack which projects onto, into, or aver any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of a roadway. 
(Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(a)).  
12.32.020 - Restrictions—Safety—Interference with traffic. 
No person shall install, use, or maintain any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any sidewalk or parkway, when the installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when the site or location is used far public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or other governmental use, or when the news rack reasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, or when the news rack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. 
(Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(b)).  
12.32.030 - Standards. 
Any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No news rack shall exceed five feet height, thirty inches in width, or two feet in depth. 
B.  News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. News racks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. News racks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No news rack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a news stand or another news rack. 
C.  No news rack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed object. 
D.  News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three news racks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen inches shall separate each group of three news racks so attached. 
E.  No news rack, or group of attached news racks allowed under subsection D, shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five pounds when empty. 
F.  No news rack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within five feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility 
4.  Within five feet of any driveway; 
5.  Within five feet ahead of, and five feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
6.  Within five feet of any bus bench; 
7.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet; 
8.  Within five feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, or trees or within five feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
G.  No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
H.  Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and attractive condition and in good repair at all times. 
(Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(c)).  
12.32.040 - Identification attached. 
Every person who places or maintains a news rack on the streets of the city shall have his name, address, and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
(Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(d)).  
12.32.050 - Correction of violations; hearing. 
(a)  Any news rack installed or maintained in violation of this chapter may be seized and removed in accordance with this section. Seizure and removal of news racks in violation of Sections 12.32.020 and 12.32.030 may take place only if it is impractical to remedy the violation by moving the news rack to another point on the street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way without mechanical assistance. Before any news rack is seized, the person responsible for its installation and maintenance shall be notified and given ten days in which to remedy the violation or to request a hearing to contest the seizure in the manner provided in subsection (b). Notice to the party responsible for the news rack shall be given by written notice sent to the address for such party, and an additional notice tag shall be affixed to the news rack on the date of notice. The latter notice shall be sufficient if no identification is shown on the news rack. Both the notice sent to the address stated on the news rack and the additional notice tag affixed to the news rack shall state the place to request a hearing to contest the seizure. 
(b)  Any person notified under subsection (a) may request a hearing before a designated city official (the "hearing officer") in the manner set forth below. The hearing officer shall be the director of public works or his designee. The person notified under subsection (a) may request a hearing by making a request in the office of the director of public works. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days after the request is made by the party notified. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. Any action by the city with respect to the alleged violation shall be stayed pending the hearing officer's decision following the hearing which decision shall be rendered in writing no later than five days after the hearing. 
(c)  The city may seize and remove a news rack if the person responsible for such news rack (i) has neither requested a hearing before the hearing officer nor remedied the violation within ten days following date of notice, or (ii) has failed to remedy the violation within ten days after receiving a copy of the written decision that the news rack was installed or maintained in violation of this chapter, following a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (b). Such persons shall be notified of the seizure. Seized news racks shall be retained by the city and may be recovered by the responsible party for a period of at least ten days following seizure. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (c), if a news rack is installed or maintained in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate danger to persons or property, the city may seize such news rack without prior notice to the person responsible for such news rack if it is impractical to remedy the danger by one person moving the news rack to another point on the street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way without mechanical assistance. The person responsible for such news rack shall be notified promptly after such seizure has occurred, and shall have the right to request an informal hearing before the director of public works within ten days after receiving such notice to determine whether the seizure was proper. Any news rack seized shall be retained by the city and may be recovered by the persons responsible for such news rack as provided in subsection (c). 
(e)  Abandoned news racks may be removed by a public officer of the city and may be disposed of if not claimed by the person responsible for that news rack within ten days. The above notwithstanding, at least ten days before any news rack is removed under this subsection, the persons responsible for its installation or maintenance shall be given written notice pursuant to this section that such news rack is suspected of being abandoned. Such news rack shall not be removed if, before removal, the party responsible for its installation or maintenance informs the director of public works that the news rack has not been abandoned and promptly stocks and maintains the subject news rack. In addition, upon removal of any abandoned news rack, the person responsible for its installation or maintenance shall promptly be notified and given ten days in which to request an informal hearing before the director of public works. 
(Ord. 1729 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(e)).  
12.32.060 - Violation—Section 12.32.030. 
In the case of violations of provisions of Section 12.32.030 relative to restrictions upon attachments of news racks to property other than that owned by the owner of the news rack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon location of news racks, any public body or officer may, as an alternative to removal under Section 12.32.050, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. 
(Ord. 1306 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 24.70(f)).  
Chapter 12.36 - RESTAURANT ENCROACHMENT PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
12.36.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them: 
A.  "Building frontage" means the length of a side of a building which faces directly upon a public street or park. For purposes of this chapter, "faces directly upon a public street or park" means that the area formed by extending lines to the street or park from the two building sides which intersect the subject side of the building will not intersect in any portion of an existing structure. 
B.  "Permittee" means an applicant issued an encroachment permit pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  "Restaurant" means a commercial business establishment engaged in the selling of food or drink for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.020 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful far any restaurant owner or operator to construct, erect, place, keep or maintain any sign, showcase, rack, frame, table, chair or other device for the storage, display or sale of any food or merchandise of any kind, or to construct any structure or obstruction of any type along, under, over or above any public sidewalk or park without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city manager or his designee. Notwithstanding Section 12.08.020, encroachment permits shall be issued if all the requirements of this chapter are met and the city manager or his designee finds that the granting of such encroachment permit will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or significantly contribute to any traffic or other safety hazards. 
B.  All encroachment permits shall expire on December 31st of each year and are revocable at any time by the city council. Encroachment permits do not constitute the granting of an easement by the city and are only transferable or assignable with the permission of the city manager or his designee. Encroachment permits may be renewed on an annual basis. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.030 - Application for encroachment permit. 
Applications for encroachment permits pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted to the city manager. Every application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, address, social security number and driver's license number of every owner of the business. This information must be kept current; 
B.  A description of the tables, chairs and other equipment intended to be used and their desired location; 
C.  Such additional information as may be required by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.040 - Insurance. 
Every permittee shall be required to furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with coverage of at least $500,000 for property damage and $500,000 for personal injury or a minimum combined single limit coverage of $500,000 naming the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. This certificate shall provide that thirty (30) days written notice of cancellation shall be given to the city. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.050 - Hold harmless agreement. 
Every permittee shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability, costs, damages or injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in any way be connected with the use of the encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.060 - Public property use fee. 
For the privilege of using public property for a commercial enterprise, an annual public property use fee shall be paid by a permittee in advance in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150) for each encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.070 - Designated location. 
A.  A permittee shall only use such sidewalk or park as is designated and approved by the city manager or his designee. The use shall not be conducted in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of any sidewalk or parkway nor shall it obstruct the free passage into or from any business office or other establishment. 
B.  Public safety shall be the principal factor considered when determining allowable locations. In addition, a designated location shall not: 
1.  Obstruct a five (5) foot area for pedestrian travel along the sidewalk. The five-foot clearance shall be maintained at all times. 
2.  Extend beyond the extended line of the building frontage of the restaurant. 
3.  Extend to a depth of more than ten (10) feet from the property line. 
4.  Be located along more than one building frontage. 
5.  Be located closer than ten (10) feet of any driveway or alley approach. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.080 - Products sold. 
Permittees shall only sell food and beverages. The sale of goods and/or merchandise is prohibited. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.090 - Additional prohibitions. 
A.  Permittee shall erect no permanent structure within the encroachment area. 
B.  No signs shall be placed within the encroachment area. 
C.  All tables, chairs and other equipment shall be removed from the encroachment area during non-business hours. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.100 - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding Section 9.12.020, the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted within the encroachment area if permittee complies with all other laws relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages.  
12.36.110 - Smoking optional. 
At the option of the business owners, smoking shall be prohibited within the encroachment area. Any person who smokes in an area so designated as non-smoking is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.120 - Revocation of encroachment permit. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter, or any federal, state, county or local health regulations shall be grounds for revocation of the encroachment permit. In addition, any conduct of any permittee which is a threat to public health and safety shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the encroachment permit. Violation shall also be grounds for denial of any subsequent application by the permittee. 
B.  Notice of revocation hearing before the city manager shall be given to the permittee by mail at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may show cause why such permit should not be revoked or should not have been revoked. The city manager shall mail his determination of the revocation to the permittee within five (5) days after the hearing. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
12.36.130 - Appeal. 
Any decision of the city manager to issue, revoke, or deny an encroachment permit may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten (10) days of mailing of the city manager's decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting provided that the appeal is received at least seven (7) days before the meeting date. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1941 § 1 (part), 1996).  
Chapter 12.42 - TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES 
Sections: 
 
12.42.010 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, place, keep or maintain any sign, showcase, rack, frame, or other device for the storage, display or sale of any food or merchandise of any kind, or to construct any structure or obstruction of any type along, under, over or above any public street or alley or otherwise close any such street or alley without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city manager or his designee. Notwithstanding Section 12.08.020, encroachment permits shall be issued if all the requirements of this chapter are met and the city manager or his designee finds that the granting of such encroachment permit will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or significantly contribute to any traffic or other safety hazards. 
B.  No encroachment permit shall be issued for more than forty-eight (48) hours, or for any location within eight hundred (800) feet of a location covered by an encroachment period within the previous sixty (60) days. 
C.  Encroachment permits do not constitute the granting of an easement by the city and are only transferable or assignable with the permission of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.020 - Application for encroachment permit. 
Applications for encroachment permits pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted to the city manager. Every application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name, address, social security number and driver's license number of the applicant. 
B.  A description of the proposed use of the encroachment area and the equipment, obstructions, etc., intended to be placed in the encroachment area. 
C.  Such additional information as may be required by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.030 - Insurance. 
Every permittee shall be required to furnish the city with a certificate of insurance with coverage of at least $500,000 for property damage and $500,000 for personal injury or a minimum combined single limit coverage of $500,000 naming the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. This certificate shall provide that thirty (30) days written notice of cancellation shall be given to the city. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.040 - Hold harmless agreement. 
Every permittee shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability, costs, damages or injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise out of or in any way be connected with the use of the encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.050 - Public property use fee for non-residential uses. 
For the privilege of using public property for a private business purpose, a permit fee shall be paid by a non-residential permittee in advance in the sum of fifty dollars ($50) for each encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.060 - Designated location. 
A.  A permittee shall only use such street or alley as is designated and approved by the city manager or his designee. 
B.  Public safety shall be the principal factor considered when determining allowable locations. In addition, a designated area shall not: 
1.  Be located on a major arterial street. 
2.  Extend for more than four hundred (400) feet along a street or alley. 
3.  Include any sidewalk along the designated area. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.070 - Additional requirements. 
A.  Permittee shall erect no permanent structure within the encroachment area. 
B.  All equipment, trash and debris shall be removed from the encroachment area prior to the expiration of the encroachment permit. 
C.  Permittee shall place and remove traffic barricades and post parking restrictions as required by the city manager or his designee. 
D.  Permittee shall contact all businesses and residences within one-half mile of the encroachment area at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the encroachment period advising them of the encroachment period and the intended use of the encroachment area. Permittee shall secure signatures granting permission from businesses which have frontage on the encroachment area, and present such with the completed application. 
E.  Security shall be provided by the permittee as required by the police department. 
F.  Permittee shall pay for any city service required for security or for any clean-up not performed by the permittee. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.080 - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding Section 9.12.020, the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted within the encroachment area if permittee complies with all other laws relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.090 - Revocation of encroachment permit. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter, or any federal, state, county or local health regulation shall be grounds for revocation of the encroachment permit. In addition, any conduct of any permittee which is a threat to public health and safety shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the encroachment permit. Violation shall also be grounds for denial of any subsequent application by the permittee. 
B.  Notice of revocation hearing before the city manager shall be given to the permittee by mail at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may show cause why such permit should not be revoked or should not have been revoked. The city manager shall mail his determination to the permittee within five (5) days after the hearing. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996).  
12.42.100 - Appeal. 
Any decision of the city manager to issue, revoke, or deny an encroachment permit may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten (10) days of mailing of the city manager's decision. The city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting provided that the appeal is received at least seven (7) days before the meeting date. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1941 § 2 (part), 1996). 

Title 13 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE 
Chapters:  
Division I. - General Provisions  
Chapter 13.02 - APPLICATION AND EFFECT 
Sections: 
 
13.02.010 - Short title. 
This title shall be cited and referred to as the "Merced Improvement Procedure Code." 
(Prior code § 14A.1).  
13.02.020 - Scope. 
Proceedings for the acquisition or construction, or both, or the maintenance and operation of any public improvement or property of a local nature or the acquisition of lands or easements, or buildings or improvements or property, or any or more than one thereof, therefor, may be had pursuant to this title whether or not provided in any general law. 
(Prior code § 14A.2).  
13.02.030 - Time limitation. 
This title shall not apply to any proceedings in which the resolution of intention was adopted prior to the effective date hereof, excepting the supplemental assessment, reassessment, refunding and curative provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.3).  
13.02.040 - Procedures alternative. 
The procedures provided in the several articles or bond plans or collection plans of this title are alternative. 
(Prior code § 14A.4).  
13.02.050 - Title not exclusive. 
This title is not exclusive, but the resolution of intention in any proceedings under an act or general law may provide that the act or general law is supplemented by any part or parts of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.5).  
13.02.060 - General law or act defined. 
"General law" or "act" means an enactment of the Legislature of the state. Unless otherwise provided, any reference to any general law or act shall apply to such law as now or hereafter amended or codified. 
(Prior code § 14A.6).  
13.02.070 - Title to supersede general law. 
The provisions of this title shall supersede the provisions of any general law or act in conflict with this title in any proceeding taken pursuant to this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.7).  
13.02.080 - Adopted. 
This title is adopted pursuant to Section 200 of the Charter of the city. In proceedings held pursuant to this title, which are a municipal affair, the general laws referred to in this title are deemed part of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.8).  
13.02.090 - Proceedings deemed state affair. 
In the event that any proceeding held pursuant hereto shall be adjudged a state affair, it is declared to be the intention that the proceedings were held pursuant to the general law or laws cited in the articles of this title specified in the resolution of intention therein. 
(Prior code § 14A.9).  
13.02.100 - Acquisitions and improvements within a single proceeding. 
One or more acquisitions and improvements or acquisitions or improvements may be had in a single proceeding. 
(Prior code § 14A.10).  
13.02.110 - Article supplementation and control. 
Divisions I, II, III and IV are supplemental to and controlling over the provisions of each other part of this title in conflict therewith. 
(Prior code § 14A.11).  
13.02.120 - Resolution of intention—Generally. 
The resolution of intention shall specify the parts of Divisions V, VI and VII of this title pursuant to which the proceedings therein are taken. 
(Prior code § 14A.36).  
13.02.130 - Resolution of intention—Reference. 
In all resolutions, notices, orders and determinations, subsequent to the resolution of intention and the notice of improvement, it shall be sufficient to refer to the resolution of intention by number for a description of the project. 
(Prior code § 14A.37).  
Chapter 13.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this title or in any proceedings conducted pursuant hereto or in any laws referred to in this title have the meanings set forth in this chapter unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Prior code § 14A.12).  
13.04.020 - Acquisition and improvement. 
"Acquisition and improvement," when used, referring to that which is done, which is to be done, or which may be done under proceeding's had under this title, is understood to be generic and as being employed for the purpose of brevity and to avoid repetition, and refers to and includes any or all of the things comprehended in the meaning of the words acquire and improve in this title. Acquisition may be by gift, purchase, lease or eminent domain, and may be before, while or after the thing being acquired comes into being. 
(Prior code § 14A.28).  
13.04.030 - Block. 
"Block," whether it be a regular or irregular block, means a parcel larger than a lot which is bounded by a street or a boundary line of some other parcel which is not a part of it. 
(Prior code § 14A.22).  
13.04.040 - City. 
"City" means the city of Merced. 
(Prior code § 14A.13).  
13.04.050 - Clerk. 
"Clerk" means the city clerk of the city. 
(Prior code § 14A.14).  
13.04.060 - Contractor. 
"Contractor" means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, organization or business trust, and includes contracting owners or their agents, to whom a contract for the performance of any work authorized is awarded. 
(Prior code § 14A.26).  
13.04.070 - Council. 
"Council" means the council of the city. 
(Prior code § 14A.15).  
13.04.080 - County. 
"County" means the county of Merced. 
(Prior code § 14A.16).  
13.04.090 - Director of finance. 
"Director of finance" means the city director of finance. 
(Prior code § 14A.18).  
13.04.100 - Engineer or superintendent of streets. 
"Engineer" or "superintendent of streets" means the director of public works. 
(Prior code § 14A.17).  
13.04.110 - Improvements not specifically enumerated. 
Notwithstanding the enumeration of specific improvements falling within the definition of public improvement, the city council may determine that any work or improvement which may be acquired or constructed, repaired, operated or maintained in the name of the city as a local improvement is a public improvement as used in this title and may proceed to apply the procedures, of this title as though such improvement were specifically enumerated in one of the references heretofore mentioned. 
(Prior code § 14A.32).  
13.04.120 - Lot, land, piece or parcel of land. 
"Lot, land, piece or parcel of land," whether used singly or in combination, includes property owned or controlled by any person. 
(Prior code § 14A.21).  
13.04.130 - Owner. 
"Owner" means the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the county recorder's office of the county in which the property is situated, or the person in possession of the property or building under claim of ownership, or exercising acts of ownership over the same for himself, or as life tenant, or as the executor administrator, or guardian of the owner. If the property is leased, the possession f the tenant or lessee holding and occupying the property means the possession of the owner. 
(Prior code § 14A.27).  
13.04.140 - Paved. 
"Paved" or "repaved" includes pavement of any commonly used paving material. 
(Prior code § 14A.25).  
13.04.150 - Place. 
"Place" includes any public street, alley, easement, right-of-way or other public property which has been dedicated and accepted or is otherwise publicly owned according to law, or which has been in common and undisputed use by the public for a period of not less than five years next preceding, or which is sought to be acquired in conjunction with any proceeding undertaken pursuant hereto, or any encroachment permit on any state highway or public utility property. 
(Prior code § 14A.24).  
13.04.160 - Project. 
"Project" or "improvement," when used in the generic sense, means the acquisition and/or improvement undertaken in a single proceeding. 
(Prior code § 14A.30).  
13.04.170 - Public improvements. 
"Public improvements" means and includes all those kinds of work as set out in Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 1 (Section 5101) of the Streets and Highways Code, Division 12, Chapter 2 of the Streets and Highways Code (Section 10100), and all other improvements of a local nature whether or not of the same class or otherwise germane to any of those specified therein. 
(Prior code § 14A.31).  
13.04.180 - Quarter block. 
"Quarter block," when used with reference to an irregular block, includes all lots or portions of lots having any frontage on either intersecting street halfway from the intersection to the next street, or, if no street intervenes, to a boundary line of some other parcel which is not a part of that block. 
(Prior code § 14A.23).  
13.04.190 - Street. 
"Street" includes avenues, highways, lanes, alleys, crossings or intersections and courts which have been dedicated or offered for dedication and accepted according to law or which have been in common and undisputed use by the public for a period of not less than five years next preceding, or which have been dedicated to a semipublic use. 
(Prior code § 14A.19).  
13.04.200 - Work or improvement. 
"Work or improvement," whether used singly or in combination, means and includes any work, which is authorized to be done or any improvement which is authorized to be made under this title, as well as the construction, reconstruction and repair of all or part of any of the work or improvement. 
(Prior code § 14A.29).  
Chapter 13.06 - INCIDENTAL EXPENSES 
Sections: 
 
13.06.010 - Acquisition. 
Incidental expenses, when referring to an acquisition, means and includes: 
A.  The costs of maps, plats, surveys and the compensation of the engineer and all engineering costs relating to the acquisition; 
B.  The costs of title searches, certificates of title, title insurance and other costs relating to title; 
C.  The compensation of appraisers and all appraisal costs; 
D.  The compensation of rights-of-way agents and all costs relating thereto; 
E.  The compensation of attorneys and all costs relating to the acquisition; 
F.  The compensation of referees and all costs relating thereto; 
G.  All clerical, stenographic and printing costs incidental to the acquisition; 
H.  All charges and expenses of any city officials relating to the acquisition; 
I.  All costs and expenses awarded to the defendants in eminent domain proceedings or otherwise paid to them or their attorneys in settlement. 
(Prior code § 14A.33).  
13.06.020 - Improvement. 
Incidental expenses, when referring to an improvement, means and includes: 
A.  The compensation of the engineers, including all costs of preliminary and final surveys, estimates of cost, reports, plans, profiles, cross-sections and specifications; 
B.  The costs of setting grade stakes and of inspecting, supervising and accepting the work, estimating and certifying progress and final payments for the costs thereof; 
C.  The costs of analyses and testing; 
D.  The compensation of the attorneys and all costs relating to the improvements; 
E.  All clerical, stenographic and printing costs incidental to the improvements. 
(Prior code § 14A.34).  
13.06.030 - Proceedings. 
Incidental expenses, when referring to the assessment and assessment bond proceedings for an acquisition and/or improvement, means and includes: 
A.  The costs of preparing the proceedings, including all clerical, stenographic and printing costs; 
B.  The compensation of the engineers; 
C.  The compensation of the attorneys; 
D.  The compensation of the city for the services of any city officials in the proceedings or in the levy and collection of the assessments and the issuance and payment of the bonds; 
E.  The costs of preparing the diagram of the assessment district and the assessment and of the boundary map; 
F.  The costs of issuing and marketing the bonds; 
G.  Interest at standard rates on moneys of the city advanced to the project prior to the time that moneys are available for repayment for the assessment and bonds; 
H.  All fees, costs and compensation expended or incurred by the city in the defense of any action questioning the validity of any act or thing done or performed under this title; 
I.  Any other expense incurred by authority of this title or incidental to the completion of the project in the manner specified. 
(Prior code § 14A.35).  
Chapter 13.08 - NOTICES 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Generally. 
No notice, or any publication of any notice, order, resolution or other matter, other than that expressly provided for in this title, or required by the state or federal constitutions, shall be necessary to give validity to any of the proceedings provided for in this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.38).  
13.08.020 - Responsibility—City clerk. 
Whenever any notice, resolution, order, or other matter is required to be published or posted or mailed, and the duty of doing or procuring the same is not specifically enjoined upon any officer or person, the clerk shall perform or procure the performing of the notice. 
(Prior code § 14A.39).  
13.08.030 - Publication—Filing. 
Notices, resolutions or other documents required to be published shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, unless fewer publications are provided by general law. If any hearing is therein noticed, said hearing shall be had not less than ten days after the first publication unless a shorter time is provided by general law. The filing or recording of any maps, diagram or other documents required to be filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder or in the office of any other public official prior to any hearing or any other event shall be filed or recorded not less than ten days prior to such hearing or event unless a shorter time is provided by general law. 
(Prior code § 14A.40).  
13.08.040 - Posting and mailing—When required. 
It shall not be necessary to post or mail any notice, resolution or other document or make or file any affidavit in regard thereto, unless posting or mailing is necessary to provide jurisdiction. In that event, the posting or mailing shall be at least ten days prior to any hearing provided therein unless a shorter time is provided by general law. 
(Prior code § 14A.41).  
13.08.050 - Posting—Where. 
All documents provided to be posted, other than a notice of improvement, shall be posted on or near the council chamber door or on any bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall. 
(Prior code § 14A.42).  
13.08.060 - Mailing. 
When any notice, resolution or other document is required to be mailed, it shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the property owners involved, as follows: 
A.  To all persons owning real property proposed to be assessed, whose names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes, including the utility roll, at said address; 
B.  In cases of transfers of land, or parts thereof, subsequent to the date on which the last assessor's roll was prepared, to such transferee, at his name and address, as the same appear on the records in the assessor's office which the assessor will use to prepare the next ensuing assessor's roll; 
C.  To each person, including the owner or person having an interest in property assessed by the state Linder Section 14 of Article XIII of the California Constitution, who has filed with the county assessor for the current fiscal year, a statement of his name, address, and a description of the property owned by him, requesting that a notice of all proposals affecting such property shall be mailed to him (Government Code 58905), at such address; 
D.  To such person at his address or as otherwise known to the clerk; 
E.  In case of doubt as to the name and address of any owner, the clerk shall cause said notice to be conspicuously posted on the property of such person in the assessment district, at or near the entrance thereto, so that it will be visible to persons on entering, leaving or passing said property. 
(Prior code § 14A.43).  
13.08.070 - Notice of improvement. 
Notices of improvement shall be entitled, "Notice of Improvement," in letters at least one-half inch in height. The council may provide in the resolution of intention or other document fixing the hearing whether and where such notices shall be posted. 
(Prior code § 14A.44).  
13.08.080 - Certificate is proof. 
The certificate of the clerk or officer giving, or procuring notice by posting or mailing shall be conclusive proof of the giving of such notice, and no affidavit shall be required. 
(Prior code 14A.45).  
Chapter 13.10 - PURCHASES AND ASSESSMENTS 
Sections: 
 
13.10.010 - Contributions. 
Contributions or partial payments from the United States, or the state, or any agency of either, or from the county, or any other local agency, may be accepted and the-same or any available city moneys applied to any part of the costs of a project at any time during or after the proceedings, and may also be applied in reduction of the amount assessed or to be assessed therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.46).  
13.10.020 - Assessments, warrants and bonds—Declaration. 
In any proceeding had under this title, the city may declare in the resolution of intention that it intends to purchase the assessment, warrant or bonds to be issued therein. 
(Prior code § 14A.47).  
13.10.030 - Assessments, warrants and bonds—Payment. 
The city shall, upon the issuance of the assessment, warrant or bonds, as the case may be, pay to the contractor, under Chapter 13.32, or into court, under Chapter 13.34, or into the construction fund, tinder Chapter 13.36, the principal amount thereof. 
(Prior code 14A.48).  
13.10.040 - Assessment, warrants and bonds—Succession of rights. 
The bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer. In that case, the city shall succeed to all rights under the assessment, warrant and bonds. 
(Prior code §§ 14A.49, 14A.50).  
13.10.050 - Assessments, warrants and bonds—Subsequent purchase. 
The shall have the power subsequently to acquire and own any bonds or assessments or warrant issued or levied or made hereunder, or now issued and outstanding, for any improvement and/or acquisition of the city. 
(Prior code § 14A.51).  
13.10.060 - Delinquent property—Generally. 
The city may bid and purchase any real or personal property offered for sale for the non-payment of any improvement assessment levied and assessed under any of the provisions of this title, or of any installment thereof, or penalties, costs or interest thereon, or in any suit brought to foreclose the assessment, and shall in like manner become the owner thereof, and the right of redemption shall in like manner terminate. 
(Prior code § 14A.52).  
13.10.070 - Delinquent property—Disposition. 
Whenever any property has been acquired by the city at any sale, then the property, or any lien thereon or interest therein created by the assessment, may be released, assigned, sold or otherwise disposed of by the city as it determines; provided, however, that no release, assignment, sale or other disposition of any lien or interest or of the property shall be made unless there is first paid to the city a sum of money equal to, and not less than the amount paid therefor by the city, together with all accrued penalties, costs, interest and necessary expenses incurred; provided further, that if any lien or interest, or property cannot be, as determined by the council, sold for the amounts or charges computed as provided in this title, then the council may sell any lien or interest or property for the best price obtainable according to its judgment. 
(Prior code § 14A.53).  
13.10.080 - Sewer and water connection—Assessment. 
Charges established by the city for the privilege of connecting to the city's sanitary sewerage or water facilities, or as a condition to providing sewer or water service, may be included in and collected as part of any special assessments levied under the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.54).  
13.10.090 - Sewer and water connection—Assessment division. 
In any proceeding for the acquisition or construction of sanitary sewerage facilities or water facilities, or both, the council may direct that each assessment be divided into two parts, one representing a connection charge (hereinafter called "the connection charge portion") and the other the balance remaining after deducting the connection charge portion from the original total assessment (hereinafter called "the remaining balance"). 
(Prior code § 14A.55).  
13.10.100 - Sewer and water connection—Assessment established. 
Charges for the privilege of connecting to the sanitary sewerage facilities or water distribution facilities of the city are established as a condition to the providing of sewer or water service, respectively, to become effective in any given project area or portion thereof upon adoption of the resolution ordering cash advances in any project provided for in Section 13.10.130. 
(Prior code § 14A.56).  
13.10.110 - Sewer and water connection—Assessment amount. 
The amount of such connection charge in each project area or portion thereof shall be fixed in such resolution provided for in Section 13.10.130. 
(Prior code § 14A.57).  
13.10.120 - Sewer and water connection—Cash advance. 
If any project in which the council directs a division of assessments as provided in Section 13.10.100, the resolution directing such division shall provide for cash advances to the project to represent all of the connection charge portions of assessments except those as to which property owners have failed to exercise the deduction option as provided in Section 13.10.130. 
(Prior code § 14A.58).  
13.10.130 - Property owner's option. 
A.  In any project where such charges are fixed and cash advances ordered, one connection charge shall be included in each individual assessment as finally confirmed by the council and recorded in the office of the superintendent of streets. The owner of each parcel assessed, in the notice to pay assessments, shall be given the option of reducing his assessment by the amount of the connection charge included therein. The original record of any assessment as to which the option is exercised, shall be marked "$.....paid by connection charge deduction" (inserting the amount of charge to be deducted). Each connection charge deducted, as well as any charge represented by the city's cash advance to the project, is payable in cash at the time of connection to the facilities constructed in the proceedings. If a connection charge is left in the assessment and either paid in cash or allowed to go to bond, the property is entitled to a single connection without payment of further charges therefor other than the cost of constructing lateral connections not included in the proceedings and any permit, inspection or other fees now or hereafter established by the city. The council may, by resolution, change the amount of the charge at any time. 
B.  If the option has not been exercised by the end of the cash payment period, the owner will be deemed to have elected to leave his assessment unchanged. 
(Prior code § 14A.59).  
Chapter 13.12 - FORCE ACCOUNT 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Generally. 
The council may, by resolution adopted by a majority vote of all its members, determine and declare that in its opinion the work in question may be more economically and satisfactorily performed by day labor, and/or materials and supplies purchased at a lower price in the open market and may order that the same be done by force account, in the manner stated in this chapter, without further observance of the provisions hereof with reference to the award of contract or execution of contract or bonds. 
(Prior code § 14A.60).  
13.12.020 - Authority. 
In the case of a force account, the city shall have the same rights as a contractor, and the work and improvements shall be directed by the engineer. 
(Prior code § 14A.6 1).  
13.12.030 - Assessments acquired—Generally. 
When the work is pursuant to Chapter 13.32, the city becomes the owner of the assessment made to pay the cost thereof, and of all bonds issued to represent the assessments, with like power of enforcement as if held by a contractor. No warrant need be issued in that case. 
(Prior code § 14A.62).  
13.12.040 - Assessments acquired—Payment. 
The treasurer is authorized, after the assessment and diagram have been recorded, to collect and receive payment of the several amounts due thereon in the manner provided in the act under which the proceedings have been taken for, and in the place of, the contractor, and his statement of payments received, when filed, shall constitute and be in lieu of, the contractor's return of the warrant and statement of payments received. 
(Prior code § 14A.63).  
13.12.050 - Assessments acquired—Bonds. 
The bonds, when issued, shall be made payable to bearer. 
(Prior code § 14A.64).  
Chapter 13.14 - REVOLVING FUND 
Sections: 
 
13.14.010 - Authority. 
In the exercise of any of the powers now or hereafter provided for in this title, including the right to take immediate possession in eminent domain proceedings, the city council may create, use and reimburse a revolving fund or funds. 
(Prior code § 14A.65).  
13.14.020 - State law applicability. 
The provisions of Article 2, Chapter 3, Division 4, Title 4 (commencing with Section 43420) of the Government Code shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.66).  
Chapter 13.16 - PARCELS AND DIAGRAM 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Parcels. 
Parcels may be described as contained on the assessment roll on which city taxes are collected, or with reference to recorded maps or deeds or assessor's maps, or by other means sufficient for identification. Prior code § 14A.67).  
13.16.020 - Diagram. 
The diagram may describe the property by reference to or by copies of official maps or assessor's maps or be otherwise sufficient to identify the several parcels thereon. It shall not be necessary to show thereon their relationship to the acquisitions or improvements. 
(Prior code § 14A.68).  
Division II. - General Procedure  
Chapter 13.18 - PROTESTS AND HEARINGS 
Sections: 
 
13.18.010 - Objections. 
Objections may be made to ordering improvements or acquisitions, to grades, to an assessment, to the extent of the district, to any supplemental assessment or reassessment, to the legality of any act or proceeding or to any part of any thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.69).  
13.18.020 - Form of protest. 
Protests shall be in writing, signed by the protestant, contain a description of the property owned by him sufficient to identify same, and state his interest therein and the grounds of protest, and be filed with the city clerk at or before the hour set for hearing thereof. The clerk shall endorse thereon the day and hour of filing. 
(Prior code § 14A.70).  
13.18.030 - Legality objections. 
Objections to legality shall specify the illegality claimed and no other illegalities need be considered. 
(Prior code § 14A.71).  
13.18.040 - Withdrawal of protest. 
Any written protest may be withdrawn by the protestant either orally in public meeting or in writing and filed with the clerk at any time before council action on the project. 
(Prior code § 14A.72).  
13.18.050 - Majority protests overruled. 
The council, by the affirmative vote of five-sevenths of its members, may overrule protests by the owners of more than half the area to be assessed, provided that proceedings have been had as provided in Chapter 13.30, or its application is avoided by petition or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 14A.73).  
13.18.060 - Authority at hearing. 
At the hearing the council shall consider and pass upon protests, may remedy or correct any irregularity and may order any improvement or acquisitions to be completed according to the plans and specifications and to its satisfaction. 
(Prior code § 14A.74).  
13.18.070 - Continuances of hearings. 
A hearing may be continued to a specific time and place and no notice of such continuance by posting or otherwise is required. Where any matter is noticed for hearing and is not heard, it is deemed submitted and may be acted upon at any subsequent meeting. 
(Prior code § 14A.75).  
Chapter 13.20 - MODIFICATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.20.010 - Authority. 
During the progress of the project, the council may make changes in the improvements or acquisitions, the boundaries of the assessment district, the assessments, the estimate of the costs or the proceedings. 
(Prior code § 14A.76).  
13.20.020 - Notice. 
Where the changes result in extending the boundaries of the assessment district, increasing the total amount to be collected, or in the proceedings, or in the amount of any assessment after it has been levied, it shall not be ordered, except after notice of its intention so to do published by one insertion in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement was published, describing the proposed changes and specifying the time and place of hearing, and posted and mailed to the owners affected. 
(Prior code § 14A.77).  
13.20.030 - Protests. 
Protests may only be made against the C, proposed changes. 
(Prior code § 14A.78).  
13.20.040 - Changes ordered—Generally. 
If no protests are made, or are found to be insufficient, or have been overruled, immediately thereon the council may order the changes. 
(Prior code § 14A.79).  
13.20.050 - Changes ordered—Record of. 
The changes may be made upon the face of the plans, specifications, estimate, diagram, assessment or other document affected or by an amended or supplemental document. 
(Prior code § 14A.80).  
Chapter 13.22 - SUPPLEMENTAL ASSESSMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.22.010 - Generally. 
If the first assessment for any improvement or acquisition, or if the bonds issued to pay all costs, damages and expenses incurred or to be incurred, including any judgments rendered, or to be rendered, and the costs and expenses of the action or proceedings, or the estimated amount of any thereof, are insufficient, the council may order a supplemental assessment to raise the deficit. 
(Prior code § 14A.81).  
13.22.020 - How levied. 
The assessment is made and collected in the same manner, as nearly as may be, as the first assessment, or a reassessment may be had therefor, and such proceedings may be repeated until sufficient money is raised to pay for same. 
(Prior code § 14A.82).  
13.22.030 - Procedure. 
Notice shall be given, protests may be made, and said supplemental assessment had, confirmed and recorded as provided in Chapter 13.20. 
(Prior code § 14A.83).  
13.22.040 - Payment. 
Proceedings for notice, demand and payment shall be had as provided for the original assessment. 
(Prior code § 14A.84).  
13.22.050 - Benefit zones. 
Notwithstanding any provision in any act regarding the manner in which assessments may be determined, the city council may adopt and confirm such assessment as will, in their opinion, best and most equitably apportion the cost of the improvement among the benefited properties according to benefits received. For this purpose, the district may be divided into zones of benefit. The determination of the council is final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 14A.85).  
Division III. - Legal Remedies  
Chapter 13.24 - LEGAL REMEDIES 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Waiver. 
All objections not made within the time and manner provided in this title are waived. 
(Prior code § 14A.87).  
13.24.020 - Orders final. 
All decisions and determinations of the council, upon notice and hearing, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal, as to all errors, informalities, omissions and irregularities which might have been avoided, or which might have been remedied during the progress of the proceedings, or which can be remedied, and as to illegalities not amounting to a want of due process of law. 
(Prior code § 14A.88).  
13.24.030 - Notice of award. 
The notice to pay assessments under Chapter 13.34, the notice to pay assessments and of award of contract under Chapter 13.36 and a notice of confirming assessment or reassessment under any other procedure in this title shall have like curative effect as the notice of award under the Improvement Act of 1911. 
(Prior code § 14A.89).  
13.24.040 - Liberal interpretation. 
This title shall be liberally construed in order to effect its purpose. No error, irregularity, informality, omission or illegality, and no neglect or omission of any officer, in any procedure taken pursuant to this title, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the council to order the work or acquisition pursuant to this title shall void or invalidate the proceeding or any assessment for the cost of the work or acquisition under this title. The exclusive remedy of any person affected or aggrieved shall be by appeal to the council in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.90).  
13.24.050 - Validity. 
No step in any proceeding shall be invalidated or affected by error or mistake or departure from the provisions of this title as to the officer or person posting, publishing, mailing or procuring the publication or posting or mailing, of any notice, resolution, order or other matter when the notice is actually given for the time required. 
(Prior code § 14A.91).  
13.24.060 - Effect of publication. 
No assessment, reassessment, supplemental assessment, warrant, diagram or bond or any other levy or issuance, and no proceedings for same, shall be held invalid by any court for any error, informality, omission, irregularity, illegality or other defect in the same, where the resolution of intention or notice of improvement has been actually published as provided in this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.92).  
13.24.070 - Dedication. 
No proceedings shall be held to be invalid upon the ground that the property, upon which the work or improvement or part thereof is to be done or was done, had not been lawfully dedicated or acquired; provided, that the same has been lawfully dedicated or acquired or an order for immediate possession and use thereof has been obtained, at any time before judgment is entered in any legal action; provided, that if such proceeding includes the acquisition thereof it shall be sufficient if the council has the power to order the acquisition thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.93).  
13.24.080 - Restriction of actions—Thirty day limit. 
No action, suit or proceedings to set aside, cancel, void, annul or correct any assessment or reassessment, or to review any of the proceedings, or to question the validity or to enjoin the collection of any assessments or reassessments or supplemental assessments shall be maintained by any person unless the action, suit or proceedings have been commenced within thirty days after the acquisition or improvement had been ordered or the assessment has been confirmed. 
(Prior code § 14A.94).  
13.24.090 - Restriction of actions—Ad valorem. 
Where the proceedings are for an ad valorem levy the period shall be thirty days after the ordering of the levy with reference to the levy, and thirty days after ordering the issuance of the bonds with reference to their issuance. If the action or suit is not brought within the time specified in this section, all persons shall be barred from any action. 
(Prior code § 14A.95).  
13.24.100 - Restriction of actions—Scope. 
No action shall affect the legality of any assessment other than the assessment on property of a plaintiff in his own name and not in a representative capacity. 
(Prior code § 14A.96).  
13.24.110 - Restriction of actions—Defense. 
No defense based on invalidity or irregularity in any proceedings shall be raised or pleaded after the expiration of the thirty day period. 
(Prior code § 14A.97).  
13.24.120 - Validation proceedings. 
The city council, at any time after the adoption of the resolution of intention, the proposed contractor, at any time after the award of the contract to him or the proposed purchaser of the warrant or any bonds to be issued, at any time after the assignment of the warrant or award of the bonds to him, may bring an action in the Superior Court of the state, in and for the county, to determine the validity of any proceedings and of the proposed contract, or of the assessment or tax levied or to be levied, or of the bonds issued or to be issued. 
(Prior code § 14A.98).  
13.24.130 - Validation proceedings—Procedure. 
The provisions of Chapter 9, (commencing with Section 860), Title 10, Part 2, excepting Section 863, of the Code of Civil Procedure, shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.99).  
13.24.140 - Validation proceedings—Defense. 
No defense may be raised in an action that could not have been made the subject of a suit by the defendant at the time, including, but not limited to, the application thereto of waivers, finality of official action, curation, and limitations of action. 
(Prior code § 14A.100).  
Chapter 13.26 - REASSESSMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.26.010 - Authority. 
If, in the opinion of the council, any assessment heretofore or hereafter issued is void or unenforceable, or the legality thereof is questionable for any cause, or if bonds are issued to represent or be secured by any assessments and the issuance is not effective through the curative provisions applicable thereto to make them valid and enforceable, or if the previous assessment or bonds are insufficient to pay the cost or estimated cost of the project, or if the council determines that the public interest will be served, a reassessment may be had either as to the whole of an assessment or as to any part thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.101).  
13.26.020 - Uncompleted improvement. 
There the assessment is for an uncompleted project, a reassessment may be had notwithstanding the project is not completed. In that case, the reassessment shall assess upon the lands benefited the benefits derived from the project or to be derived from the project when completed. 
(Prior code § 14A.102).  
13.26.030 - When made. 
The reassessment shall be made upon the demand of the contractor or his assigns, or the owner or holder of bonds aggregating one-third of the principal amount outstanding or upon order of the city council whose decision so to do shall be final. 
(Prior code § 14A.103).  
13.26.040 - Procedure. 
The reassessment shall be made in the manner and form provided by the Improvement Act of 1911 and Improvement Bond Act of 1915. 
(Prior code § 14A.104).  
13.26.050 - Rate of interest. 
In the resolution ordering the reassessment, the council shall determine whether said reassessment shall include interest, and if so, the rate at which and the date from which it shall be computed. In lieu thereof, it may order that the reassessment shall bear interest at a rate and from a date fixed by it. 
(Prior code § 14A.105).  
13.26.060 - Payment. 
Proceedings for notice to pay, demand and payment shall be had as provided for the original assessment. 
(Prior code § 14A.106).  
Division IV. - Lien  
Chapter 13.28 - LIENS 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Priority. 
The lien of a fixed lien assessment, whether a bond or bonds are issued to represent it or not, shall have priority over all fixed lien assessments which may thereafter be created against the property. 
(Prior code § 14A.107).  
13.28.020 - Reassessment—Supplemental assessment. 
The lien of a reassessment and a refunding assessment shall have the same priority as the original assessment to which it relates. A supplemental assessment is a new assessment. 
(Prior code § 14A.108).  
13.28.030 - Effective date. 
Immediately upon the recording of a notice of assessment in the office of the county recorder, any assessment shall thereupon be a lien on the property against which it is made. 
(Prior code § 14A.109).  
13.28.040 - Notice. 
From and after the date of recording a fixed lien warrant, assessment and diagram and from and after the recording of the notice of assessment, all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the contents of each thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.110).  
13.28.050 - Duration. 
The lien of a fixed lien assessment shall continue for a period of four years from the date of recording of the notice of assessment. In the event bonds are issued to represent the assessment, the lien shall continue until the expiration of four years from the due date of the last installment upon the bonds or of the last principal coupon attached thereto. 
(Prior code § 14A.111).  
13.28.060 - Uniform law. 
The provisions of Article 13 (commencing with Section 53930), Chapter 4, Part 1, Division Title 5 of the Government Code, providing a uniform law as to the priority of liens, fixed lien and of ad valorem assessments, shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.112).  
Division V. - Acquisition and Improvement Procedure  
Chapter 13.30 - INVESTIGATING PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
13.30.010 - Public hearing. 
Whenever the council determines that proceedings should be taken for acquisitions and/or improvements without complying with the provisions of Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 193 1, a public hearing shall be held on the question of public convenience and necessity and the hearing shall be called and notice of time and place thereof shall be given in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.113).  
13.30.020 - Preliminary determination. 
A resolution of preliminary determination shall be adopted describing the proposed improvement or acquisition and setting a time and place when and where any and all persons interested may appear and show cause, if they have any, why the council should not find and determine that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed acquisition or improvement without compliance with such Investigation Act. 
(Prior code § 14A.114).  
13.30.030 - Notice and hearing. 
The resolution shall contain a notice of the time and place of hearing. A copy of the resolution, and of the time and place of hearing, shall be published in one or more issues of a newspaper published and circulated in the city, and shall be posted. The resolution and notice of its adoption may be incorporated in the resolution of intention and notice of improvement, and in the notice to property owners. 
(Prior code § 14A.115).  
13.30.040 - Objections. 
Any person interested may object to undertaking said proceedings without first complying with the provisions of such Investigation Act. 
(Prior code § 14A.116).  
13.30.050 - Final determination. 
If no protests are made, or when protests have been heard and overruled, the council may adopt a resolution finding and determining that the pubic convenience and necessity require the proposed improvements and/or acquisitions, and that the Investigation Act shall not apply. The findings may be incorporated in the resolution ordering the improvement and/or acquisition. 
(Prior code § 14A.117).  
13.30.060 - Modifications. 
When proceedings are had for a change and modification, the resolution of intention to change and modify shall be deemed a resolution of intention and the resolution ordering the changes shall be deemed a resolution ordering the improvement or acquisition as to the changes and modifications. 
(Prior code 14A.118).  
13.30.070 - Adoption of resolution. 
The resolution determining public convenience and necessity shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of the council, and its finding and determination shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 14A.119).  
13.30.080 - Alternative proceeding. 
This chapter is alternative to a proceeding which has been excepted under the provisions of the Investigation Act, or when proceedings have been taken pursuant to the Act. 
(Prior code § 14A.120).  
13.30.090 - Council determination final. 
Where proceedings for any improvements and/or acquisitions or any part thereof have been undertaken without compliance with the Investigation Act or without proceedings under this chapter, proceedings may thereafter be had under this chapter with reference thereto, and the order of the council determining convenience and necessity therein shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 14A.121).  
Chapter 13.32 - IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 1911 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Application. 
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this chapter, the Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.112).  
13.32.020 - Resolution—Adopted. 
As an alternative method for the collection of cash assessments or assessments of less than fifty dollars levied under the provisions of this chapter, the council may, and upon the written request of the contractor or his assigns shall, by resolution adopted at or before the third Tuesday in September, direct that the assessments be collected upon the tax roll upon which general city taxes are collected. 
(Prior code § 14A.123).  
13.32.030 - Resolution—Contents. 
The resolution shall contain a description of the properties so assessed, the amounts of the assessments, together with interest thereon from the date of filing the original list of unpaid assessments and at the rate of one percent per month to the next succeeding thirty-first day of December of the tax year for which the roll has been prepared, and the total amounts of principal and interest on each property. 
(Prior code § 14A.124).  
13.32.040 - Resolution—Delivery. 
A certified copy of the resolution shall be delivered immediately to the officer who extends city taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected. 
(Prior code § 14A.125).  
13.32.050 - Extension on roll. 
The officer shall extend upon the roll the total amounts of the assessments and interest. 
(Prior code § 14A.126).  
13.32.060 - Collection. 
The amounts shall be collected at the same time as the first installment of taxes and in the same manner as general city taxes are collected, and be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided for general city taxes, all of which laws for the levy, enforcement and collection of which are made applicable to special assessment taxes. 
(Prior code § 14A.127).  
13.32.070 - Payment to contractor. 
The assessments and the interest so entered shall become due and payable to the contractor or his assigns at the office of the treasurer on the second day of January next succeeding. 
(Prior code § 14A.128).  
13.32.080 - Default—Generally. 
Upon default in payment, the lands so assessed shall be sold in the same manner in which real property in the city is sold for the nonpayment of general city taxes, and be subject to redemption within one year from the date of sale in the same manner as the real property is redeemed from the delinquent sale, and upon failure of redemption, shall in like manner be sold or pass by deed to the city. The city shall not, however, be required to pay into the assessment fund any part of the delinquency until the property is redeemed or sold and money received therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.129).  
13.32.090 - Default—Resale of property. 
Upon receipt of the deed the city shall there-upon offer and sell the property at public auction in the manner provided by law for the sale of tax deeded property, and the amount of the assessment and the penalties and interest thereon less the costs of the sale shall be paid to the contractor or his assigns. 
(Prior code § 14A.130).  
3.32.100 - Default—When no bidder. 
In the event there has been no bidder offering the amount then due on the property, it may, at the city's election, be declared sold to the owner of the assessment and in like manner be deeded to him, and the assessment ordered satisfied of record. 
(Prior code § 14A.131).  
13.32.110 - Advance or purchase by city. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from: advancing to the contractor or his assigns the amount of any assessment when due, in which event it shall receive the interest posted to the roll; or advancing the amount and the interest thereon upon its delinquency on or immediately after January 1, in which event the city shall receive the delinquent penalties and interest; or subsequent thereto, in which event the city shall receive the penalties and the interest shall be prorated; or purchasing the property at the public sale thereof, in which event it shall receive title in like manner as would the owner of the assessment. 
(Prior code § 14A.132).  
Chapter 13.34 - STREET OPENING ACT OF 1903 
Sections: 
 
13.34.010 - Application. 
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this chapter, the Street Opening Act of 1903 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.133).  
13.34.020 - Closing a street or easement. 
Proceedings may be had for closing or abandoning any street or easement, and the council may therein determine that no assessment is necessary. 
(Prior code § 14A.134).  
13.34.030 - Resolution of intention. 
The ordinance of intention may be a resolution. 
(Prior code § 14A.135).  
13.34.040 - Notice of improvement. 
The notice of improvement shall be so called and no map need be contained therein. 
(Prior code § 14A.136).  
13.34.050 - Assessment collection procedure. 
Cash assessments or assessments for less than fifty dollars may be collected as provided in Chapter 13.32. 
(Prior code § 14A.137).  
Chapter 13.36 - MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 1913 
Sections: 
 
13.36.010 - Application. 
When proceedings are taken pursuant to this chapter, the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.138).  
13.36.020 - Hearing. 
The hearing on the report need not be set for more than ten days beyond the day of setting. 
(Prior code § 14A.139).  
13.36.030 - Payment—Time extension. 
The time provided for payment of assessments may be extended by the council, or, on petition of all of the owners, may be shortened or waived. 
(Prior code § 14A.140).  
13.36.040 - Payment—To whom. 
Payment shall be made to the treasurer unless the council shall specify some other officer to whom payments are to be made. 
(Prior code § 14A.141).  
13.36.050 - Eminent domain—Proceedings. 
Proceedings in eminent domain may be exercised tinder the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code § 14A.142).  
13.36.060 - Eminent domain—Stipulations for judgment. 
Stipulations and proceedings thereon for judgment may be had as provided in the Street Opening Act of 1903. 
(Prior code § 14A.143).  
13.36.070 - Eminent domain—Offset of assessments. 
Awards and assessments may be offset as provided in the Street Opening Act of 1903. 
(Prior code § 14A.144).  
13.36.080 - Eminent domain—Referees. 
Reference to referees may be had as provided in the Street Opening Act of 1903. 
(Prior code § 14A.145).  
13.36.090 - Construction fund surplus—Disposition. 
If there is, or the city council determines that there will be, a surplus in the construction fund, the city council may determine that said moneys be used for any one or more of the following purposes: 
A.  For transfer to the general fund of the city; provided, that the amount shall not exceed the lesser of one thousand dollars or five percent of the total amount expended from the construction fund; 
B.  To reimburse the city for any contributions or advances to or for the construction fund that were not pledged in the resolution of intention; 
C.  For maintenance of the improvements or a specified part thereof; 
D.  As provided in Section 13.36.100. 
(Prior code § 14A.146).  
13.36.100 - Construction fund surplus—Alternative disposition. 
As an alternative method of disposition, the surplus shall be refunded or credited pro rata to the parties assessed, as follows: 
A.  Where the assessment or any installment has been paid in cash, the credit shall be returned in cash to the person who paid the assessment or installment. 
B.  Where the assessment or any installment is unpaid, the credit shall be applied upon the assessment or the earliest unpaid installment of principal and interest. 
C.  Where an owner has requested that the credit be paid to him, in the petition for the improvements or subsequently in writing filed with the treasurer, or to his assigns, the credit shall be so paid notwithstanding the assessment or an installment has not been paid in cash. 
D.  When the assessment is ad valorem in nature or otherwise not fixed liens, the credit shall be deposited in the bond interest and redemption fund. 
(Prior code § 14A.147).  
Chapter 13.38 - MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
13.38.010 - Authority. 
The city council may form the whole or any part of the city into a municipal improvement district for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, improving, extending, replacing, repairing, maintaining or operating any public improvements, works, utilities, buildings, structures, facilities or right of use, capacity or disposal in or service thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.148).  
13.38.020 - Formation. 
The city council shall adopt a resolution declaring its intention to form a district, describing its boundaries, stating its purposes, giving it a name or number, and fixing a time and place when it will hear all persons interested. 
(Prior code § 14A.149).  
13.38.030 - Notice, hearing and determination. 
Notice shall be given, a hearing shall be held, determination shall be made, and the council shall act as provided in Chapters 13.30 and 13.36. 
(Prior code § 14A.150).  
13.38.040 - Acquisition and disposition of property. 
The city may purchase, lease, obtain option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, eminent domain or otherwise, and hold, sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of, any real or personal property within the city, or any interest in, or improvement on, the property. All property shall be acquired and held in the name of the city. 
(Prior code § 14A.151).  
13.38.050 - Acquisition of city lands. 
City lands or property may be acquired. In that event, the resolution of intention shall describe same and state the amount and manner of payment of the compensation. In lieu thereof, the council may provide in the resolution that the compensation for the property shall be an amount to be fixed by the decision of two of three disinterested competent appraisers to be appointed by the city council. 
(Prior code § 14A.152).  
13.38.060 - Sale of property. 
The council may sell any property acquired for public improvements which is not needed therefor. Any money received from the sale may be used for the acquisition, construction or improving of other public improvements in the district. It may also be applied as a credit on any assessments levied for the acquisition of the property, in which case the provisions of Section 13.36.100 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.153).  
13.38.070 - Operation and maintenance. 
The public improvements may be maintained and operated, and all or any costs and expenses thereof, including rent, repairs, replacement, fuel, power, electrical current, care, supervision, and any other items necessary for the property maintenance and operation thereof may be expended for that purpose. Included in the costs may be the cost of replacements, improvements and extensions to any public improvement necessary or convenient for the proper operation thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.154).  
13.38.080 - Assessment—Apportionment. 
An annual assessment may be levied upon the real property within the district established therefor for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, maintaining and operating the public improvements. The assessment shall be in an amount clearly sufficient to pay any and all costs and expenses then due or thereafter to accrue before the proceeds of another levy shall be available therefor. The levy shall be apportioned among the properties within the district on the basis of the ad valorem value of the real property on the equalized tax roll for city taxes. 
(Prior code § 14A.155).  
13.38.090 - Assessment—Annual report. 
The city manager shall annually file with the city clerk a written report stating in reasonable detail the estimated cost for which an assessment is to be levied in that year. It shall also state the estimated rate of the levy to be made therefor. When the report has been preliminarily approved by the council, the clerk shall give notice to interested persons that the report has been filed in the office and open to inspection, and of the time and place when the report will be heard by the council and an assessment ordered. The notice may be by publication or by mail. 
(Prior code § 14A.156).  
13.38.100 - Assessment—Hearing. 
The report shall be fully heard and may be altered, amended, or supplemented by the council. When all objections have been heard and action taken with reference thereto, by their having been overruled or otherwise, the report shall be confirmed by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 14A.157).  
13.38.110 - Assessment—Rate. 
The council shall fix the final rate of assessment to be levied therefor. 
(Prior code 14A.158).  
13.38.120 - Assessment—Collection. 
The assessments shall be placed on the next tax roll on which city taxes are levied and they shall be collected in the same manner, and be subject to the same penalties, costs and interest, and may be redeemed, and the property sold for nonpayment thereof, and title shall pass to the purchaser, as provided for city taxes. 
(Prior code § 14A.159).  
13.38.130 - Transfer of funds. 
The city may advance funds for the acquisition, constructing or improving of the public improvements, or for the maintenance and operation thereof, and reimburse itself from the proceeds of any assessment subsequently levied for that purpose. It may also make contributions thereto from available funds. 
(Prior code § 14A.160).  
13.38.140 - Pledge. 
The council may, at any time, make a pledge or pledges as it shall determine, for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds, or for the maintenance and operation of the facilities acquired or to be acquired therewith, or for adequate reserves, from the income and revenue of any public improvement acquired or constructed under this title or from the income and revenue of any public improvement similar to and/or related in use or purpose to those acquired or constructed under this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.161).  
13.38.150 - Annexation—Adoption of resolution. 
The boundaries of the district may be enlarged from time to time. The territory to be annexed shall be set forth in a resolution of intention to be adopted by the council, which shall give notice that the matter, and all persons interested, shall be heard by the council at a time to be stated therein, at the regular meeting place of the council. 
(Prior code § 14A.162).  
13.38.160 - Annexation—Resolution hearing. 
The resolution shall be published, posted and mailed. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. At the hearing, the council shall have the power to determine whether or not the entire territory, or only a portion thereof, to be annexed will be benefited by being annexed. 
(Prior code § 14A.163).  
13.38.170 - Annexation—Determination by council. 
The council shall by resolution order the annexation of the territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. Thereafter the property annexed shall be subject to special levies for maintenance and operation and for any ad valorem bonds issued for the acquisition or construction of the improvements. 
(Prior code § 14A.164).  
13.38.180 - Application to existing public improvements. 
The provisions of this chapter with regard to districts may be applied to existing public improvements, regardless of the manner in which the public improvements were acquired or constructed. 
(Prior code § 14A.165).  
Chapter 13.40 - ASSESSMENT OF CITY DEPARTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
13.40.010 - Generally. 
In any proceeding conducted pursuant to Chapters 13.32, 13.34, and 13.36, the city may levy assessments against lands or properties of any duly established and legally constituted department or special fund of the city which is benefited by the proposed improvements. Any such assessment shall be an enforceable obligation against the income and revenues of said department and shall not constitute an indebtedness or general obligation of the city. Such obligation is payable by, and, to the extent legally possible, enforceable against the city department or special fund in the same manner as assessments against lands of public agencies under Section 5302.5 of the Streets and Highways Code, except that the annual assessment installments therein provided need not be equal. The remedy of mandamus or other appropriate remedy referred to in such Section 5302.5 shall be available to the owner of the assessment to compel whatever action is legally available to said department or special fund for the collection of funds, and any limits otherwise applicable shall not apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.166).  
Division VI. - Assessment Bond Procedure  
Chapter 13.42 - GENERAL PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
13.42.010 - Purpose. 
When bonds are to be issued in any proceeding had and taken in connection with any public improvement, and/or acquisition, and/or immediate possession, and/or street closing, pursuant to this title, the same shall be issued, paid and collected in accordance with this division. 
(Prior code § 14A.167).  
13.42.020 - Adoption of resolution of intention. 
When the council has determined that bonds shall be issued, it shall so declare in its resolution of intention and shall specify pursuant to which plan provided in this title the bonds are issued, the term or maximum term of their maturity following their date and the rate or maximum rate of interest they shall bear. 
(Prior code § 14A.168).  
13.42.030 - Form of bonds. 
The bonds and coupons shall be payable to bearer and shall be substantially in the form provided in the plan specified with appropriate changes in the wording to show that they are issued pursuant to the plan. When the form is not provided by law it shall be prescribed by the council. 
(Prior code § 14A.169).  
13.42.040 - Execution of bonds. 
The bonds shall be executed as provided by law, and if not so provided, shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and have affixed the city seal. The interest coupons shall be executed by the treasurer. There shall be at least one manual signature on the bonds. The signature of the mayor on the bonds and of the treasurer on the coupons and the city seal may be printed, engraved or lithographed thereon in facsimile. 
(Prior code § 14A.170).  
13.42.050 - Dating of bonds. 
The bonds shall be dated as the council determines; provided, that in a proceeding pursuant to Article 2 of Division 5 of this title, the written consent of the contractor or his assigns shall be obtained before delaying their date. 
(Prior code § 14A.171).  
13.42.060 - Serial maturites. 
The bonds shall mature in series except that the principal of each bond under Bond Plan A shall mature in annual installments represented by coupons. The principal shall mature in annual amounts as the council determines. To this end, assessments of different amounts may be classified and made to mature over different periods. The first installment may be postponed as the council determines. 
(Prior code § 14A.172).  
13.42.070 - Principal of bonds. 
The principal of the bonds may include interest and costs of maintenance and operation for the period of the acquisitions and the construction of the improvements plus twelve months. 
(Prior code § 14A.173).  
13.42.080 - Division of bond series. 
The bonds of a series may be issued in more than one division having different dates of maturity and dates from which interest runs. 
(Prior code § 14A.174).  
13.42.090 - Sale of bonds. 
The bonds shall be sold as the council determines. Their proceeds shall be deposited in the proper fund and used exclusively for the objects and purposes thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.175).  
13.42.100 - Premiums. 
Premiums received on the sale of bonds shall be deposited in the construction fund, unless the council otherwise determines. 
(Prior code § 14A.176).  
13.42.110 - Accrued interest. 
Accrued interest received on the sale of bonds shall be deposited in the bond fund, unless the council otherwise determines. 
(Prior code § 14A.177).  
13.42.120 - Registration—Against theft. 
The bonds may be registered against theft, in which event Article 7, Chapter 4, Division 4, Title 4, of the Government Code shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.178).  
13.42.130 - Registration—Delinquent bonds. 
Bonds may be registered for nonpayment, in which event Article 2, Chapter 3, Part 1, Division 1, Title 5 of the Government Code shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.179).  
13.42.140 - Registration—Lost bonds. 
New bonds or coupons may be issued to replace lost or destroyed bonds, in which event the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 3, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the Government Code shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.180).  
13.42.150 - Payment by matured bonds. 
Payment of all, or any portion, of any assessment installment levied to pay the principal or interest due, or to become due, on the bonds of any district formed under this title may be made with matured bonds or matured coupons of the district. The bonds and coupons shall be accepted and treated as cash, and when so received, shall be canceled, and the interest and sinking fund of the district shall be credited with the face value thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.181).  
13.42.160 - Destruction of paid bonds. 
Upon the entry of the payment of any bond or coupon in the bond register, and under any additional conditions as the treasurer establishes, the treasurer or other fiscal agent of the city may destroy or cremate any and all bonds and coupons pertaining thereto which have been previously paid or canceled. 
(Prior code § 14A.182).  
13.42.170 - Bond surplus distribution. 
In the event of a surplus remaining in the redemption fund after payment of the entire principal and interest on all bonds issued pursuant to a plan in this title for retirement of which the fund has been established, the surplus shall, subject to any other special provision of this title, be applied first to repayment to the city of any balance due it for contributions and advances which it may have made to the redemption fund, and of any special taxes which it may have levied in aid thereof other than any regular taxes levied to retire any bonds, and of any moneys due it for costs incurred or charges allowed, together with interest on the sums at the rate mentioned in the bonds. The excess, if any, shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 14A.183).  
13.42.180 - Premiums on call of bond. 
When the law provides a premium on the call of bonds, the council may provide in the resolution of intention that no premium will be paid upon the call of bonds prior to their fixed date of maturity. In that event, the bond plan designated shall be followed by "(NP)." 
(Prior code § 14A.184).  
13.42.190 - Supplemental remedies. 
When a proceeding is undertaken pursuant to a bond plan in this title in which the supplemental provisions of the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 requires the city to advance funds and make special tax levies for the purpose of advancing funds to meet delinquencies in assessment installments of principal and interest, the council may declare in the resolution of intention that the provisions shall not apply. In that event, the bond plan designation shall be followed by "(NSR)." If both the premium and the remedy are declared not to apply, the bond plan designated shall be followed by "(NP-NSR)." 
(Prior code § 14A.185).  
13.42.200 - Assessment under fifty dollars. 
As an alternative method of collecting fixed lien assessments which are less in amount than fifty dollars when bonds are issued pursuant to Bond Plans A, B or C described in this chapter, proceedings therefor may be had as provided in Sections 13.38.0.110 and 13.318.100. 
(Prior code § 14A.186).  
Chapter 13.44 - LOT BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.44.010 - Application. 
When bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, the bond provisions of the Improvement Act of 1911 shall apply; provided, that alternate methods of collecting the assessments may be employed as provided in Chapter 13.60. 
(Prior code § 14A.187).  
13.44.020 - First one-percent penalty. 
The first one-percent penalty on the bonds shall be retained by the treasurer and charged as a cost of serving the delinquency. 
(Prior code § 14A.188).  
Chapter 13.46 - DISTRICT BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.46.010 - Application. 
When bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 shall apply, except that the period of redemption shall be one instead of five years; provided, that alternate methods of collecting assessments may be employed as provided in Chapter 13.30. 
(Prior code § 14A.189).  
13.46.020 - Elimination of certain reference in resolution of intention. 
The provisions of Part 11.1 of the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 shall apply to proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter, and it shall not be necessary to refer thereto in the resolution of intention. 
(Prior code § 14A.190).  
Chapter 13.48 - DISTRICT LIABILITY BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.48.010 - Application. 
When bonds are issued pursuant to this plan, in any proceeding pending or hereafter taken, the provisions of Chapter 13.36 shall apply, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14A.191).  
13.48.020 - Form. 
Appropriate changes shall be made in the form of the bonds to show that they have been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14A.192).  
13.48.030 - Advances on delinquent installment not mandatory. 
The provisions of the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 which require the city to advance, as a loan to the bond redemption fund from available surplus funds, the amount of any delinquent installment of principal, interest and penalties thereon, shall not be mandatory and shall not be enforceable. 
(Prior code § 14A.193).  
13.48.040 - Special levy restrictions. 
The provisions of the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 which require that the city shall cause to be levied a special tax of not to exceed ten cents on the one hundred dollars of taxable property in the city shall be restricted to the taxable property within the district created in the proceedings or other district deemed benefited and described in the resolution of intention, and shall not be enforceable against the city as a whole. 
(Prior code § 14A.194).  
13.48.050 - Supplemental tax district—Authority. 
The district within which the supplemental taxes are to be levied shall include all of the properties within the city which, in the opinion of the council, will be benefited by the levy of the special tax, which may be greater than the assessment district. 
(Prior code § 14A.195).  
13.48.060 - Supplemental tax district—Resolution of intention. 
The supplemental district shall be described and declared in the resolution of intention to be the district so benefited. 
(Prior code § 14A.196).  
13.48.070 - Supplemental tax district—Notice and hearing. 
Notice shall be given to all owners within the supplemental district by posting and mailing, they have the right to protest, and the council shall make the determinations, all as provided for the assessment district. 
(Prior code § 14A.197).  
13.48.080 - Special levy fund—Created. 
Moneys realized from special levies made pursuant to Section 13.48.040 for a particular project, shall be deposited in a special fund to be separately numbered or otherwise known as the special levy fund for the project, and shall be used as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14A.198).  
13.48.090 - Special levy fund—Transfer to redemption fund. 
Moneys in a special levy fund shall be transferred to the bond interest and redemption fund of the project for which they are levied, as they are needed for the prompt payment of the annual installments of the fixed lien assessments levied therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.199).  
13.48.100 - Special levy fund—Funds returned. 
When properties are redeemed or sold for the nonpayment of any annual installments of fixed lien assessments levied therefor, the amounts transferred from a special levy fund to the bond interest and redemption fund of the bonds, shall be restored to the special levy fund from the bond redemption fund. 
(Prior code § 14A.200).  
13.48.110 - Special levy fund—Disposition of surplus. 
At the time of final payment of the bonds and the interest thereon of any series, surplus funds in the special levy fund created therefor shall be transferred to the redemption fund of the bonds and supplied as provided by law therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.201).  
Chapter 13.50 - AD VALOREM LAND BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.50.010 - Authority. 
There is vested in the council the power to issue serial ad valorem land bonds upon any district created under this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.202).  
13.50.020 - Assessment provisions not required. 
No assessment or diagram shall be required. A preliminary first report may be made for the purpose of providing information as to the apportionment of estimated assessments. 
(Prior code § 14A.203).  
13.50.030 - Pursuant to Chapter 13.32—Declaration of completion. 
If the proceedings are had pursuant to Chapter 13.32, then upon completion of the work, the person appointed by the council to be in charge of the work shall prepare and file with the council a declaration that the work has been completed according to the contract therefor, together with an itemized statement of the cost of the work and of the expenses incidental to said proceedings, estimated to the conclusion of the proceedings. 
(Prior code § 14A.204).  
13.50.040 - Pursuant to Chapter 13.32—Contributions. 
The amount of any contribution shall be stated therein as well as the balance for which bonds are to be issued. 
(Prior code § 14A.205).  
13.50.050 - Pursuant to Chapter 13.32—Delivery to contractor. 
When the bonds have been issued, they shall be delivered to the contractor upon his paying to the city the moneys due it for incidental expenses as stated in the declaration. 
(Prior code § 14A.206).  
13.50.060 - Pursuant to Chapter 13.32—Cash advances. 
The council may provide in the resolution of intention that the contractor shall be paid in cash from advances to be made to the project or from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds, in which event the bonds shall be issued as provided for the issuance of acquisition bonds in Section 13.50.070. 
(Prior code § 14A.207).  
13.50.070 - Pursuant to Chapter 13.32—Interlocutory eminent domain proceedings. 
If the proceedings are had pursuant to Chapter 13.34, then upon the entry of all interlocutory judgments in any eminent domain proceedings brought pursuant thereto, proceedings shall be had substantially as provided in Section 13.50.030. 
(Prior code § 14A.208).  
13.50.080 - Pursuant to Chapters 13.36 and 13.38—Determination of cost. 
If proceedings are had pursuant to Chapter 13.36 and 13.38, then in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements, the council shall determine the estimated cost of the acquisitions and improvements and of the expenses incidental thereto, and the total estimated amount of the bonds to be issued. 
(Prior code § 14A.209).  
13.50.090 - Possession bonds—Procedure when funds not available. 
If proceedings are had for the taking of immediate possession of the property to be acquired, and funds are not then available therefor, the person in charge of the proposed acquisitions shall prepare and file with the city an estimate of the amount of money necessary to be deposited in court for immediate possession, and other funds necessary for incidental costs, and proceedings shall be had for the issuance and sale of bonds therefor as provided for the issuance of acquisition bonds in Section 13.50.070. 
(Prior code § 14A.210).  
13.50.100 - Possession bonds—Disposition. 
The council may either provide for the retirement of possession bonds out of the proceeds of the bonds of the project, or issue only an amount of additional bonds as is necessary to provide for the additional costs of the project after having credited the proceeds of the possession bonds upon the final costs of the project and expenses incidental thereto. 
(Prior code § 14A.211).  
13.50.110 - Declaration of issuance—Notice of hearing. 
Excepting in proceedings had pursuant to Chapters 13.36 and 13.38, the clerk shall publish notice of a time and place of hearing on the declaration filed in relation to the issuance of bonds. 
(Prior code § 14A.212).  
13.50.120 - Declaration of issuance—Notice. 
The notice of hearing filed in relation to the issuance of bonds shall: 
A.  Refer to the resolution of intention by number and name for a description of the work to be done or acquisitions or improvements to be had and for the boundaries of the assessment district; 
B.  Give notice to all persons interested that it is proposed to hear the report and issue bonds pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14A.213(a), (b)).  
13.50.130 - Declaration of issuance—Hearing—Generally. 
Any person feeling aggrieved by any act or determination done or made in the proceedings or claiming that any previous acts or proceeding's were irregular, defective, erroneous or faulty, or claiming that the work or improvement has not been performed according to the contract in a good and substantial manner, or claiming that any portion of the work or improvement for any reason was omitted or illegally included in the contract or having any objections or reasons why bonds should not be issued in the amount set forth in the declaration and statement on file, may appear before the council at the time and place so fixed by it and be heard. 
(Prior code § 14A.213(c)).  
13.50.140 - Declaration of issuance—Hearing—Who may attend. 
The contractor or his assigns, and any other person or persons interested in the matter, may appear and be heard upon any of the matters referred to in the notice. 
(Prior code § 14A.214).  
13.50.150 - Declaration of issuance—Final determination. 
In the final determination of the council upon the hearing, or in the resolution ordering the acquisitions or improvements when the proceedings are had pursuant to Chapter 13.36, and 13.38, the council shall order the issuance of bonds. The resolution shall state the total principal amount of the bonds and the amounts to mature in each year during their term. The bonds may be made to mature on July 2nd over a period of not to exceed forty years from their date. 
(Prior code § 14A.215).  
13.50.160 - Supplemental bonds. 
If the proceeds of the bonds for any reason are less than the total final costs of the acquisitions and improvements and expenses incidental thereto, additional bonds may be issued by filing with the clerk a declaration or statement of the amount necessary therefor and by giving notice and holding a hearing and determining the amount of bonds to be issued therefor as provided herein for the issuance of bonds upon declaration, notice and hearing. The bonds shall be deemed a division of the bonds of the main issue. 
(Prior code § 14A.216).  
13.50.170 - Interest payment. 
Semiannual interest coupons shall be attached to the bonds and be payable on the second days of January and July of each year, excepting that the first coupons shall be for interest from their date to the second day of January next succeeding four months after the date of the bonds. 
(Prior code § 14A.217).  
13.50.180 - Interest after maturity. 
Each bond will continue to bear interest after maturity at the rate stated therein; provided, that it is presented at maturity or date of redemption, fixed for call prior to maturity and payment thereof is refused upon the sole ground that there are not sufficient moneys in the redemption fund with which to pay same. 
(Prior code § 14A.218).  
13.50.190 - Bond fund. 
A fund to be named, "Bond Plan D Series No._______, Bond Fund," shall be created and maintained for each issue of bonds. Moneys collected for the payment of the bonds shall be deposited in the fund and be used solely to pay the principal and interest on the bonds and premiums on and cost of calling bonds before their maturity. Any balance after the bonds have been paid shall be transferred to the general fund. 
(Prior code § 14A.219).  
13.50.200 - Callable bonds. 
The bonds may be made callable in inverse numerical order, in which event they shall so state on their face. A premium may be provided to be paid to the holder of the bonds in the event of their call, in an amount or amounts as is prescribed in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(Prior code § 14A.220).  
13.50.210 - Ad valoreum tax—Authority. 
For each district in which bonds have been issued pursuant to this chapter, the council shall annually, until all of the bonds and interest thereon shall have been paid in full, at the time of levying the taxes for general city purposes, levy an ad valorem assessment upon all taxable lands within the assessment district in an amount clearly sufficient, together with any moneys which are or may be in the redemption fund, and after making adequate allowance for estimated delinquencies, to pay all of the principal of and interest on the bonds which shall become payable before the proceeds of another levy is available therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.221).  
13.50.220 - Ad valorem tax—Collection. 
The annual special assessment levies shall be collected upon the tax roll on which general city taxes are collected; shall be in addition to all other taxes levied for general city purposes; and shall be levied, computed, entered, collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same persons, at the same time, and with the same penalties and interest, as are other taxes for city purposes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of taxes for city purposes are made applicable to the special assessment levies, and properties on which the levy is delinquent shall be subject to redemption within one year from the date of sale by operation of law in the same manner as real property is redeemed for delinquent general city taxes and if not redeemed shall in like manner pass to the purchaser. 
(Prior code § 14A.222).  
13.50.230 - Ad valorem tax—Omitted property. 
If the levy on any land is omitted in any year, it shall be assessed for the omitted amount in a year or years after the omission is discovered. 
(Prior code § 14A.223).  
13.50.240 - Transfer and pledge of revenues. 
The council may annually, at or prior to the time the levy is made, or at any other time as it determines, transfer to a bond fund amounts as it determines, or it may pledge revenues not prohibited by law for the security and payment of the principal and interest of the bonds, premiums on and costs of calling bonds and for costs of administration, maintenance, operation, improvement, extension, repair and replacement of the improvements. 
(Prior code § 14A.224).  
13.50.250 - Benefit zones. 
If, in the judgment of the council, varying benefits will be derived by the different parcels of land lying within the assessment district, the district may be divided into zones according to benefits. 
(Prior code § 14A.225).  
13.50.260 - Benefit zones—Number. 
The district may be divided into as many zones, up to the total number of parcels of land in the district, as may be deemed proper, and each zone shall be composed of and include all of the lands within the district which will be benefited in like measure. 
(Prior code § 14A.226).  
13.50.270 - Benefit zones—Percentage determination. 
The council shall also determine the percentage of the sum to be raised each year by the levy and collection of the ad valorem assessments in the district for the payments of the principal and interest of the bonds, or other method of apportionment, which will be raised from the lands in each zone. 
(Prior code § 14A.227).  
13.50.280 - Benefit zones—Resolution of intention. 
When the district is divided into zones, the resolution of intention shall so state, giving the percentages or other method of apportionment to be used to determine the amounts to be raised from the lands in each zone. 
(Prior code § 14A.228).  
13.50.290 - Benefit zones—Designation. 
Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or number and shall be plainly shown on the map or plat of the assessment district filed in the office of the city clerk and referred to in the resolution of intention, either by separate boundaries, coloring or other convenient and graphic method, so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain within which zone any parcel of land is located. 
(Prior code § 14A.229).  
13.50.300 - Benefit zones—Referral to plat. 
It shall be sufficient, in all cases where the assessment district is to be divided into zones according to benefits, if the resolution of intention states the fact and refers to the plat or map for the boundaries and all details concerning the zones. 
(Prior code § 14A.230).  
13.50.310 - Validity. 
All bonds issued and all ad valorem assessments levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall by their issuance be conclusive evidence of the regularity, validity and legal sufficiency of all proceedings, acts and determinations in anywise pertaining thereto, and after the bonds are issued, no levies for paying the principal or interest on the bonds shall be held invalid or illegal, or be set aside by reason of any error, informality, irregularity, omission or defect in the proceeding's not amounting to a want of due process of law. 
(Prior code § 14A.231).  
13.50.320 - Reassessment proceedings—Court determination. 
When any court of competent jurisdiction determines that any contract purported to have been made, or any proceedings, steps or actions purported to have been taken, or any bond or bonds issued or any levy or assessment made, tinder this chapter, is or are void, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, or for any cause enjoins the issuance of any bonds proposed to be issued under this chapter, the court shall also determine that a reassessment proceedings is had as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14A.232).  
13.50.330 - Reassessment proceedings—Council determination. 
The council may also order reassessment proceedings when it determines: the existence of voidness, invalidity or unenforceability, the validity thereof is questionable, the questioning of the validity thereof is threatened, or the public interest will be served thereby. 
(Prior code § 14A.233).  
13.50.340 - Reassessment proceedings—Council action. 
If the council orders a reassessment proceedings, the council shall adopt a resolution so declaring which shall state the amount of any work performed, improvements made, acquisitions had and the expenses incidental thereto, and the estimated cost of any to be had. 
(Prior code § 14A.234).  
13.50.350 - Reassessment proceedings—Notice and hearing. 
The proposal to reassess shall be noticed and heard and a reassessment ordered as provided in Section 13.50.070. To the extent applicable, the provisions of Chapter 13.24 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.235).  
13.50.360 - Reassessment proceedings—Disposition of valid bonds. 
If the invalidity is not in the bonds themselves, the council may so declare in the reassessment proceedings. In that event, the reassessment proceedings shall be and constitute the proceedings providing the legal authority for the issuance of the outstanding bonds, and the redemption fund created in any reassessment proceedings shall constitute a trust fund for their payment. 
(Prior code § 14A.236).  
13.50.370 - Reassessment proceedings—Exchange with new bonds. 
If the invalidity is in the bonds themselves, or if the council so determines in the reassessment proceedings, new bonds shall be issued and exchanged for the outstanding bonds. The new bonds shall mature in the amounts and at the times provided for the outstanding bonds, as nearly as may be. If the council determines, it may assign different bonds and allot maturities as it deems equitable. 
(Prior code § 14A.237).  
13.50.380 - Reassessment proceedings—Sale and retirement. 
If any part of the outstanding bonds have matured or will mature before the time for providing for the servicing of the new bonds, or if interest has accrued or will so accrue, the council may provide for the issuance of additional new bonds in the amount thereof and for their maturity. If the holders of the outstanding bonds or coupons or any other holders of outstanding bonds or coupons have refused to accept exchange of bonds therefor, the council shall sell additional bonds in the amount thereof and deposit the proceeds in the redemption fund. The outstanding bonds shall forthwith become due and payable without premium, and shall no longer bear interest. 
(Prior code § 14A.238).  
13.50.390 - Supplemental remedies. 
The supplemental security and remedy provisions of Part 13 (commencing at Section 8800) of Division 10 of the Streets and Highways Code shall apply. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 43240 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 14A.239).  
13.50.400 - Modifications. 
The council may prescribe the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds whose holders are required to consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given. 
(Prior code § 14A.240).  
13.50.410 - Events of default. 
The council may define events of default, establish the consequences thereof and provide bondholders' remedies and the nature thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.241).  
Chapter 13.52 - AD VALOREM REALTY BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.52.010 - Authority. 
There is vested in the council the power to issue serial ad valorem realty bonds upon a district created pursuant to this title. 
(Prior code § 14A.242).  
13.52.020 - Assessment. 
The annual ad valorem assessment to be levied therein shall be upon all taxable real property (land and improvements) within the assessment district. 
(Prior code § 14A.243).  
13.52.030 - Procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all of the provisions of Chapter 13.50 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.244).  
Chapter 13.54 - UNPAID ASSESSMENTS AGAINST PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
13.54.010 - Issuance of bonds. 
Bonds to represent unpaid assessments against lands or properties of any public agency, including assessments against lands or properties of any duly established and legally constituted department or special fund of the city pursuant to Section 13.44.010 or otherwise, may be issued pursuant to Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 6468) of Part 5 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 14A.245).  
13.54.020 - Bonds issued in series. 
The bonds may be issued in series and the annual proportion of the aggregate principal sum thereof payable on June 2nd of every year need not be equal. 
(Prior code § 14A.246).  
13.54.030 - Certificates. 
As an alternative to the issuance of bonds under Sections 13.54.010 and 13.54.020, certificates may be issued to represent said unpaid assessments in the manner provided in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 6467) of Part 5 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 14A.247).  
13.54.040 - Supplemental remedies. 
The supplemental security and remedy provisions of Part 13 (commencing at Section 8800) of Division 10 of the Streets and Highways Code shall apply in the event bonds or certificates are issued to represent assessments against lands or properties of any city department, and the income and revenues of such department are inadequate to pay installments of principal and interest on said assessments as they fall due. The duties to advance abailable funds and levy limited special taxes provided therein shall be exercised for the purpose of paying principal and interest on bonds in the event of inadequacy of such income and revenues. 
(Prior code § 14A.248).  
Chapter 13.56 - PARKING BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.56.010 - Authority. 
There is vested in the council the power to issue vehicle off-street parking bonds upon an off-street parking assessment district created under this title to finance the cost of acquiring, constructing, improving and extending vehicle off-street parking places and facilities and the costs incidental thereto and to the proceedings and the financing thereof, including public automobile parking lots, garages and underground or elevated structures, and all works, equipment, appliances, tools and facilities useful therein or therefor. 
(Prior code § 14A.249).  
13.56.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure by which assessment bonds may be issued for the acquisition, construction, improvement, extension and financing of vehicle off-street parking places and facilities and to permit the bond redemption fund to receive the proceeds of pledges of revenues and contributions and to allow the assessments to reflect credits to properties which provide private off-street parking places and facilities. 
(Prior code § 14A.250).  
13.56.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section have the following meanings: 
A.  "Charge" means fees, tolls, rates and rentals; 
B.  "Improve" means reconstruct, replace, extend, repair, better, equip, develop, embellish or otherwise improve; 
C.  "Net revenues" means the revenues (gross revenues) of parking places remaining after deducting all sums expended therefrom for the annual management, operation, maintenance and repair thereof, including all incidental costs, fees and expenses properly chargeable thereto, without allowance for depreciation; 
D.  "Net meter revenues" means the revenues from street meters remaining after deductions for the cost of acquiring and installing the meters, the cost of their maintenance, operation, repair, replacement and servicing, and the cost of collecting revenues therefrom, without allowance for depreciation or obsolescence; 
E.  "Parking places" means parking lots, garages, subsurface structures and buildings for the parking of motor vehicles; 
F.  "Real property" means land and improvements; 
G.  "Revenues" means all charges for, and all income and receipts derived by the city from parking places or arising therefrom, and includes revenues in all revenue, redemption, sinking and reserve funds and interest earned thereon. 
(Prior code § 14A.251).  
13.56.040 - Procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter all of the provisions of Chapters 13.36 or 13.38 and 13.42 shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.252).  
13.56.050 - Off-street parking revenues. 
The city may pledge all or a part of the revenues to be derived by it from off-street parking facilities of the city then existing, to be acquired or constructed in the proceedings, or thereafter to be acquired or constructed by it, for the payment and security of the principal of and interest on the bonds to be issued pursuant to this chapter, the premiums on and costs of calling bonds prior to their fixed date of maturity and the costs of administration, maintenance, operation, improvement, extension and replacement thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.253).  
13.56.060 - On-street parking meter revenues. 
The city may pledge, place a charge upon or otherwise make available, as additional security for the payment of bonds to be issued pursuant to this chapter, all or a part of any or all street parking meters then owned or controlled or to be acquired or controlled by it, for the purposes stated in Section 13.56.050. 
(Prior code § 14A.254).  
13.56.070 - Resolution of intention. 
The resolution of intention shall state any pledges proposed to be made by the city pursuant to Sections 13.56.050 and 13.56.060. It shall also state, in general terms, sufficient to be understood and applied, the formulae to be used in determining the annual apportionment of benefits in the levy of annual assessments upon the real property within the proposed assessment district and the granting of credits to the extent that private off-street parking places and facilities have been provided for the year by owners of real property within the district. 
(Prior code § 14A.255).  
13.56.080 - Modification of assessed values. 
In stating the formulae under Section 13.56.060, the council may provide for, but is not limited to, modification of the assessed valuations of properties to be assessed, as follows: 
A.  Parcel of land that is zoned and used for residential purposes at the time of a levy; 
B.  A parcel of land that is greater than a fixed distance from a particular public parking facility or a combination of distances from public parking facilities, at the time of a levy; 
C.  Additional formulae for all parcels to be assessed, based upon the ratio of their parking deficiencies in conformity with the requirements of the applicable provisions of Title 20. 
(Prior code § 14A.256).  
13.56.090 - Notice to property owners. 
Each notice to property owners shall state the estimated amount of the first annual assessment against the particular parcel covered by the notice. 
(Prior code § 14A.258).  
13.56.100 - Hearing—Authority to make changes. 
At the hearing on the resolution of intention and report, the council may make changes in the project, the costs, the assessment district, any zones and the percentages relating thereto, in the supplemental report, and in the formulae stated in the resolution of intention. In that event, notice shall be given and a further hearing held as provided in Chapter 13.18. 
(Prior code § 14A.259).  
13.56.110 - Estimate. 
The director of finance shall annually cause to be prepared an estimate for each bond issue under this chapter which includes the following: 
A.  The gross amount required to pay the principal and interest on the bonds which have accrued or which shall accrue before the proceeds of the second succeeding assessment levy under this chapter shall be available therefor; 
B.  The balance estimated to be available therefor at the end of the fiscal year, in the bond interest and redemption fund created for the bonds; 
C.  The amount estimated to become available therefor pursuant to a pledge in the assessment proceedings, from revenues which may be provided to be collected by the city on parking places or facilities in or for the parking assessment district created for the bonds; 
D.  The amount of revenues to be collected from street parking meters within or without the parking district, which have been pledged for the servicing of the bonds: 
E.  The amount of additional contributions, if any, which the city proposes to make the bond fund for the year, 
F.  The balance of the amount provided in subsection A, 
G.  The estimated amounts provided tinder subsections C, D, E and F shall be provided in the city budget for the fiscal year for which an annual assessment is to be levied. 
(Prior code § 14A.260).  
13.56.120 - Engineer's report. 
No assessment or diagram shall be provided for the engineer's report. However, it shall contain or be supplemented by a preliminary annual estimated report for the first bond year, in form substantially as hereinafter provided for in this title, which shall contain a map or plat showing the parcels to be assessed and an estimated assessment of each parcel for the first bond year based upon the then use and location of the property by the application of the formulae described in the resolution of intention. 
(Prior code § 14A.257).  
13.56.130 - Engineer's report—Issued annually. 
The engineer shall annually cause to be prepared, a report for each bond issue under this chapter, which shall, under appropriate headings, show the amounts to be provided in the annual budget and by properly headed columns, show the information provided therefor and required by the formulae, and the amount of the total annual assessment for said year, on each parcel of land to be assessed. 
(Prior code § 14A.261).  
13.56.140 - Engineer's report—Endorsement. 
When the report has been completed, it shall be endorsed by the engineer and filed with the clerk on or before July 15th of each year. 
(Prior code § 14A.262).  
13.56.150 - Engineer's report—Hearing. 
The report shall come on regularly for hearing by the council at its regular meeting held on the first Monday of August in each year. 
(Prior code § 14A.263).  
13.56.160 - Engineer's report—Notice of hearing. 
The clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by publication, posting and mailing. 
(Prior code § 14A.264).  
13.56.170 - Engineer's report—Mailing of subsequent notices. 
Notices shall not be required to be mailed to persons as to a hearing on subsequent reports, when the report is heard at the time fixed in Section 13.56.150. 
(Prior code § 14A.265).  
13.56.180 - Engineer's report—Form of notice. 
The notice shall be substantially as follows: 
 NOTICE OF HEARING ON PARKING ASSESSMENT ROLL PROJECT NO._______ 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Director of Public Works has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk a report which provides the basis for levying assessments on the properties within the parking district created and established for Vehicle Off-street Parking Project No.___, the amounts proposed to be levied for the fiscal year of upon the several parcels of land in the parking assessment district created to pay the principal and interest of the bonds issued in said project, which report is open to public inspection. 
 Such report will be heard by the Council at its meeting to be held on the ___ day of _______, 19___, at the hour of 8:00 o'clock P.M., Council Chambers, City Hall, Merced, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein. 
Any interested person, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any parcel of land owned by him, may file with the city clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing, a protest in writing signed by him, describing, the parcel so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his protest, and may appear at said meeting and be heard in regard thereto. 
(Prior code § 14A.266).  
13.56.190 - Engineer's report—Proof of notice. 
Affidavits of publication and affidavits or certificates of posting and mailing notice of hearing shall be made and filed with the clerk. 
(Prior code § 14A.267).  
13.56.200 - Engineer's report—Protests. 
The clerk shall endorse on each protest the date it is filed with him, and shall show whether the protest is filed prior to the hour fixed for hearing. No protest received after that hour shall be included in the computation of the percentage of protests, but the council may, in its discretion, consider the protests and hear the signers thereof. 
(Prior code § 14A.268).  
13.56.210 - Engineer's report—Public hearing. 
At the time and place fixed for hearing, or at any time to which the hearing is adjourned, the council shall: 
A.  Hear all persons having an interest in any real property within the district; 
B.  Hear all objections, protests or other written communications from persons interested in any real property within the district; 
C.  To take and receive oral and documentary evidence pertaining to the matters contained in the report; 
D.  Remedy and correct any error or informality in the report, and revise and correct any of the acts or determinations of the director of finance or of the person making the report as contained therein; 
E.  Amend, alter, modify, correct and confirm the report and each of the assessments therein. 
(Prior code § 14A.269).  
13.56.220 - Engineer's report—Certification. 
The report, together with the certificate of the clerk as to the fact and date of approval by the council, shall be delivered to the director of finance at or before the time the council fixes the general city tax rate for the fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 14A.270).  
13.56.230 - Engineer's report—Inclusion in city budget. 
The estimated amounts provided under subsections C, D, E and F of Section 13.56.110, as finally approved in the report, shall be included in the city budget for the fiscal year referred to in that section. 
(Prior code § 14A.271).  
13.56.240 - Annual assessment. 
The amount provided in subsection F of Section 13.56.110, including provision for anticipated delinquencies, shall be raised by annual assessments on all real property within the parking assessment district, in accordance with the provisions of the formulae, until all of the bonds and the interest to accrue thereon have been paid in full. 
(Prior code § 14A.272).  
13.56.250 - Supplemental remedies. 
The supplemental security and remedy provisions of Part 13 (commencing at Section 8800) of Division 10 of the Streets and Highways Code shall apply. This section is adopted pursuant to Section 43240 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 14A.273).  
Chapter 13.58 - REFUNDING BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.58.010 - General procedure. 
The refunding bonds shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of Division VI. 
(Prior code § 14A.276).  
13.58.020 - Authority—Establishment of plan. 
The council may by resolution establish a plan of refunding, and rules and regulations therefor, to be performed by the city officials or other persons designated by it. 
(Prior code § 14A.280).  
13.58.030 - Authority—Depository appointment. 
The city council may appoint and provide a bank or other trust company to act as depository of the former bonds for their holders, and to otherwise assist in the consummation of a refunding plan. 
(Prior code § 14A.281).  
13.58.040 - Amounts issued for. 
Refunding bonds may be issued in a principal amount sufficient to provide for the payment of all of the following: 
A.  The principal amount of the bonds to be refunded; 
B.  The premiums necessary to be paid in calling and retiring the outstanding bonds; 
C.  The price in excess of the par value of bonds required to be paid for their purchase in the open market; 
D.  Interest accrued, or to accrue, on the bonds to be refunded, to the date of their refunding or to the next interest payment date thereafter when required to be paid; 
E.  The costs of engineering, legal and other technical services employed to accomplish the refunding; 
F.  The costs of printing and advertising, and all other costs of the city incurred or to be incurred in the refunding proceedings; 
G.  Interest on the refunding bonds from their date to the date they are delivered to the former bondholders, in exchange for former bonds. 
(Prior code § 14A.277).  
13.58.050 - Exchange. 
Refunding bonds may be exchanged for former bonds, in which event the holder of the former bonds and the council shall agree upon the amounts and maturities of the bonds to be exchanged. 
(Prior code § 14A.278).  
13.58.060 - Joint proceedings. 
Proceedings for refunding bonds may be had in conjunction with proceedings for the acquisition or construction of public improvements pursuant to Chapter 13.36. 
(Prior code § 14A.282).  
13.58.070 - Contract rights. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the city to violate any contract or other vested rights arising from the issuance or ownership of the former bonds. The city is authorized to and shall conduct a refunding proceeding and to take all proceedings necessary therein to avoid the violation of a contract or vested right. To this end, the city may exercise in whole or in part the procedures therefor in any law or provide therefor itself. 
(Prior code § 14A.283).  
13.58.080 - Sale. 
Refunding bonds may be sold in the manner provided in Division VI, and the proceeds used to purchase or pay for all or any of the former bonds and costs of refunding. 
(Prior code § 14A.279).  
13.58.090 - General law assessment bonds. 
Special assessments and special assessment bonds heretofore or hereafter levied or issued pursuant to general law may be refunded pursuant to this chapter. The provisions of the Special Assessment and Bond Refunding Act of 1939, Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 59100), Division 1, Title 6, of the Government Code shall apply. 
(Prior code § 14A.274).  
13.58.100 - Special assessments and bonds—Procedure. 
Special assessment and special assessment bonds hereafter levied or issued pursuant to this title may be refunded by proceedings had pursuant to Chapter 13.36. The provisions of this chapter are to be read in pari materia with the provisions of Divisions V and VI pursuant to which the former assessments were levied or bonds were issued. 
(Prior code § 14A.275).  
Division VII. - Pedestrian Malls  
Chapter 13.60 - PEDESTRIAN MALLS 
Sections: 
 
13.60.010 - Purpose. 
Proceedings may be had pursuant to this division for the purpose of establishing, maintaining and operating a pedestrian mall. 
(Prior code § 14A.284).  
13.60.020 - Powers. 
In conducting such proceedings, the city shall have the powers provided therefor in the provisions of Sections 11000 through 11102, 11200 through 11305, 11308 through 11601, and 11603 through 11702 of the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960 (Part 1, Division 13, commencing with Section 11000) of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 14A.285).  
13.60.030 - Procedure. 
The proceedings for determining and. assessing damages for establishing a pedestrian mall and for acquiring property and constructing improvements in conjunction therewith may be had in a single combined proceeding pursuant to Chapter 13.36, which shall be so modified as to comply with the provisions of Section 13.60.020. 
(Prior code § 14A.286).  
13.60.040 - District by resolution. 
The district may be established by resolution. 
(Prior code § 14A.287).  
Division VIII. - Maintenance Districts  
Chapter 13.62 - MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.62.010 - New maintenance districts. 
Whenever the city council determines that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature have not been adequately financed and provided for, proceedings therefor may be undertaken pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.288).  
13.62.020 - Council powers. 
The city council may, in its resolution declaring its intention to order work done or improvements made or by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all public improvements of a local nature, including the cost of necessary repairs, replacements, fuel, power, electrical current, care, supervision, and any and all other items necessary for the proper maintenance and operation thereof, shall be assessed, either partly or wholly, upon such district as the city council shall determine will be benefited by the maintenance and operation of the public improvements proposed to be maintained; the amounts so assessed to be collected in the same manner and by the same officers as taxes for city purposes are collected. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.289).  
13.62.030 - Applicable general law. 
When the city council has declared its intention pursuant to Section 13.62.020, the applicable provisions of Chapter 26 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California, excepting Sections 5850 to 5853, inclusive, shall apply. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.290).  
Article I. - Alternative Method for the Levy of Benefit Assessments 
 
13.62.040 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative procedure by which the city council may provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any public improvements which are local in nature, payable from annual benefit assessments apportioned among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district established therefor, the nature and formula or formulae for which is to be determined in the proceedings in which jurisdiction is provided for the use of such alternative procedure. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(a)).  
13.62.050 - Resolution of intention. 
The resolution of intention to order work done or improvements made or said separate resolution shall contain a statement of the formula or formulae upon and by which annual assessment levies for the payment of said costs and expenses will be apportioned according to benefits among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district and the zones of benefit, if any, to be established therefor. Said formula or formulae may prescribe a maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment to be levied for such purposes. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(b)).  
13.62.060 - Written protests and oral objections. 
In connection with the hearing provided for in the establishment of the maintenance district, and the zones of benefit, if any, or the annexation of territory to an existing maintenance district, or to the initial modification in said formula or formulae as hereinafter provided, owners may file written protests and make oral objections to said formula or formulae in the same manner, at the same time and with like legal effect as provided for other protests and oral objections in Chapter 26 of Part 3 of Division 7 of said Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(c)).  
13.62.070 - Initial modification. 
At said hearing, the city council, of its own volition or in response to any protest made, heard or considered, may make modifications in the formula or formulae for the purpose of making the same more fair and equitable; provided, however, that before making a final determination in said matter of modification it shall set said matter for hearing at a subsequent meeting of the city council, which it shall call or to which it may adjourn; provided further, that it shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting, by one publication in the newspaper in which the original resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation was published, at least ten days prior to said hearing. If the formula or formulae modification consists solely of a decrease in such maximum rate or amount of annual benefit assessment, the city council may order such decrease by resolution and no hearing need be held thereon. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(d)).  
13.62.080 - Majority protest. 
If the city council finds that protests are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the city council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of five-sevenths of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(e)).  
13.62.090 - Final determination. 
At the initial hearing or at subsequent hearing on the modification of said formula or formulae as provided in this chapter or at any meeting of the city council subsequent to the full hearing of said matter, with or without said matter having been submitted, the city council, by resolution, shall finally adopt a formula or formulae for the apportionment of benefits in said annual assessment levies, which shall be that stated in the resolution of the intention, or said separate resolution, or as modified, and its decision and determination shall be final and conclusive against all persons entitled to appeal to it as to all errors, informalities or irregularities which the city council might have avoided or have remedied. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(f)).  
13.62.100 - Subsequent modification. 
If, at any time following the final establishment of the formula or formulae for said annual assessment levies, the city council shall, by resolution, determine that, by reason of changed conditions or because of defects or insufficiencies therein disclosed by its application, the established formula or formulae is, in any particular, inequitable or unfair, or may be made more equitable and fair, the city council may, by resolution, so declare, stating the reasons therefor, and fix a time and place of hearing thereon. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1(part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(g)).  
13.62.110 - Resolution of modification—Notice. 
The city clerk shall cause a copy of the resolution adopted by the city council as provided in Section 13.62.100 to be published once in the newspaper in which the resolution of intention or notice of improvement or notice of hearing on the formation of the maintenance district or notice of hearing on the proposed annexation in said proceedings was published, to be mailed, postage prepaid, to all owners of property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the city hall. Said publication, mailing and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(h)).  
13.62.120 - Hearing and determination. 
At the hearing provided for in Section 13.62.100 protests may be filed, heard and acted upon in the manner and with like effect provided in Sections 13.62.060 through 13.62.090. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1(part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(i)).  
13.62.130 - Budget—Contents. 
The city manager shall annually cause to be prepared a budget for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any or all of said improvements of a local nature during the ensuing fiscal year which shall include the following: 
A.  The gross amount required for the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating said improvements; 
B.  The surplus balance available at the end of the fiscal year for such purpose; 
C.  The amount, if any, to be contributed by the city to pay any part of said costs and expenses; 
D.  The amount, if any, to be repaid to the city for funds advanced by the city to pay deficits which occurred in prior years; and 
E.  The balance of the amount necessary to pay said costs and expenses. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(j)).  
13.62.140 - Annual benefit assessment. 
The amount provided in subsection E of Section 13.62.130 shall be raised by an annual benefit assessment on all of the lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1(part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(k)).  
13.62.150 - Report. 
In each fiscal year in which a balance is provided in the budget to be raised to pay said costs and expenses pursuant to subsection E of Section 13.62.130, the city engineer shall cause to be prepared a report, in writing, for each maintenance district, which shall set forth the budget, the formula or formulae for the annual assessment levy and by properly headed columns, show the following data as to each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district: 
A.  A description of each lot or parcel of property by a legal description, assessor's parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same; 
B.  The amount of assessment to be levied against each lot or parcel of property in accordance with the formula or formulae; and 
C.  Such other information as will be necessary or useful in applying the formula or formulae adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(l)).  
13.62.160 - Report—Filing with city clerk. 
When report has been completed by said city engineer, it shall be signed by him and filed with the city clerk on or before June 1st each year. Upon receipt of the report, the city clerk shall present it to the city council for its consideration. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(m)).  
13.62.170 - Report—Approval by city council. 
The report shall be reviewed by the city council and said city council may approve the report, as filed, or it may modify the report in any particular and approve it as modified. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1(part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(n)).  
13.62.180 - Report—Hearing. 
Upon approval of the report by the city council pursuant to Section 13.62.170, the city council shall, by resolution, appoint a time and place of hearing thereon. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 198 1: prior code § 14A.291(o)).  
13.62.190 - Report—Notice. 
A.  The city clerk shall cause notice of the hearing on the report to be given by mailing, postage prepaid, to all owners of property subject to said assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation; to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the city hall. Said mailing, publication and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing. 
B.  The form of notice to be published and posted shall be substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF HEARING ON ________ MAINTENANCE DISTRICT 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Engineer has caused to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk, a report, in writing, which provides the basis for the levy of benefit assessments for the costs of maintenance and operation on all lots or parcels of property within said maintenance district. Said report sets forth the amounts to be provided in the budget for maintenance and operation, a description of each lot or parcel of property in the maintenance district, by a legal description, assessor's parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the same, and the amount of assessment to be levied for the fiscal year 19___—19___ against each lot or parcel of property. Said report is open to public inspection. 
 Said report will be heard by the City at its meeting to be held on the _____ day of _______, 19___, at the hour of _____ o'clock ___m. in the regular meeting place of said Council, Council Chambers, City Hall, Merced, California, at which time said Council will examine said report and hear all persons interested therein. 
 Any interested owner, objecting to the amount of the assessment on any lot or parcel of property owned by him, may file with the City Clerk at or before the hour fixed for hearing a protest, in writing, signed by him, describing the lot or parcel of property so that it may be identified, and stating the grounds of his protest, and may appear at said hearing and be heard in regard thereto. 
C.  The form of mailed notice shall be substantially as hereinabove set forth, and shall also contain a description of the lot or parcel of property covered by the notice sufficient to identify it, and the amount of the proposed assessment against said lot or parcel of property as set forth in the report. 
D.  If the city council adopts the report, the requirement for mailed notice shall not thereafter apply to hearings on reports prepared in subsequent years for the annual benefit assessment and notice by posting and publication as provided in this section shall be adequate except that the city clerk shall give notice thereof to owners owning lots or parcels in the following categories: 
1.  Where there is an increase in the amount of the annual benefit assessment by reason of a change of zone or a change in the formula or formulae upon and by which annual assessment levies for the payment of the costs and expenses of said maintenance and operation will be apportioned according to benefits among the several lots or parcels of property within the maintenance district and the zones, if any; 
2.  Where there has been a division of any lot or parcel of land assessed during the previous year, and, as a result thereof, the divided lots or parcels are owned by different persons; 
3.  Where there has been an annexation of said lots or parcels to an existing maintenance district. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(p)).  
13.62.200 - Report—Hearing—Determining final. 
The city council shall hold the hearing at the time and place specified in the resolution and in any order continuing the hearing. During the course of, or upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may order changes in any of the matters provided in the report. Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the city council may adopt a resolution confirming the report, either as originally submitted or as changed by it. 
All decisions and determinations of the city council, on notice and hearing as aforesaid, shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal to it, as to all errors, informalities and irregularities which the city council might have avoided, or have remedied during the hearing on the report. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(q)).  
13.62.210 - Report—Certification and filing. 
The report, together with the certificate of the city clerk as to the fact and date of approval and adoption thereof by the city council as provided in Section 13.62.200 shall forthwith be delivered to the finance officer, who shall thereafter deliver said report, as adopted, to the officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(r)).  
13.62.220 - Benefit assessments—Posting. 
The officer designated by law to extend ad valorem property taxes upon the tax roll on which they are collected shall post to said tax roll the total amount of the benefit assessment levied and to be collected for said year on each lot or parcel of property within the maintenance district as set forth in said report. The amount so posted shall appear as a separate item on the tax bill. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(s)).  
13.62.230 - Method of collection. 
The special benefit assessments shall be collected upon the last equalized secured and utility tax rolls upon which said ad valorem property taxes are collected. They shall be in addition to all of said ad valorem property taxes, and shall be collected together with, and not separate therefrom, and enforced in the same manner and by the same persons and at the same time and with the same penalties and interest as are said ad valorem property taxes. All laws applicable to the collection and enforcement of said ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to said special benefit assessment levy, and the assessed lot or parcel of property, if sold for taxes, shall be subject to redemption in the same manner as such real property is redeemed from the sale or ad valorem property taxes, and if not redeemed, shall in like manner pass to the purchaser. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(t)).  
13.62.240 - Omitted property. 
If any property within the maintenance district is erroneously omitted in any such report, said property shall be assessed for the omitted amount in the next year after said omission is discovered, and appropriate provisions shall be made in the report for said year. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(u)).  
13.62.250 - Consolidated hearing. 
The procedures relating to the formation of a maintenance district or the annexation to an existing maintenance district and the alternative method for the levy of the annual benefit assessment hereunder may be consolidated for hearing purposes. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.291(v)).  
Article II. - Applicability to Maintenance Districts Formed Prior to Effective Date Hereof 
 
13.62.260 - Generally. 
The provisions of Sections 13.62.040 through 13.62.250 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessments shall be applicable to maintenance districts formed before the effective date hereof, regardless of the law pursuant to which said maintenance districts were formed, if all of the owners of all of the lots or parcels of property subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation request, in writing, that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as provided in Sections 13.62.040 through 13.62.250 shall apply. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(a)).  
13.62.270 - City council action. 
The city council may, by separate resolution, declare its intention to order that the alternative method for the levy of the benefit assessment as provided in this chapter be made applicable to maintenance districts formed prior to the effective date hereof and shall fix therein a time and place for a hearing thereon. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(b)).  
13.62.280 - Hearing—Notice. 
Notice of said hearing shall be given by the city clerk who shall cause a copy of said resolution of intention to be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of any lot or parcel of property subject to a benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation as provided in this chapter, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and to be posted on or near the council chamber door or any bulletin board in or adjacent to the city hall. Said mailing, publication and posting shall be completed not less than ten days prior to such hearing. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(c)).  
13.62.290 - Protests. 
At any time not later than the hour fixed for the hearing of objections in resolution of intention, the owner of any lot or parcel of property subject to assessment in said maintenance district to pay the costs of said maintenance and operation may make written protest thereto. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(d)).  
13.62.300 - Council decision final. 
The city council shall hear and pass upon all protests thereto, and its decision thereon, expressed by resolution, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 198 1: prior code § 14A.292(e)).  
13.62.310 - Majority protest. 
If the city council finds that protests thereto are made by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property in said maintenance district subject to benefit assessment to pay said costs of maintenance and operation, no further proceedings shall be taken for a period of six months from the date of the decision of the city council on the hearing, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of five-sevenths of the members of the city council. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(f)).  
13.62.320 - Consolidated hearing. 
The procedures under Sections 13.62.040 through 13.62.250 relating to the alternative method for the levy of benefit assessment may be consolidated for hearing purposes with the procedures under Sections 13.62.260 through 13.62.120. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.292(g)).  
Division IX. - Economic Development Bonds  
Chapter 13.64 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.64.010 - Title—General statement. 
This Division IX shall be known as the "City of Merced Industrial Development Revenue Bond Law" (sometimes hereafter referred to as "this division"), and is enacted by the city council of the city under and pursuant to the powers granted and reserved to the city under Sections 3, 5 and 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the state and Section 200 of the Charter of the city, and is enacted for the purpose of establishing a procedure for the issuance and sale of revenue bonds of the city for certain purposes. This division shall constitute a special procedure for the carrying out and enforcement of the rights and powers belonging to the city and such procedure shall control and be followed in the issuance and sale of revenue bonds as in this division so provided. This division fixes and establishes the entire procedure for the issuance and sale of said revenue bonds and no other law shall be applicable thereto. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.300(part)).  
13.64.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this division. 
A.  "Acquire" and its variations mean acquire, construct, improve, furnish, equip, remodel, repair, reconstruct or rehabilitate. 
B.  "Administrative expenses" means the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the city in the administration of the provisions of this division, including, without limitation, fees and costs of paying agents, indenture trustees, attorneys, consultants and others. 
C.  "Application" means an application submitted by a company pursuant to this division to obtain financing for a project under a project agreement. 
D.  "Bondholder" or "holder of bonds," or any other similar term, means: 
1.  Any person who has been the holder of any outstanding bond payable to bearer; or 
2.  The registered owner or his duly authorized attorney, trustee, representative or assigns of any outstanding bond which shall at the time be registered so as to be payable other than to bearer. 
For the purpose of bondholders' voting rights or consents, bonds owned by the city shall not be counted. 
E.  "Bond proceeds" means all amounts received by the city upon sale or other disposition of any bonds. 
F.  "Bonds" means the bonds, including principal (premium, if any) and interest, authorized to be issued by the city tinder this division, including a single bond, a promissory note or notes, or other instruments evidencing an indebtedness or obligation. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, bonds include any security issued hereunder, including any guarantee of such security by any person given in relation to an issue of bonds, which satisfy the following criteria: 
1.  Are issued as part of an issue all or a major portion of the proceeds of which are to be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on by any person who is not an exempt person within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; and 
2.  The payment of the principal or interest on which (under the terms of such obligation or any underlying arrangement) is, in whole or in major part: 
a.  Secured by any interest in property used, or to be used, in a trade or business or in payments in respect of such property, or 
b.  To be derived from payments in respect of property, or borrowed money, used or to be used in a trade or business; and 
3.  Are issued as part of an issue substantially all of the proceeds of which are to be used, with respect to any one or more of such facilities (none of which shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of any other state law), to provide: 
a.  For the acquisition or development of land as the site for an industrial park, 
b.  For any facilities meeting the criteria set forth in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection which the city can finance hereunder under the exemptions in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, commonly known as the "small issue exemptions", 
c.  Projects for residential rental property if each obligation issued pursuant to the issue is issued in registered form and if 
i.  Fifteen percent or more in the case of targeted area projects, or 
ii.  Twenty percent or more in the case of any other project, of the units in each project are to be occupied by individuals of low or moderate income (within the meaning of section 167(k) (3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 
d.  Sports facilities, 
e.  Convention or trade show facilities, 
f.  Airports, docks, wharves, mass commuting facilities, parking facilities, or storage or training facilities directly related to any of the foregoing, 
g.  Sewage or solid waste disposal facilities or facilities for the local furnishing of electric energy or gas, 
h.  Air or water pollution control facilities, 
i.  Facilities for the furnishing of water for any purpose if: 
i.  The water is or will be made available to members of the general public (including electric utility, industrial, agricultural, or commercial users), and 
ii.  Either the facilities are operated by a governmental unit or the rates for the furnishing, or sale of the water have been established or approved by the state or political subdivision thereof, by an agency or instrumentality of the United States, or by a public service or public utility commission or other similar body of the state or political subdivision thereof, or 
j.  For any other facilities which the city can finance hereunder without violating the applicable federal laws and regulations promulgated thereunder pertaining to industrial development bonds. 
The above definitions of the words "bonds" and "bond" shall be construed to include all of the types of industrial development bond facilities that can be financed on a tax-exempt basis under the applicable federal laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder, the details thereof, although also incorporated in such laws and regulations, being, omitted herein for the sake of brevity; and, it is intended that the definition in this division will be amended to correspond with any changes in said federal laws (but not in the regulations or in the details of such laws). It is not intended, by including any of the above definitions, to contravene any provisions of the city Charter and such definitions shall be so construed. Furthermore, some of the above items are furnished by privately owned public utilities or private concerns, and it is not intended to, nor shall any proceedings be conducted under those provisions, without the consent of the privately owned public utility or other private concern involved, as the case may be; or 
4.  Are issued as part of an issue substantially all the proceeds of which are to be used with respect to any one or more of such facilities (none of which shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of any other state law) to provide facilities (for example, hospitals) which are to be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on by any person who is an exempt person within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; and any company, who so qualifies as an exempt person, may submit an application for financing hereunder; and any company, who does not so qualify as an exempt person, may submit an application for financing of facilities for operations by such an exempt person, it being the intent of this division to encourage all enterprises, either within or without the city, which broaden the employment opportunities for residents of the city and which serve the residents of the city and so make it a more attractive place for industrial and commercial ventures. While bonds issued to provide facilities described in this subdivision do not fall within the definition of "industrial development bonds" as set forth in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, such bonds shall be treated as industrial development bonds for purposes of this division and may be issued substantially in the manner set forth herein pursuant to appropriate proceedings being taken therefor. 
G.  "City" means the city of Merced, California, a charter city in the State existing under and exercising powers pursuant to the city Charter. 
H.  "City Charter" means the "Charter of the city," as amended from time to time. 
I.  "Company" means a person, partnership, corporation, whether for profit or not, trust, or other private enterprise of whatever legal form, for which a project is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken pursuant to this division, and may include more than a single enterprise. 
J.  "Cost" as applied to any project, may include, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
1.  The cost of construction, improvement, remodeling, rehabilitation, repair and reconstruction: 
2.  The cost of acquisition, including rights in land and other property, both real and personal and improved and unimproved, and franchises, and disposal rights; 
3.  The cost of demolishing, removing, or relocating any building or structures on lands so acquired, including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings or structures may be moved or relocated; 
4.  The cost of machinery, equipment and furnishings, and of engineering and architectural surveys, plans, and specifications; 
5.  The cost of consultant services, including, without limitation, legal, financial, engineering, accounting, and auditing, necessary or incident to a project and of the determination as to the feasibility or practicability of undertaking such project; 
6.  The cost of financing, including, without limitation, interest to be paid on the bonds prior to, during, and for, a reasonable period after completion of a project, underwriter's discount, loan fees. and reserves for securing principal and interest payments and for extensions, enlargements, additions, repairs, replacements, renovations, and improvements; 
7.  The cost of acquiring or refinancing existing obligations incurred in connection with a project, and the reimbursement to any governmental entity or agency, or any company, of expenditures made by or on behalf of such entity, agency, or company that are costs of such project hereunder, without regard to whether or not such expenditures may have been made before or after the undertaking of a project by the city or delivery of bonds, all to the extent that such costs may be legally paid from bond proceeds; 
8.  The cost of making relocation assistance payments by the company and/or the city, as the case may be, all as provided by state law; 
9.  Any other items necessary or convenient for the project, whether or not included within the above categories. 
Except in the case of a company qualifying as an exempt person Linder Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, "cost" shall not otherwise include working capital for a company. 
K.  "Facilities" or "facility" means property suitable for any one or more of the activities or uses described in this division for which bonds can be issued, and includes incidental facilities and appurtenances and appurtenant work. 
L.  "Governmental department" means any commission, department, or agency of the state or the United States of America with which, under any other act, the offer, issuance, or sale of the bonds is subject to authorization, qualification or registration. 
M.  "Health facilities," means a structure or building suitable for use as a hospital, clinic, nursing home, home for the aged or infirm, place providing health care, laboratory, laundry, nurses', doctors', or interns' residence, ambulatory care center, place for administrative offices, place in which to conduct research, place in which to house maintenance equipment and supplies, storage place, place in which to 'locate utilities, auditorium, dining hall, place for food service and preparation, place in which to house firefighting equipment, place in which to provide mental and physical health care and dental care, nursing school, medical teaching school, and place in which to house offices; parking lots, garages, and buildings or structures in which to house supporting services; and all necessary, useful, and related furnishings, equipment, machinery, and appurtenances, including without limitation, the acquisition, preparation, and development of all lands necessary or convenient as a site or sites for any of the foregoing. 
N.  "Proceedings" means the actions taken by the city in undertaking, carrying out, and completing a project, including, without limitation, the project agreements, indentures, bonds, and resolutions. 
O.  "Project" means the acquisition, financing or refinancing of facilities as authorized by this division. 
P.  "Protect agreements" means the agreements between the city and a company respecting a project, and may include, without limitation, leases, subleases, options to, and installment or other contracts of purchase, loan, and guarantee agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds of trust, and security agreements. 
Q.  "Property" means any land, easements, rights-of-way, air rights, water rights, disposal rights, and any other rights, hereditaments, or profits of whatever kind and nature, improvements, buildings or other structures, and any personal property, and includes, but is not limited to, machinery and equipment, whether or not in existence or under construction, and interests in any of the foregoing necessary, incidental or convenient in connection with a project. 
R.  "Resolution of issuance" means a resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds by the city as further provided in Section 13.66.100. 
S.  "Revenues" means all rents, purchase payments, and other income derived by the city from, or with respect to, the sale, lease, or other voluntary or involuntary disposition of, or repayment of, loans with respect to, property, bond proceeds, and any receipts derived from the investment of any such income or proceeds in any fund or account of the city, but does not include receipts designated to cover administrative expenses. 
T.  "State" means the state of California. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.300 (part)).  
13.64.030 - Purpose. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that it is necessary and essential to the well-being of the city that it provide financial assistance to promote the economic development of the city. Such economic development will serve the following public purposes and municipal affairs of the city: 
1.  The full and gainful employment of residents of the city; 
2.  The full and efficient utilization and modernization of existing industrial, commercial, and business facilities; 
3.  The development of new industrial, commercial and business facilities; 
4.  The growth of the city's tax base through increased property values and purchasing power; 
5.  The reduction of the need for and costs of welfare and other remedial programs; 
6.  The reduction of urban ills, such as crime, attributable in part to inadequate economic opportunities; 
7.  The stability and diversification of the city's economy; 
8.  The lowering of the cost to Merced consumers of necessary goods and services; 
9.  The environmentally optimum disposition of waste materials of the city; and 
10.  The enhancement of the general economic prosperity, health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
B.  The availability of financial assistance pursuant to this division will serve those purposes and the general plan of the city by providing private enterprises with new methods of financing capital outlays in the city and by ensuring that economic development within the city will reflect the local community's needs and objectives and will be environmentally optimal with respect to both the physical and social environment of the city. The city can promote such public interests pursuant to this division without adversely affecting areas outside the city and without conflicting with efforts by the state to solve problems of statewide concern. 
C.  The city is authorized and directed to engage in the issuance of bonds for the accomplishment of one or more of the public purposes which it is the declared policy of the city to achieve, all as provided in this division. Such purpose or purposes shall be deemed to constitute a public purpose or purposes of the city in which the city has a peculiar and unique interest, and the exercise of the powers recognized in this division shall be deemed to be in the performance of an essential governmental function and also a municipal affair as those terms are defined by California law. Findings as to the reasons for the adoption of this division, the public purposes to be achieved thereby and other matters pertinent to this division were set forth in Ordinance No. 1374 of the city council, which the ordinance codified in this division is amending in its entirety. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.301).  
13.64.040 - Contract restrictions. 
A.  No attorney or firm of attorneys employed as counsel by a company may serve as legal counsel, including bond counsel, to the city in connection with any project or proposed project for such company. No attorney or firm of attorneys employed as counsel by an underwriter may serve as legal counsel, including bond counsel, to the city in connection with any project or proposed project for the company involved. 
B.  No person or firm employed as financial consultant, advisor or underwriter by a company may serve as financial advisor to the city, and no financial advisor to the city for a particular issue of bonds may purchase or agree to purchase bonds from the city unless such bonds are offered by the city at a public sale upon publication of a notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.302).  
Chapter 13.66 - FINANCING FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
13.66.010 - City powers—Allowed. 
The city is recognized to have all powers pursuant to and as may be limited by the city Charter which are necessary or appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this division, including, without limitation, the following powers, together with all powers incidental thereto: 
A.  To acquire property by purchase, exchange, gift, lease, contract, or otherwise, including eminent domain; 
B.  To maintain property; 
C.  To dispose of property by lease, sale, exchange, donation, release, relinquishment, or otherwise; 
D.  With respect to property, to: 
1.  Charge and collect rent under any lease; 
2.  Sell at public or private sale, with or without public notice: 
3.  Sell at a premium or discount above or below appraised value or for a nominal consideration; 
4.  Sell on an installment payment or a conditional sales basis; 
5.  Convey, or provide for the transfer of property without further act of the city, upon exercise of an option; and 
6.  Sell at a fixed or formula price, and receive for any such sale the note or notes of a company and mortgages, deeds of trust, or other security agreements respecting such property; provided, however, this subsection shall be operable only to the extent permitted by the city Charter; 
E.  To encumber property, including funds, whether then owned or thereafter acquired; 
F.  To advance funds secured by loan agreements and charge and collect interest on such funds; 
G.  To exercise all rights and to perform all obligations of the city under the project agreements and resolution of issuance, including the right, upon any event of default by or the failure to comply with any of the obligations thereof by the lessee, purchaser, or other company thereunder, to dispose of all or part of the property to the extent authorized by the project agreements or resolution of issuance; 
H.  To borrow money and issue its bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the costs of a project, as provided in this division; 
I.  To pledge the revenues or any portion thereof, and all other rights, as security for the payment of any bonds so issued and for performance of obligations under a resolution of issuance; 
J.  To contract and pay compensation for professional, legal, financial and other services; 
K.  To refund outstanding, bonds when there is a finding that such refunding will be of benefit to a company or holders of such bonds, subject to the provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof to the extent permitted by law; 
L.  To invest and reinvest funds, including bond proceeds, pending application thereof to the purposes for which such bonds shall have been issued, subject to the provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof. 
M.  To acquire and hold obligations of any kind and pledge or assign the same as further security; 
N.  To fund administrative expenses: 
1.  By the establishment and collection of application processing and other fees in such amounts as may be established by the city council from time to time, 
2.  By the acceptance of funds and other aid from governmental sources authorized to provide such funds or aid, 
3.  By the acceptance of contributions from business, trade, labor, community and other associations, and 
4.  By other legal means; 
O.  1.  To make a loan and/or loans to a company pursuant to a resolution of issuance and a project agreement, and such loan or loans may be secured by a mortgage or such other security interests as deemed advisable by the city, may contain the unconditional promise of the company to so make payments or may be Guaranteed by such other means as approved by the city, 
2.  To lease facilities and/or property to a company with an option for the company to purchase such facilities and/or property at the end of the lease term at such price as may be determined by the city, 
3.  To enter into lease-leaseback financings with companies on such terms as may be provided in the resolution of issuance and the project agreements, and 
4.  To enter into installment sale agreements with a company for facilities constructed by the city, with title to pass from the city to such company upon entering into such agreement or upon payment in full of the principal and interest on bonds; 
P.  To exercise the city's right of eminent domain in implementing the intent of the city by adopting this division, to the extent possible and in the manner required in the city Charter and applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.303).  
13.66.020 - City powers—Prohibited. 
The city shall not have the power to operate any facilities as a business. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.304).  
13.66.030 - Publication—Contents. 
Upon this division becoming effective, the city clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice setting forth substantially the following: 
A.  That the city has duly adopted and approved this division seeking to promote industrial growth within the city so as to encourage increasing long-term employment for the residents thereof; 
B.  That on and after the effective date of this division, the city will accept applications on forms approved by the city from companies interested in entering into project agreements for the financing of facilities hereunder; and 
C.  That the city will review such applications and determine the feasibility of each project so submitted and will undertake to commence the financing thereof as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.305).  
13.66.040 - Rules, regulations and forms. 
The city council shall provide, by resolution, rules and regulations setting forth the details of the procedures for the implementation of this division, including therein, without limitation, a form of application, the criteria for evaluation and approval of the applications, the procedures for processing applications and the deposits, fees and charges to be made hereunder and the uses of same, or any fund or funds derived therefrom. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.306).  
13.66.050 - Applications—Contents. 
Private industrial, manufacturing or commercial concerns may apply for financing pursuant to this division by filing an application with the city on such forms and with the city as specified pursuant to Section 13.66.040 and shall include, without limitation, all information necessary to evaluate the financial reliability and stability of the enterprise, to verify that long-term employment of local residents, will, in fact, be increased, and to determine that the city will receive a substantial benefit that exceeds any detriment incurred. The application shall also include the following: 
A.  An estimate of the maximum amount of bonds proposed to be issued, of the sources of amounts otherwise required for the project, and an itemization of the estimated costs and any other expenses; 
B.  The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company to comply, and/or to assist the city in complying, with all state and federal laws in the issuance of the bonds, including, without limitation, the making of any required application to a governmental department, for authorization, qualification, or registration of the offer, issuance, or sale of the bonds, and any amendments thereto, and any permit or other authorization of such governmental department, prior to the delivery by the city of such bonds: 
C.  The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company to cause and/or to assist the city in causing to be printed any prospectus or other written or printed communication proposed to be published in connection with the issuance, offer, or sale of bonds, prior to the delivery by the city of such bonds, and, if deemed necessary by the city, following the delivery of such bonds; 
D.  All commitments by the company shall specifically provide for the company to pay all expenses in connection with the issuance, offer or sale of the bonds, whether or not they are finally issued, to hold the city harmless from any and all expenses and liabilities related thereto and to pay items on an ongoing basis so that neither the city, nor its advisors, attorneys, employees and the like will accumulate any claims against the city; and 
E.  All additional information, agreements and undertakings as the city may require which are submitted to the city by a company shall be reproduced in written, printed, or other tangible form, shall be supplied in as many copies as the city prescribes and shall be deemed supplements or amendments to the application. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.307).  
13.66.060 - Applications—Processing. 
A.  Applications for projects by companies not reasonably in accordance with the requirements of this division need not be accepted and further processed. 
B.  Receipt of any application in no way obligates the city to preliminarily undertake the project proposed. 
C.  Upon receipt of any application, the city shall review each application and shall determine compliance with the purposes of this division and with the criteria established pursuant hereto, and such review shall include the making of the appropriate determinations, including, without limitation, the determination that it is likely that the undertaking of the project by the city will be a substantial factor in the accrual of each of the public benefits from the use of the facilities as proposed in the application. 
D.  Upon an affirmative determination under subsection C of this section, a copy of the application, as then amended or supplemented, so certified by the city clerk, shall be entered into the records of the city, and a notice of the acceptance of the application naming the company, stating the estimated maximum bond issue and briefly summarizing the proposed project, shall be published pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code. 
E.  The company, not the city, shall be deemed the proposer of any project, a copy of the application for which is filed pursuant to Section 13.66.050. 
F.  Upon such approval, and certification thereof by the city clerk, all proceedings necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended ("CEQA"), any zoning, building code or other requirements of law shall, if not already done, be commenced at the expense of the company. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.308).  
13.66.070 - Preliminary undertaking. 
A.  A project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken by the city when the application has been reviewed, processed as set forth in Section 13.66.060, the affirmative determinations above required have been made, the approval of the city has been obtained, a period of thirty days from the date of publication of the notice referred to in subsection D of Section 13.66.060 has expired, and no requests have been received by the city clerk for a public hearing pursuant to the publication of such notice. Should requests be received for a public hearing on the matter, the city council shall hold such a hearing as soon as is reasonably practicable. A further notice shall be given of such public hearing pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code. If, after such public hearing', the city council decides to proceed, the project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken; provided, however, nothing herein shall be deemed to commit the city to proceeding, if as a result of the public hearing the city council decides not to proceed. 
B.  Preliminarily undertaking a project in no way obligates the city to undertake a project by entry into project agreements. 
C.  The city council may decide to hold the public hearing referred to in subsection A of this section and if so, the thirty-day waiting period in subsection A of this section shall not apply. 
D.  The city council may, as it deems necessary in certain instances, approve any particular application, regardless of the form thereof, without complying with Sections 13.66.030, 13.66.040, 13.66.060 and subsections A, B and C of this section. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.309).  
13.66.080 - Undertakings. 
The city shall undertake projects by entry into project agreements in substance not inconsistent with the following: 
A.  The company shall comply with all legal requirements relating to the project and the operation, repair and maintenance of the facility, including: 
1.  Obtaining any rezonings or variances, building, development, environmental and other permits and approvals, and licenses and other entitlements for use, without regard to any exemption for public projects; 
2.  Securing the issuance of any certificates of need, convenience, and necessity or other certificates or franchises required by the state; 
3.  Qualifying and/or registering any nonexempt issue, offer, or sale of any bonds or other security proposed to be issued by the company or others (including the city) in connection with the project; and 
4.  Providing satisfactory evidence of compliance with this section. 
B.  The company shall provide, or cause to be provided by others, all amounts required for the project and all property of the project which are not to be provided as or by expenditure of bond proceeds, and in the case of any such amounts and property which the company proposes to cause to be provided by others; as by contract, grant, subsidy, loan, or other form of assistance, shall provide satisfactory evidence that such amounts and property will be provided when required. 
C.  Expenditure of bond proceeds shall be supervised to assure proper application to the project. 
D.  The company shall, at its own expense, insure, repair and maintain the facility, pay such taxes with respect to its interests in the property of the project as is then required by law, and pay any assessments and other public charges secured by liens, upon such interests as constitute the tax base for property taxation (regardless of any exemption which may be provided from property taxes), on the same basis as other property of similar character. 
E.  The amounts payable by a company to, or for, the benefit of the city shall, in the aggregate, not be less than amounts sufficient: 
1.  To pay any bonds that shall be issued by the city to pay the costs of the project, and 
2.  To pay those administrative expenses which relate to the administration of the project agreements, the resolution of issuance and the bonds. 
F.  The term of the project agreements shall extend at least until the date on which all such bonds and all other obligations incurred by the city in connection with a project shall have been paid in full or adequate funds for such payment shall have been otherwise provided. 
G.  Such additional provisions as in the determination of the city are necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this division, including, without limitation provisions: 
1.  For payments by a company which include amounts for administrative expenses, in addition to the amounts which the agreement is required to obligate the company to pay, which are incurred by the city subsequent to the preliminary undertaking of the project by the city; 
2.  For payment before a facility exists or becomes functional, or after a facility has ceased to exist or be functional to any extent and from any cause; 
3.  For payment regardless as to whether or not the company is in possession or is entitled to be in possession of the facility; 
4.  Relating to the carrying out and completion of the project, including the allocation of responsibility between the city and the company regarding the acquisition of property, the making of other purchases, and the contracting for construction of the project, with or without competitive bidding, and the payment therefor; 
5.  That some or all of the obligations of a company shall be unconditional and shall be binding and enforceable in all circumstances whatsoever, notwithstanding any other provision of law; and 
6.  Relating to the use, maintenance, repair, insurance, and replacement of property of the project, such as the city and the company deem necessary for the protection of themselves or others, including, but not limited to, liability insurance, indemnification, and events of default; 
7.  That the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against the claims and demands of all persons arising in any manner from the project, the project agreements, the facilities, the property, its operation, maintenance, repair and the like, including, without limitation, alleged violations of any state or federal law relating thereto or relating to this division or any acts taken under this division; 
8.  For the payment of fees, charges, or deposits for the purpose of establishing and maintaining such common reserve fund or funds as may be deemed necessary or desirable to secure the city's bonds issued hereunder, pursuant to rules and regulations governing the derivation, operation and use of such common reserve fund or funds. One or more common reserve funds may be established by the city for any or all of its bonds. The liability of any such common reserve fund with respect to any single issue of bonds of the city may not exceed the sum of the unpaid principal, interest, and premium, if any, of the outstanding bonds of such issue. Each common reserve fund established pursuant to this section shall be established by the city treasurer. All interest or other increment earned by investment or deposit of moneys in such fund shall be credited to, and deposited in, such fund. 
H.  The company shall provide for the payment of any relocation assistance required by law and shall reimburse the city, as the case may be, for relocation assistance services. 
I.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, projects developed pursuant to this division shall be consistent with the requirements of the general plan of the city and any applicable redevelopment plan. 
J.  In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree that, to the extent feasible, the company shall pass through to the patients at such health facilities in the form of lower patient charges, the interest cost savings achieved by the company as a result of the City issuing bonds for the financing or refinancing of such health facilities. 
K.  In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree to obtain all necessary health planning approvals with respect to the health facilities proposed to be financed or refinanced by the city. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.310).  
13.66.090 - Nonagency. 
No company shall, by reason of any project agreement, be deemed agent of the city in the carrying out of such agreement. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.311).  
13.66.100 - Resolution of issuance. 
The issuance of bonds shall be authorized by the city council by a resolution of issuance. The resolution of issuance may contain such terms and conditions of the bonds as the city council deems advisable and in accordance with the provisions of this division, including, but not limited to: 
A.  The type, denominations, terms and maturities of the bonds as the city may deem appropriate; 
B.  For the bonds to be in either registered or bearer form either as to principal or interest or both and carry such conversion and reconversion privileges as the city may deem appropriate; 
C.  For the bonds to be payable as serial or term bonds in such installments as may be set forth therein and at such time or times not exceeding forty years from the date thereof; 
D.  For the bonds to be payable in such mediums and at such place or places within or without the State as the city may deem appropriate; 
E.  For the bonds to bear interest at such rate or rates (or variable rates, as the case may be) per annum not to exceed those specified in the proceedings, (which shall be greater than that allowed under the Constitution of the state), payable at such time or times and at such place or places within or without the state and evidenced in such manner as the city may deem appropriate; 
F.  For the bonds to be exchangeable for, or issuable in lieu of, such bonds; 
G.  For bonds to be signed on behalf of the city by facsimile signature of the mayor and by manual signature of the city clerk, and the seal of the city to be impressed, imprinted and reproduced thereon. The interest coupons on the bonds shall be signed by fascimile signature of the city clerk. The foregoing officers shall be authorized and directed to sign the bonds and coupons in accordance with this Section. If any city official whose manual or facsimile signature appears on the bonds or coupons ceases to be such member or officer before delivery of the bonds, such signature is as effective as if such official had remained in office. In lieu of the manual signature of the city clerk on the bonds, they may be authenticated by the manual signature of a duly authorized officer of the trustee on the particular bond issue involved; 
H.  If deemed advisable by the city, there may be retained in the proceedings an option to redeem prior to maturity all or any part of any bonds as may be specified in such proceedings, at such price or prices and after such notice or notices and on such terms and conditions as may be set forth in such proceedings and as may be briefly recited in the bond. Nothing in this division shall be construed to confer on the city any right or option to redeem any bonds, except as may be provided in the proceedings under which they shall have been issued; 
I.  For the fixing and collection of revenues; 
J.  For the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues, including reserve and sinking funds; 
K.  For limitations on expenditures of bond proceeds; 
L.  For the procedure by which any contract represented by bonds may be amended or abrogated; 
M.  For the acts and omissions which shall constitute, and the rights and remedies available in, an event of default. In such an event of default, the obligations of the city may be enforced by mandamus, by the appointment of a receiver, by foreclosure of, or sale under, any resolution of issuance, by injunction, by specific performance, by equitable relief, or by any one or more of such remedies, or any other appropriate remedy authorized by law; 
N.  Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding, of outstanding bonds; 
O.  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given; 
P.  For the payment of administrative expenses or other expenses of the city, 
Q.  Specifications of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of the bonds, and providing, the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default: 
R.  Issuing bonds in temporary form pending preparation of bonds in definitive form, at which time such temporary bonds shall be exchanged for definitive bonds in bearer or fully registered form; 
S.  For any additional matters authorized to be included in the indenture provisions of a resolution of issuance or which relate to the security, protection, or remedies of bondholders, or which tend to make the bonds more marketable; and 
T.  The bonds to contain such provisions not inconsistent with this division as the city may deem appropriate which are for the protection of the city or the bondholders or which tend to make the bonds more marketable. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.312).  
13.66.110 - Indenture provisions in resolution of issuance. 
A.  In the discretion of the city, any bonds issued under the provisions of this division may be secured by indenture provisions in the resolution of issuance by and between the city and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within the state and the resolution of issuance may contain such provisions which are customarily found in indentures, including, without limitation, the provisions set forth in this section. 
B.  Such resolution of issuance may vest in bondholders the right to remove and appoint a new trustee or trustees. The trustee or trustees may, at any time, own all or any part of the bonds, unless otherwise provided in the resolution of issuance. Such resolution of issuance may vest in such trustee or trustees, in trust or as agents, as provided therein and as consistent with other provisions of this section, property, rights, powers and duties, and may provide that the revenues and any other rights be pledged as security for repayment of the bonds, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist. Such resolution of issuance may contain convenants of the city as to the acquisition of property, the disposition of any property, or part thereof, the subjecting of additional property to the lien thereof, the issuance of additional bonds, the custody, investment and application of all moneys, the creation and maintenance of reserves, the disposition of insurance or condemnation proceeds, and the use of surplus bond proceeds. Any such resolution of issuance may define events of default thereunder, which may include events of default by a company under the project agreements, may specify the action to be taken by the city upon an event of default, may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee or trustees, and may restrict the individual right of action by bondholders. In addition, any such resolution of issuance may contain such other provisions as the city may deem reasonable and proper and which relate in any way to the security or protection of bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such resolution of issuance shall be treated as an administrative expense. 
C.  Any interest in property established by any resolution of issuance shall be valid and binding from the date thereof, and any revenues or amounts to cover administrative expenses received by, or on behalf of, the city thereunder shall immediately be subject to the lien thereof without any further act, which lien shall be valid and binding as against all persons, irrespective of notice, without any filing or recording except a filing in the records of the city. All revenues, excepting (unless otherwise provided) bond proceeds, shall further be deemed to be trust funds and all revenues shall be held and applied solely as provided in such resolution of issuance, but no bondholder shall, as such, be in any manner obligated to see to the proper application thereof. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.313).  
Chapter 13.68 - BONDS 
Sections: 
 
13.68.010 - General provisions. 
All bonds issued by the city for a project shall be special obligations only of the city, payable solely from the revenues or from the other sources specified in the proceedings. In addition and without limitation to the other provisions of this division: 
A.  The bonds may be executed and delivered by the city at any time and from time to time; 
B.  The issuance by the city of one or more issues of bonds for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds in connection with the same project or any other project, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist; 
C.  Any bonds of the city issued under this division at any time outstanding may, at any time, and from time to time, be refunded by the city by the issuance of its refunding bonds in such amount as the city may deem necessary or appropriate. Bonds may be issued as one issue for refunding and other authorized purposes. Any refunding may be effected whether the bonds to be refunded shall have then matured or shall thereafter mature, either by sale of the refunding bonds and the application of the bond proceeds to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded thereby, or by the exchange of the refunding bonds for the bonds to be refunded thereby with the consent of the holders of the bonds so to be refunded and with such cash adjustments as may be agreed, and regardless of whether or not the bonds proposed to be refunded shall be payable at the same date or different dates or shall be due serially or otherwise, and, notwithstanding any other provision of the law, the proceedings for the issuance of such refunding bonds may provide for the payment into an escrow fund of such moneys, together with the interest to be earned thereon, which shall be sufficient to pay the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on the bonds so refunded to the earliest or subsequent date of redemption, purchase or maturity of such refunded bonds; and 
D.  Each bond shall be deemed to be an investment security under the Uniform Commercial Code as adopted by the state and a negotiable instrument, subject only to any provisions thereof for registration or other provisions restricting transfer, and shall be deemed to have been issued for an authorized purpose of the city in the exercise of the powers pursuant to this division; provided, that the city so determines in the proceedings and such determination is recited in the bond. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.314).  
13.68.020 - Compliance with state and federal laws required. 
Any and all bonds issued pursuant to this division shall be issued in compliance with all state laws not inconsistent herewith as well as federal laws and regulations relating to the issuance of securities and federal laws and regulations relating to the exemption from federal income taxation. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.315).  
13.68.030 - Sale of bonds. 
Bonds may be sold at such prices and in such manner as the city council may direct, at public or private sale. Such bonds may be sold at, above, or below the par or face value thereof, but the sale price shall not be less than the percentage of the par or face value of the bonds specified in the proceedings. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.316).  
13.68.040 - No debt or liability of city. 
A.  None of the bonds issued by the city pursuant to this division shall be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city, or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city, but shall be payable solely from the revenues and other funds, if any, provided therefor in the proceedings. 
B.  The issuance of bonds shall not directly or indirectly or contingently obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
C.  All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect: 
Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City of Merced is pledged to the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on this Bond, nor is the City of Merced in any manner obligated to make any appropriation for payment. 
D.  Neither the city council nor any persons executing the bonds shall, in any event, be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance of such bonds. 
E.  The bonds shall be a special obligation of the city, and the city shall, under no circumstances, be obligated to pay bonds or project costs (other than administrative expenses), except from revenues and other funds received under the project agreements for such purposes, nor to pay administrative expenses except from funds received under project agreements for such purposes, or from funds which are made available as otherwise authorized by law. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement of their special obligation nature. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.317).  
13.68.050 - Net earnings. 
Any net earnings realized by the city pursuant to this division shall inure solely to the benefit of the city and not to the benefit of any company or other private person. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.318).  
Chapter 13.70 - SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.70.010 - Interpretation. 
This division, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.319(a)).  
13.70.020 - City's pledge to make fair amendments. 
The city pledges and agrees with the holders of any bonds issued, and with those companies which may enter into project agreements pursuant to the provisions of this division relating to such bonds, that the city will not amend this division so as to adversely affect vested rights of the holders of such bonds or the companies executing project agreements relating thereto until the obligations evidenced by such bonds are fully met or discharged and such project agreements are fully performed or discharged on the part of the city; provided, however, that nothing contained in this division shall preclude such alteration or change: 
A.  If there will be no impairment of the contracts represented by such bonds, based upon a finding made by the council after a public hearing and the receipt of appropriate opinions and evidence relating thereto; 
B.  If, and when, adequate provision has been made for the protection from impairment of the contracts represented by such bonds and project agreements; or 
C.  To amend this division so as to make it more efficient, cure ambiguities, defects, inconsistent provisions, clarify matters or questions arising tinder this division, take advantage of new legal or conceptual developments or otherwise improve this division and the application thereof to the benefit of the city and its citizens; and such right to so alter or change is hereby reserved. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.319(b)).  
13.70.030 - Legal actions brought forward. 
An action may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Part 2 of Title 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to determine the validity of bonds, proceedings, project agreements or indentures, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the legality of all proceedings theretofore taken, or proposed to be taken in such proceedings, pursuant to this division; and all of such matters respecting which an action may be brought pursuant to such Chapter 9 shall be subject to the provisions thereof regarding validity, limitation of actions and incontestability. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.319(c)).  
13.70.040 - Applicability of division. 
This division provides a complete and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this division, but the authorizations shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws; provided, however, that, in the exercise of any of the powers conferred, including powers relating to the offer, issuance and sale of bonds, under the provisions of this division, the city need not comply with the provisions of any law applicable to the exercise of similar powers except as referred to in this division. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 part), 1981: prior code § 14A.319(d)).  
13.70.050 - Grammatical interpretation. 
A.  Except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this division, the definition of each word or phase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
B.  Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders. Words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice versa. 
C.  Words importing persons shall include corporations and associations, including public bodies, as well as natural persons. 
D.  The terms "hereby," "hereof," "hereto," "herein," "hereunder" and any similar terms used in this division, refer to this division. 
(Ord. 1417 § 1 (part), 1981: prior code § 14A.319(e)).  
Title 14 - PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.04 - PARK RULES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2341A, adopted Sept. 21, 2009, amended Ch. 14.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14.04 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 18.1—18.8; Ord. No. 1129, adopted 1975; Ord. No. 1332, adopted 1980; and Ord. No. 1910, adopted 1995. 
 
14.04.010 - Vehicles—Speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful and an infraction, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle in any of the city parks at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.020 - Vehicles—Speed limit signs. 
Metal signs shall be placed by the director of public works-operations or the designee thereof at the boundary line of a public park as determined by the city engineer on every such road or avenue, of the same specifications as prescribed by Title 10, with the words thereon "Ten miles speed limit." 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.030 - Vehicles—Parking on driveway. 
It is unlawful and an infraction, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to park or leave standing any motor or horse-drawn vehicle on any of the driveways in any city park, except upon the right-hand edge thereof and parallel thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.040 - Vehicles—Driving upon grass. 
Any person who drives a motor vehicle or any vehicle of any kind whatsoever upon any grass, plant or shrubbery growing in any of the public or private parks or grounds in the city, or in or upon any cultivated area or any ground prepared for planting of grass, plants, trees or shrubbery in any public or private park or grounds in the city, or, when posted with a sign or signs prohibiting such activity, in or upon any undeveloped or unplanted public park lands in the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.050 - Vehicles—Lights. 
It is unlawful and an infraction, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to park or leave standing any motor or horse-drawn vehicle in any of the driveways in any city park at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise, unless such vehicle is equipped with two (2) lighted lamps on the front thereof and one (1) lighted lamp on the rear thereof, all such lamps to be so placed and of such character as to be plainly visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.060 - Riding or driving off roadway. 
Any person who rides, drives or leads any animal or vehicle of any kind in any of the public parks of the city other than upon the roadways therein is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.070 - Hours—Permit. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to be or remain in any city park between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day, without having received a permit to do so from the chief of police of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.080 - Injuring verdure. 
Every person who in any manner injures any tree, plant, shrub, grass plot or grass growing in or upon any of the public or private parks or grounds, or plucks flowers or fruit from any growing vine, bush, tree, plant or shrub in any of the public or private parks or grounds in the city is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.090 - Train tracks. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to place or cause to be placed any rock or debris on or between the train tracks in Applegate Park. 
B.  Signs shall be placed by the director of public works-operations or the designee thereof in such locations as determined by the city engineer so as to be seen by an ordinarily observant person giving notice of the prohibitions contained herein. Failure to place such signs shall not prevent enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.100 - Turf renovation. 
The director of parks and community services may restrict usage of an area up to eighteen hundred (1,800) square feet in any city park for the purpose of turf renovation. Areas designated for turf renovation shall be clearly marked. Any person who enters an area designated for turf renovation shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.110 - Active and passive recreation activities. 
A.  The director of parks and community services may designate areas in city parks for active recreation activities. Areas designated for such activities shall be clearly marked. Active recreation activities refer to activities that require the use of equipment or designated facilities, courses, or fields, and include, but are not limited to, baseball, football, volleyball, basketball, soccer, hockey, tennis, skateboarding, frisbee golf, kator, kickball, and top spin. 
B.  The director of parks and community services may designate areas in city parks for passive recreation activities. Areas designated for such activities shall be clearly marked. Passive recreation activities place minimal stress on park resources and are compatible with natural resource protection. Passive recreation activities refer to activities that do not require the use of equipment or designated facilities, courses, or fields, and include, but are not limited to, picnicking, walking, bicycling, running, jogging, hiking, and wildlife viewing. 
C.  Any person who engages in active recreation activities in or upon an area designated for passive recreational activities shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
14.04.120 - Golfing prohibited. 
Any person that plays golf, or practices the driving of golf balls, in or upon any city park shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 1, 9-21-2009)  
Chapter 14.08 - PARK—EXCLUSIVE USE PERMITS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2341A, adopted Sept. 21, 2009, amended Ch. 14.08 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14.08 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from prior code § 18.9(a)—(f); and Ord. No. 1321, adopted 1980. 
 
14.08.010 - Generally. 
A permit shall be obtained from the director of parks and community services for exclusive use of any park facility or area designated for such use by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.015 - Activities requiring exclusive use permit. 
A.  The following activities require an exclusive use permit in order to be conducted in or upon any city park: 
1.  The use of a bounce house or similar apparatus; 
2.  Exclusive use of a covered area within any city park; 
3.  Organized sports leagues or tournament play. 
B.  In addition to obtaining an exclusive use permit, the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for such use, and enter into any agreement for such use, as established by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.020 - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of an exclusive use permit as described in Section 14.08.010 shall file an application with the director of parks and community services. The application shall state: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any; 
C.  The day and hours for which the exclusive use permit is desired; 
D.  The park or portion thereof for which such permission is desired; 
E.  An estimate of anticipated attendance; 
F.  Any other information which the director of parks and community services finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether an exclusive use permit should be issued; 
G.  Whether or not a system for amplifying sound is proposed to be used and the purpose or purposes for which it shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.030 - Issuance standards. 
A.  The director of parks and community services shall issue an exclusive use permit as described in Section 14.08.010 when he/she finds: 
1.  That the requested area of the park is available during the period for which the exclusive use permit is requested; 
2.  That the expected attendance does not exceed the capacity established for the area of the park requested; 
3.  That the use for which the exclusive use permit is sought complies with the use established for the area of the park requested; 
4.  That the applicant has met any time limit set by regulation for reserving the area of the park requested; 
5.  That if a system for amplifying sound is to be used, the use thereof will not interfere with or detract unreasonably from the general public enjoyment of the park or surrounding area; 
6.  That the proposed activity is not, in the judgment of the chief of police, of a size or nature that would require the diversion of so great a number of police officers as to jeopardize the provision of police protection to the remainder of the city; or provisions have been made by the permittee for the cost of additional police officers needed to preserve order during the exclusive use; 
7.  That the user fee as set by resolution of the city council has been paid; 
8.  That a cash deposit in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of any cleanup or damage has been filed. 
B.  For the purposes of subsections 2 and 3 above, the established uses and capacities for the several parks and areas of parks subject to exclusive use shall be those approved from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.040 - For exclusive use—Rules shall apply. 
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were incorporated into the exclusive use permits. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.050 - For exclusive use—Revocation. 
A.  Failure to comply with any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the park shall be grounds to revoke the exclusive use permit and, in such circumstances, the police department or parks and community services department shall immediately revoke the exclusive use permit. The applicant or permit holder in such case shall have the right to appeal said revocation to the city council at its next meeting. 
B.  Any person who continues the activity after the revocation of the exclusive use permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
14.08.060 - Park exclusive use—Permit violation. 
Any person who carries on an activity without obtaining the exclusive use permit required by Section 14.08.010 or Section 14.08.015 of this code, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2341A, § 2, 9-21-2009)  
Chapter 14.12 - TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS* 
Sections: 
 
14.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"Director" means the director of recreation and parks of the city or any of his authorized representatives. 
"Master plan" means the plan entitled: "Master Plan—Trees and Shrubs of the City of Merced," on file in the office of the city clerk. 
"Street tree" shall mean any tree placed within the road rights-of-way of the city or in easements adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.025 - Street trees property of city. 
All street trees within the city of Merced are the exclusive property of the city. The director shall have exclusive authority, except as hereinafter provided, to plant, remove, prune, inspect, maintain, root prune or otherwise alter such street trees. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.030 - Kinds or varieties. 
Subject to the supervision of the city manager, the director shall have the power to designate the kind or variety of trees, shrubs or plants to be planted upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city in conformity with the master plan; provided, however, that the owners of property fronting on any street, alley or public place may petition the recreation and parks commission that such trees, shrubs or plants shall be a certain kind or variety, but the decision of the commission shall be merely advisory to the action of the city council, which makes the final decision. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.040 - Cutting, trimming or planting—Permit required. 
No person shall cut, trim, prune, plant, spray, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, without the prior permission and approval therefor from the director. The director is authorized to grant such permission in his discretion and, where necessary, subject to the condition that the removed tree will be replaced by an official tree in conformity with the master plan. No such permission shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its date of issuance. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.045 - Same—Private works. 
Any person granted permission pursuant to Section 14.12.040 may undertake the work personally or by agreement with a private nursery or tree service if the director determines: 
A.  There is sufficient assurance that such work will be properly undertaken and, except in cases of removal, will not irrevocably damage the street tree; and 
B.  There is sufficient assurance that the public safety will not be impaired. To this end, the director may require a public liability and property damage insurance policy, a permit and a processing fee. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.050 - Cutting or trimming to maintain wires, pipes or conduits. 
Any person maintaining any overhead wires or any pipes or underground conduits along or across any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, or owning any property abutting upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, desiring to have any tree, shrub or plant cut, trimmed, pruned or removed may file with the director a written request that such work be done. Such request shall describe the work desired to be done and it shall be within the discretion of the director to require a written agreement upon the part of the petitioner to pay the cost thereof and to do such work in the way stipulated by the director before the issuance of any permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.060 - Interference with director. 
No person shall interfere with the director, or persons acting under this authority, while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, or in the removing of any stone, cement or other substance from about the trunk of any tree, shrub or plant in any such street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard alley or public place. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.070 - Deleterious substances. 
No person shall cause, authorize or permit any brine water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, or onto any sidewalk, road or pavement within the city at a point from which such substance may be lying upon or by flowing, dripping or seeping into such soil injure such tree, shrub or plant, or to otherwise harm or kill any such tree, shrub or plant. No person, without the approval of the director, shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it impedes the free access of water or air to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.080 - Placing or attaching wires, ropes or signs. 
No person shall place, apply, attach or keep attached to any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or other public place of the city, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign, paint or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.090 - Construction work—Protection. 
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the city, no person in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant arising out of or by reason of the erection, repair, alteration or removal. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.095 - Duty to protect trees—Excavations. 
A.  It shall be the duty of any person owning or operating any utility within the public right-of-way (including, but not limited to, water sewer, gas, electrical, telephone and cable television services) to maintain such utility in a manner to prevent damage to street trees. 
B.  Any person excavating, trenching or otherwise engaged in subsurface works within the public right-of-way shall not cut any street tree root exceeding three inches in diameter unless specifically authorized to do so by the director. In addition to the penalties otherwise prescribed by this chapter for violation of the terms thereof, any person who, without authorization, cuts a street tree root in excess of three inches in diameter shall be liable for the cost of removal and replacement of tree, or shall be liable for the costs of remedial pruning of said street tree. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.100 - Construction work—Trimming or removal—Permit. 
When the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure necessitates the trimming, pruning or removal of any tree, shrub or plant on any street, park, pleasure ground, alley or other public place of the city, except any trimming, pruning or removal required by the construction of a residential driveway, which shall be governed by Section 14.12.040, it shall be within the discretion of the director to refuse permission to do such work. Applications for a permit to trim, prune or remove any tree or plant on any of the above-mentioned places for the above mentioned reasons shall be filed with the director at least three days prior to the time of doing such work. The director may stipulate the conditions upon which any trimming, pruning or removal may be done and may require the applicant to enter into an agreement whereby the applicant shall agree to pay all costs incurred for any inspection, labor, equipment or service deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.110 - House movers—Approval and notice. 
No person shall move any building, house or portion thereof without notifying the director at least three days in advance of such moving. The notice shall designate the route to be followed and all other details pertinent to such work. The director shall have the authority to change such route and designate one which in his opinion will cause less damage to trees, shrubs or plants owned by the city along and adjacent to such route. If necessary to protect such trees, shrubs or plants, the director may require that the house, building or portions thereof be cut into segments small enough to fit the available width between such trees, shrubs or plants along the designated route. As a condition to approving any route for the moving of any building, house or portion thereof, the director may require the person doing such work to enter into an agreement to pay all costs incurred for any labor, equipment or material used to protect or preserve such trees, shrubs or plants, either before or after such moving. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.120 - Private property—Hazard inspection. 
The director may inspect any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the city, or any tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property, to determine whether the same, or any portion thereof, is in such condition as to constitute a hazard or an impediment to the progress or vision of any person traveling on any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.130 - Private property—Removal authority. 
If, in the opinion of the director, under the provisions of Section 14.12.120, any tree, shrub or plant is hazardous to the traveling public or impedes the progress or the vision of the public on any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place, he may cause the same, or such part thereof as is hazardous or impedient, to be trimmed or removed so as to remedy such conditions. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.140 - Private property—Notice of removal. 
No tree, shrub or plant referred to in Section 14.12.130, standing on any private property shall be cut down or removed unless ten days' notice in writing of such intention is given by the director to the owner, occupant or agent of the property upon which such described condition exists. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.150 - Private property—Removal hearing and appeal. 
If the owner, occupant or agent of any private property referred to in Section 14.12.140, within seven days after receipt of such notice, files his objection to such removal with the director, such tree, shrub or plant shall not be cut down or removed unless the director gives the owner, occupant or agent a reasonable opportunity to be heard in support of the objection. If objection is not sustained, the director shall thereafter approve in writing the cutting down or removal of such hazardous or impedient tree, plant or shrub. Any decision of the director may be appealed to the recreation and parks commission and to the city council. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.160 - Private party—Removal for convenience—Fee. 
Whenever a property owner desires to have a tree removed from a planting strip or planting easement owned or controlled by the city, he shall file or cause to be filed with the department of recreation and parks an official application for removal. If such tree is found to be in good condition and the removal is granted solely for the convenience of the applicant, then the full cost of such removal may be apportioned to the applicant. Cost of removal may be apportioned where removal is granted in part for convenience of the city. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.170 - Hazard liability. 
Nothing contained in Sections 14.1.1120 through 14.12.150 shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or under his control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the city. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.180 - Master plan. 
A "Master Plan—Trees and Shrubs" is established, which master plan shall designate the type, form and location of all trees, shrubs and plants on public property in the city. The master plan shall be adopted by the city council, upon the recommendation of the recreation and parks commission, and may be changed, modified, altered and amended by the city council upon recommendation of the recreation and parks commission. A copy of the master plan shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.185 - Installation of street trees—Responsibility. 
A.  Street trees shall be required as a condition of issuance of a building permit, and shall be installed prior to occupancy. Needed right-of-way or easements to accommodate planting of street trees shall also be dedicated. 
B.  Unless landscaping (including street trees) is required as a condition of development approval, the street trees shall be purchased and installed by the city for all residential projects and the cost thereof, as determined by the director, shall be paid prior to building permit issuance. 
(Ord. 1635 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.190 - Watering parkways—Responsibility. 
A.  Owners of private property shall be responsible for watering trees in parkways or other public property immediately adjacent to the private property. The city shall not be responsible for watering any such trees. 
B.  Irrigation systems for street trees may be required as a condition of issuance of building permit or other approval to develop. The private property owner shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of any such system. 
C.  Should a private property owner allow or cause the demise of a street tree, it shall be replaced at the discretion of the director. The cost of such replacement(s) shall be the responsibility of the private property owner. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.200 - Tree removal program—Exception. 
A.  The director, each year, no later than the first day of September, shall prepare a tree removal program for the period ending the first day of September of the year following, which shall be immediately presented to the recreation and parks commission. 
B.  Trees having a caliper size of less than six inches shall not be considered as part of this program. Caliper size shall be measured at four feet six inches above ground level. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.210 - Tree removal program—Hearing. 
After notice given by the director, the recreation and parks commission shall hold one public hearing on the tree removal program, at which time all interested persons may appear and be heard. After the public hearing has been concluded, the recreation and parks commission shall make its recommendation on the program to the city council. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.220 - Tree removal program—Council hearing. 
The city council, after notice, shall likewise hold one public hearing on the tree removal program and the city council, upon the conclusion thereof, shall either adopt, reject, modify or amend the program. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
14.12.230 - Tree removal program—Notice. 
A.  The notice provided for in Sections 14.12.210 and 14.12.220 shall be given by marking each of the trees to be removed. The marking shall be accomplished at or prior to the time of the submission of the program to the recreation and parks commission, and by giving ten days' notice in writing by mail to the owner of the immediately adjacent property or his agent of the fact that the trees are to be removed and of the time and place of the public hearing. 
B.  Notice by mail shall be deemed complete upon depositing in the United States mail the notice in an envelope bearing the address of the property owner, or his agent, as appears on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the director. 
(Ord. 1501 § 2 (part), 1983).  
Title 15 - PUBLIC SERVICE  
Division I. - Sewer System  
Chapter 15.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
15.04.005 - Authorized representative. 
"Authorized representative" means 
a.  If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer. For purposes of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: (1) a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation, or (2) the manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
c.  A person designated by the individuals described in paragraphs (a) or (b) above if (1) the authorization is made in writing by such individual; (2) the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and (3) the written authorization is provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms, as used in this title, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. Terms not otherwise defined hereinafter shall be as adopted in Standard Methods. 
(Ord. 2168 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.020 - Apartments. 
"Apartments" means a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.030 - Beneficial uses. 
"Beneficial uses" means uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation, including, but are not necessarily limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified by federal or state law. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.035 - Best management practices or BMPs. 
"Best management practices" or "BMPs" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance or operating procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Chapter 15.24 of the Merced Municipal Code. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. For purposes of Chapter 15.30, BMPs mean activities, prohibitions, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the direct or indirect introduction of FOG into the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
35.04.040 - Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen required by sewage for biochemical oxidation in five days at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1). 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.050 - Building sewer. 
"Building sewer" means a sewer conveying wastewater from the plumbing of a structure to a public sewer. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1(part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.055 - Categorical pretreatment standard. 
"Categorical pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the federal act that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.056 - Change in operations. 
"Change in operations" means for purposes of Chapter 15.30 any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of an FSE that has the potential to change the amount of FOG discharged by the FSE in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.057 - Collection system. 
"Collection system" means the system of pipes, pump stations, sewer lines or other conveyances upstream of the POTW treatment plant headworks owned by the City and used to collect and convey wastewater to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.060 - City. 
"City" means the city of Merced. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.070 - Commercial user. 
"Commercial user" means any user not defined as a residential, industrial or other type user not specifically mentioned. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1(part), 1983).  
15.04.075 - Commissary. 
"Commissary" means an establishment which is used as a base of operations for one (1) or more motorized food wagons or push carts, where such unit or units and/or equipment are serviced, cleaned, supplied and/or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.080 - Compatible pollutant. 
"Compatible pollutant" means biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, pH, coliform bacteria, and oil and grease. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1(part), 1983).11  
15.04.085 - Compliance schedule. 
"Compliance schedule" means a time schedule, enforceable under the provisions of this division, that contains increments of progress (e.g. milestones, in the form of dates). These milestones shall be for the commencement and/or completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities or the implementation of policies, procedures or operational management techniques required for permittees to comply with all applicable federal, state or local environmental regulations which may directly or indirectly affect the quality of the permittee's wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.086 - Composite sample. 
"Composite sample" means a collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time that forms a representative sample of the waste stream discharged during the sample period. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.090 - Contamination. 
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state are affected. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.100 - Cooling water. 
"Cooling water" means water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added to the water is heat. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.110 - Director. 
"Director" means the director of public works—water resources and reclamation (as such title may be amended from time to time) or such other person as may be designated by the director of public works—water resources and reclamation to perform the services or make the determinations permitted or required in this division to be made by the director of public works—water resources and reclamation of the city. 
(Ord. 2168 § 2, 2004: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.115 - Division. 
"Division" means Division I - Sewer System of Title 15 of the City's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.120 - Domestic sewage. 
"Domestic sewage" means waterborne waste derived from the ordinary living processes and free of industrial wastes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the POTW. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983) 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.130 - Duplex. 
"Duplex" means a building containing two dwelling units. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.140 - Dwelling group. 
"Dwelling group" means two or more buildings on any one lot containing three or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.150 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means a suite of one or more rooms which is occupied by or intended to be occupied by one family with its own kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.155 - Enforcement officer. 
"Enforcement officer" means any city employee or agent of the city with authority to enforce the provisions of this division. Enforcement officers shall have the same authority and powers as defined in Section 1.09.040 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.156 - EPA. 
"EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.160 - Engineer. 
"Engineer" means the city engineer or such other person designated by the city engineer to perform the services or make the determinations permitted or required in this division to be made by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983)  
15.04.165 - Fats, oils, and grease or FOG. 
"Fats, oils, and grease" or "FOG" means any substance such as vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that becomes or may become viscous, or solidifies or may solidify, with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.170 - Federal act. 
"Federal Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended through Public Law 107-303 (November 27, 2002) and any amendments thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the EPA pursuant to the act. 
(Ord. 2168 § 3, 2004: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983) 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.175 - FOG wastewater discharge permit or FOG WDP. 
"FOG wastewater discharge permit" or "FOG WDP" means a permit issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 15.30 of the Merced Municipal Code authorizing a permittee to discharge wastewater from an FSE into the POTW subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.176 - Food grinder. 
"Food grinder" means any device installed in the plumbing of an FSE for the purpose of grinding food or food waste. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.177 - Food service establishment or FSE. 
"Food service establishment" or "FSE" means a facility operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving or manufacturing, packaging or otherwise handling food and/or beverage for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by an exhaust hood pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 114149.1 or in accordance with the California Retail Food Code (California Health and Safety Code Sections 113700 et seq.). An FSE includes a commissary where food is prepared using FOG and/or which receives water from motorized food wagons or push carts containing FOG. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.180 - Garbage. 
"Garbage" means any solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.181 - Grab sample. 
"Grab sample" means a sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.182 - Grease control device. 
"Grease control device" means any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism or device which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap, collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.183 - Grease disposal mitigation fee. 
"Grease disposal mitigation fee" means a fee charged to a permittee when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease control device for the FSE impossible or impracticable. The grease disposal mitigation fee is intended to cover the costs of increased maintenance of the public sewer, for inspection and cleaning of FOG that a usual and customary, and properly maintained, grease control device would otherwise prevent from entering the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.184 - Grease interceptor. 
"Grease interceptor" means a multi-compartment device that is generally required, according to the California Plumbing Code, to be located underground between an FSE and the connection to the public sewer. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one (1) compartment to the next. To be effective, these devices must be cleaned, maintained and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner, at regular intervals. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.185 - Grease trap. 
"Grease trap" means a grease control device that is used to serve individual plumbing fixtures and is typically installed indoors, under or near a dishwashing sink. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.190 - Holding tank waste. 
"Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1(part), 1983).  
15.04.195 - Hot spots. 
"Hot spots" mean areas in sewer lines that have experienced SSOs or that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.200 - House sewer line. 
"House sewer line" means a building sewer. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.210 - Incompatible pollutant. 
"Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in this section. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.215 - Indirect discharge. 
"Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.220 - Industrial user. 
"Industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.230 - Industrial wastes. 
"Industrial wastes" means any and all liquid or waterborne wastes from any producing, manufacturing, processing, commercial, agricultural, institutional or other operation. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.231 - Infiltration. 
"Infiltration" means groundwater entering the public sewer through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.232 - Inflow. 
"Inflow" means stormwater entering the public sewer system through a direct connection such as roof leader, storm drain or foundation drain. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.233 - Interceptor. 
"Interceptor" means a grease interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.235 - Interference. 
"Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 
(2)  Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the federal act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
(Ord. 1747A § 1, 1989). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.236 - Limited food preparation establishment. 
"Limited food preparation establishment" means an establishment engaged only in reheating, hot holding, or assembly of ready to eat food and/or beverage products, and as a result there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor or consistency of food. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.240 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land consisting of one or more contiguous lots of record in one ownership. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.250 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2402, § 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, repealed § 15.04.250 which pertained to major industrial user and derived from Ord. 1489, § 1(part), adopted 1983; and Ord. No. 1747A, § 2, adopted 1989.  
15.04.255 - Manifest. 
"Manifest" means a receipt retained by a permittee for the disposal of FOG, recyclable wastes and/or liquid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.260 - Mass emission rate. 
"Mass emission rate" means the weight of material discharged to the sewer system ding a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combinations of constituents. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.270 - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.273 - National pretreatment standard. 
"National pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the federal act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5, as amended. 
(Ord. 2168 § 4, 2004: Ord. 1747A § 3, 1989).  
15.04.274 - Natural outlet. 
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, bay, ocean or other body of surface water, or into the groundwater. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.275 - New construction. 
"New construction" means any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection fee has not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.277 - New source. 
(1)  "New source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the federal act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(i)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(ii)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(iii)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)(ii), or (1)(iii) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(i)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program; 
(A)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(B)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purpose of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
(Ord. 1747A § 4, 1989). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.278 - Non-significant categorical industrial user. 
"Non-significant categorical industrial user" means an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards that satisfies all of the following conditions: the director has made a finding that the user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard); the user has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; the user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 15.29.110B of this division, together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and the user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.280 - Nuisance. 
"Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1(part), 1983).  
15.04.285 - Obstruction. 
"Obstruction" means any discharge which, alone or in combination with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the flow in a sanitary sewer or the operation of the POTW or is otherwise a violation of the Merced Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, its waste discharge requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.290 - Owner classification. 
"Owner classification" means a classification of owners based upon the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the Executive Office of Management and Budget. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.295 - Pass-through. 
"Pass-through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, has a reasonable potential to cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of violation). 
(Ord. 1747A § 5, 1989). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.296 - Permittee. 
"Permittee" means a person who has been issued a wastewater discharge permit by the city pursuant to Chapter 15.29 or Chapter 15.30. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.300 - Person or owner. 
"Person" or "owner" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, society, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.310 - pH. 
"pH" means a measure of hydrogen ion concentration, or acidity in which the neutral point of 7.0 and decreasing number indicate greater acidity as prescribed by Standard Methods. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.320 - Pollutant. 
"Pollutant" means a substance causing pollution. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.330 - Pollution. 
"Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.333 - POTW. 
"Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the federal act, which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
(Ord. 1747A § 6, 1989). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.335 - POTW treatment plant. 
"POTW treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of domestic sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. 1747A § 7, 1989). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.340 - Premises. 
"Premises" means a lot, piece or parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon which is determined by the city to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for service. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.350 - Pretreatment. 
"Pretreatment" means application of physical, chemical, and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the POTW. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.360 - Pretreatment requirements. 
The term "pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
(Ord. 1747A § 8, 1989: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.390 - Public sewer. 
"Public sewer" means a sanitary sewer owned and/or operated by the city tributary to the POTW treatment plant. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.395 - Remodeling. 
"Remodeling" means any physical or operational change to an FSE causing a change in FOG quantity or consistency or that involves any one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Under slab plumbing in the food processing area. 
2.  A thirty (30) percent increase in the net public seating area. 
3.  A thirty (30) percent increase in the size of the kitchen area. 
4.  Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment that would cause an increase in the quantity of FOG. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.400 - Residential user. 
"Residential user" means any user whose premises are used solely for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.405 - Sanitary sewer. 
"Sanitary sewer" means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.406 - Sanitary sewer overflow or SSO. 
"Sanitary sewer overflow" or "SSO" means any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.410 - Sewage or sanitary sewage. 
"Sewage" or "sanitary sewage" means a combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such inflow and infiltration as may be present. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.420 - Sewage system. 
"Sewage system" means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage, wastewater and/or sludge. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.430 - Sewer connection permit. 
"Sewer connection permit" means the permit required prior to connecting to the sewer system. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.440 - Sewer extension charge. 
"Sewer extension charge" means a charge established to equalize the costs of connecting the in-tract facilities and/or oversize facilities of a particular subdivision or area to the trunk sewers so that the developments close to the chosen trunk sewer alignments do not receive unfair advantage over those located further away. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.450 - Sewer facilities charge. 
"Sewer facilities charge" means a charge established to compensate the city for having provided collection and treatment facilities before collecting revenue from the benefited properties. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.460 - Sewer lateral. 
"Sewer lateral" means a building sewer. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.470 - Sewer service. 
"Sewer service" means the services and facilities for the collection, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.480 - Sewer service charge. 
"Sewer service charge" means a charge established to pay the cost of operation, maintenance and debt service of the sewage system. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.490 - Shall. 
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.495 - Significant industrial user. 
"Significant industrial user" means any user who (1) is subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or (2) discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day of process wastewater, or (3) contributes process wastewater to the POTW at a volume equal to or greater than five (5) percent of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or (4) is found by the city to have wastewater with compatible or incompatible pollutants in excess of limitations listed in Sections 15.24.090 or 15.24.110, or (5) is determined by the city to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.496 - Significant noncompliance. 
"Significant noncompliance" means a violation that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement; 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
C.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
D.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
F.  Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance schedules; 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
H.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.497 - Sludge. 
"Sludge" means any solid, semi-solid and/or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.498 - Slug discharge. 
"Slug discharge" means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has the potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate this division, local limits or permit conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.500 - Standard Methods. 
"Standard methods" means the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.510 - State. 
"State" means the state of California. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.515 - Storm drain. 
"Storm drain" means a pipe or conduit used to collect and convey stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.520 - Stormwater. 
"Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or immediately following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.530 - Subtrunk sewer. 
"Subtrunk sewer" means a sewer lateral which has been deepened and/or enlarged to serve areas in addition to those immediately adjacent to the trunk sewer. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.535 - Suspended solids. 
"Suspended solids (SS)" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, wastewater and which are largely removable by standard laboratory filtration procedures. 
(Ord. 1549 § 1, 1984).  
15.04.540 - Trunk sewer. 
"Trunk sewer" means a pipeline which transports sewage from sewer laterals and subtrunk sewers to the POTW treatment plant. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.550 - Unpolluted water. 
"Unpolluted water" means water not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or whose discharge will not cause or contribute to any violation of state or federal water quality standards. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.560 - User. 
"User" means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.570 - Waste. 
"Waste" includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for purposes of disposal. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.580 - Wastewater. 
"Wastewater" means the liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the city's treatment works. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.04.590 - Wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
"Wastewater constituents and characteristics" means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall be measured as described in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR) Part 136, as amended, unless expressly stated otherwise or as established by federal and state regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 2168 § 5, 2004: Ord. 1747 A § 9, 1989: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 2, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.595 - Wastewater discharge permit. 
"Wastewater discharge permit" means a permit issued to an industrial user pursuant to Chapter 15.29. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 1, 12-17-2012)  
15.04.600 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2402, § 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, repealed § 15.04.600, which pertained to wastewater treatment system and derived from Ord. 1489, § 1(part), 1983.  
Chapter 15.08 - CONSTRUCTION* 
 
15.08.010 - Sewer connections. 
Whenever any person wishes to connect any building or premises to the city sewer system, he shall first make application to the engineer for a sewer connection permit, and such person shall pay the cost thereof as herein provided. The engineer shall make an estimate of the cost of all material, labor and equipment required to make the connection and extending the same to the property line of the property, for which the connection is to be made, closest to such connection. The applicant for the permit shall thereupon deposit with the city the amount of the estimate, together with all other fees provided for in this chapter, and thereupon the permit shall be issued. After receiving the fees and the amount of moneys provided for in the estimate of the engineer, it shall be the duty of the engineer to cause such connection to be made with the city sewer and extended to the property line of the applicant nearest the point of the connection and the cost thereof charged against the deposit, and any excess of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.020 - Approval of plans for sewer construction. 
A.  No person, other than employees of the city, or persons contracting to do work for the city, shall construct or cause to be constructed, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer any connection or industrial connection sewer over six inches in diameter, or other sewer facility within the city where existing or proposed wastewater flows will discharge directly or indirectly to facilities of the city without first obtaining approval of sewer construction plans from the city engineer. 
B.  The applicant shall submit to the city engineer for approval, construction plans and such specifications and other details as required to describe fully the proposed sewer facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training registered in the state. 
C.  Plans for sewer construction shall not be approved by the city engineer for any facility which will convey industrial wastewater unless the discharger has first obtained a permit for industrial wastewater discharge. 
D.  Plans for sewer construction shall meet all design requirements as established from time to time by the city engineer. The construction work shall be performed by a properly licensed contractor. Inspection of all sewer construction under this section shall be made by personnel of the city in the manner described in Section 15.08.030. An approval of plans for sewer construction shall expire one year after date of approval unless construction has been initiated. 
E.  Approval of plan for sewer construction and trunk sewer connection permits are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.030 - Inspection of construction. 
A.  All sewer to be attached to the city sewer system shall be inspected by personnel of the city during construction. At least forty-eight hours prior to cutting into a city sewer, the city shall be notified. In making a connection to a city sewer, no physical alteration of the city's facilities shall commence until an inspector is present. 
B.  No wastewater shall be discharged into any public sewer prior to obtaining inspection and approval of sewage construction by the city. Following satisfactory completion of construction, the city will issue a construction inspection certificate upon request. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.040 - Permit for repairing connection to city sewer. 
No person shall repair or cause to be repaired any connection of any building or premises with the city sewer without first obtaining a permit to do so from the engineer but such person shall pay the cost thereof as herein provided. Upon application for such permit, the engineer shall make an estimate of all costs for material, labor and equipment for repairing the connection including the opening and repairing of any street or alley disturb thereby. The engineer shy not issue the permit for repairs until the applicant shall deposit with the city the amount of the estimate of the cost of such repair herein provided for which deposit shall be used to pay said cost. Upon receipt of the amount of such estimate, the engineer shall cause such repair to be made and the cost thereof charged against the deposit, and any excess of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.050 - Sewer line extensions. 
Subtrunk sewers and sewer later may be extended by an applicant in accordance with this chapter. Engineering and inspection costs equal to three percent of the total cost of installation shall be deposited with the city before applicant begins such work. If the proposed subtrunk sewer extension is to serve a developed or populated area, the city may elect to perform the extension work. Where a subtrunk sewer or sewer lateral is to be extended to serve a parcel of land, said sewer line shall extend the full frontage of said parcel unless it is determined by the city that the line is not likely to be extended to serve any other property. The inside diameter of every sewer line to be installed shall not be less than eight inches, except as may be determined by the city. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.060 - Bond for sewer line extensions. 
In the event the applicant installs sewer line extension facilities, he shall furnish the city a corporate surety bond written by a company approved by the city, in an amount at least equal to the estimate made by applicant's engineer (and approved by the city) of the installation costs to guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a surety bond in an amount equal to at least one-half of the estimate to guarantee claims of persons employed by applicant and claims of persons who fish materials, supplies, and implements used by applicant on such work. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.070 - Ownership of sewer line extensions. 
When sanitary sewers are installed in public streets or easements pursuant to the regulations of the city and they have been accepted by the city, they shall become the property of the city and a part of the sewer system of the city. House and building sewer lines, including their connection to subtrunk sewers or sewer laterals, shall not be considered city property or become a part of the city sewer system, and their maintenance and repair shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.080 - Connections outside city—Consent required. 
No person shall connect property outside of the city to the sewage system without first obtaining the consent of the city council, paying the fees and charges imposed by the city and signing an agreement to annex to the city. In considering applications for furnishing sewer service to property located outside of the city, the council may impose such additional reasonable conditions to the granting of such privilege as it deems to be in the best interest of the city. However, the city is under no obligation to provide sewer service outside of the city limits. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.090 - Building connections separate—Exception. 
There shall be a separate connection to the sewage system for each building served; except, that when authorized by the director, two or more buildings on the same lot may be served by the same connection. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.100 - Line extension—When city performs work. 
If the proposed sewer extension is to serve a developed or populated area, the city may elect to perform the extension work. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.110 - Extension along full frontage. 
Where a subtrunk sewer or sewer lateral is to be extended to serve a parcel of land, the sewer line shall extend the full frontage of the parcel, unless it is determined by the director that the line is not likely to be extended to serve any other property. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.120 - Line size. 
The inside diameter of every sewer line to be installed shall not be less than eight inches, except as may be determined by the director. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.130 - Extension cost—Collection from subsequent applicant. 
A.  Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property fronting a sewer line, the installation cost of which was paid by a previous applicant, or the city, such applicant shall pay to the city prior to the granting of such permit an amount calculated as "A" in the following formula: 
A = F × C × 0.75, where: 
1.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on the sewer line. 
2.  C equals the cost per foot of installing the sewer line. 
3.  0.75 equals the factor composed of 0.50 (for one of the two sides fronting on sewer line), 0.10 (for street intersection allowance), and 0.15 (for administration and collection of the fee). 
B.  When the city engineer determines that only one side of a street can be benefited by a sewer line installed by a previous applicant or the city, subsequent applicants for permits to connect thereto shall pay to the city prior to the granting of such permits an amount calculated as "A" in the following formula: 
A = F × C × 1.35, where: 
1.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on the sewer line. 
2.  C equals the cost per foot of installing the sewer line. 
3.  1.35 equals the factor composed of 1.00 (the total cost of the installation), and .20 (for street intersection allowance), and 0.15 (for administration and collection of the fee). 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B above, an applicant shall not owe an extension fee if the sewer line was installed by a previous applicant over ten years prior to the date of applicant's application, or if the sewer line was installed through an assessment district or solely with state and federal grant monies. 
(Ord. 2042 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1665 § 3, 1987: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.140 - Extension cost—Refund to initial applicant or city. 
A.  Amounts collected as provided in Section 15.08.130 (excluding the 0.15 fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing the main until the applicant has received an amount calculated as "R" in the following formula: 
R = T - (0.60 × C × F), where: 
1.  T equals cost of installing the sewer line; 
2.  C equals cost per foot of installing the sewer line; 
3.  F equals number of feet of installing applicant's property fronting on main. 
B.  When the city engineer has determined that only one side of a street can be benefited and has made collections on that basis, amounts so collected (excluding the.0.15 fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing the sewer line until said applicant has received an amount calculated as "R" in the following formula: 
R = T - (1.20 × C × F), where: 
1.  T equals total cost of installing the sewer line; 
2.  C equals cost per foot of installing sewer line; 
3.  F equals number of feet of installing applicant's property fronting on sewer line. 
(Ord. 2042 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.150 - Extension cost refunds—Time limitation. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under subsection B, for lines installed by applicants, the city shall not make refunds to the installing applicants after the tenth anniversary of the date the sewer line was accepted by the city. 
B.  For lines installed by the University of California Merced pursuant to the Contract for Water and Sewer Services Between the City of Merced and the Regents of the University of California, recorded as Document No. 2003-028581 in the official records of the county of Merced, the city shall not make refunds to the University of California, Merced after the thirtieth anniversary of the date of the contract, entered into as of March 17, 2003. 
(Ord. 2168 § 6, 2004: Ord. 1665 § 2, 1987: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.160 - Extension cost refunds—Oversize lines. 
A sewer line more than ten inches in diameter shall be considered oversize and the city shall pay directly to the installing applicant the difference in cost between the average cost of installing a ten-inch diameter sewer line and the actual cost of installing the oversize sewer line; provided, that the installing applicant does not need more than a ten-inch diameter sewer line to serve his own premises. The city will determine the average cost of installing a ten-inch diameter sewer line and its findings shall be conclusive. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.165 - Payment. 
Applicants subject to the charge identified in Sections 15.08.130, 15.16.030, 15.16.040, 15.16.050, and 15.16.070 shall pay such charge prior to obtaining the permit to connect the property to the sewer line, except that if the line and/or laterals are installed by the City and the applicant is to connect a single-family residence to the sewer line and the residence is, or will be owner-occupied by an at or below median-income family as determined by the income limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor, then the applicant may elect to pay the charge in twenty (20) annual installments, plus interest thereon on the unpaid balance. Interest shall be calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year's average interest rate earned on city investments. Applicants who make the election shall execute a promissory note and deed of trust evidencing the debt to the city. 
(Ord. 1787 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1665 § 1, 1987). 
(Ord. No. 2471, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
15.08.170 - BOD determination. 
The value of BOD to be used in determining the strength of waste of an industrial user shall be the average of at least four grab samples taken by the city at a time when the wastes are considered representative and at reasonable intervals during the billing period and analyzed by the city. When an industrial user requests additional tests for BOD, he shall pay a sampling fee of fifty dollars for each such sampling. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.08.180 - House and building sewer lines—Liability. 
Each user shall be responsible for the construction, maintenance and repair of his house and/or building sewer line. Each user shall be liable for damages which may result to the sewage system from his failure to keep his house or building sewer line in good order. Whenever any house sewer line connected with the public sewer becomes obstructed, broken or out of order, the director shall, if the owner, agent or occupant of the premises fails to repair the same after five days' notice so to do, cause such sewer line to be removed, reconstructed, replaced, altered or cleaned as he may deem expedient, at the expense of the owner, agent or occupant of such premises, and the cost thereof shall be collected in the manner provided in Chapter 15.12. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
Chapter 15.12 - SERVICE CHARGES* 
 
15.12.010 - Determination. 
Each person owning improved property within the city, except those in recently annexed areas who are using a private sewage disposal system which is not conflict with Chapter 15.24, shall pay a monthly sewer service charge to the city in accordance with the rates set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.020 - Payment. 
Charges for sewer service shall begin on the first of the month following completion or occupancy of a building, whichever date occurs first, and shall be paid to the finance officer. The finance officer of the city shall cause the premises to be billed for sewer service either monthly, bimonthly or at such other intervals as he determines in his discretion. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.025 - Formula—Base sewer service charge. 
Unless otherwise indicated, starting July 1, 2015 all base sewer service rates and charges in this chapter shall be adjusted annually by an amount equal to the percent change in the All Urban Consumers Index, U.S. City Average (USCA), as supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless or until such time new rates are set by the city council. The amount of such base sewer charge shall be computed as follows: 
		Current Year Consumer 		
Monthly Sewer Rate 	= 	Price Index (USCA)   
Ending Scheduled Year CPI (USCA) 	× 	Base Charge 
 
(Ord. 2269 § 1, 2006). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.030 - Residential—Single-family. 
The base sewer service charge for a single-family residence shall be as follows: 
Residential/Condominium 
Units 
Per 
Month 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
	$40.29 	$40.29 	$40.29 	$40.29 	$40.29 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 6, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.040 - Residential—Multifamily. 
The base sewer service charge for multifamily residential units on a per unit basis shall be as follows: 
Residential/Apartments 
Units 
Per 
Month 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
	$32.23 	$32.23 	$32.23 	$32.23 	$32.23 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 7, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.050 - Residential—Mobile home and trailer coach. 
The base sewer service charge for mobile homes and trailer coaches shall be as follows: 
Residential/Mobile Homes 
Units 
Per 
Month 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
	$20.62 	$20.62 	$20.62 	$20.62 	$20.62 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 8, 1990: Ord 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.060 - Commercial and industrial—Choice of determination. 
Except as provided in Section 15.12.130, commercial and industrial users may request using the volume of water consumed on their premises as the basis for the establishment of their sewer service charge, or they may request to have their sewer service charge determined according to Section 15.12.080. Upon receiving such a request, or if no request is made, the city engineer shall determine the most appropriate method. 
At any time, the city engineer may review the account of any user to determine the most appropriate method to recover the city's cost of providing service and change the billing method upon thirty days written notice to the user. Any change in billing method shall not be retroactive, and shall apply from the effective date contained in the city engineer's notice to the user. 
(Ord. 2002 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.070 - Commercial and industrial—Rate determination based on metered water schedule. 
For all commercial and industrial premises using metered water as a basis for rate determination, the base monthly sewer service charge shall be according to the following schedule for each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water purchased: 
Premises 	Units 	2010— 
11 	2011— 
12 	2012— 
13 	2013— 
14 	2014— 
15* 
Bakery—Wholesale 	Per HCF 	$7.86 	$7.86 	$7.86 	$7.86 	$7.86 
Barber & beauty shop 	Per HCF 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 
Bars w/o dining 	Per HCF 	3.92 	3.92 	3.92 	3.92 	3.92 
Car wash 	Per HCF 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 
Construction 	Per HCF 	3.59 	3.59 	3.56 	3.59 	3.59 
Government buildings 	Per HCF 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 
Department & retail stores 	Per HCF 	3.59 	3.59 	3.59 	3.59 	3.59 
Dry industrial 	Per HCF 	5.80 	5.80 	5.80 	5.80 	5.80 
Hospital & convalescent 	Per HCF 	3.73 	3.73 	3.73 	3.73 	3.73 
Hotel with dining 	Per HCF 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 
Hotel without dining 	Per HCF 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 
Laundromat 	Per HCF 	3.45 	3.45 	3.45 	3.45 	3.45 
Laundry 	Per HCF 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 	4.86 
Light manufacturing 	Per HCF 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 
Markets w/o garbage disposal 	Per HCF 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 
Mortuaries 	Per HCF 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 	7.93 
Professional office 	Per HCF 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 
Recreation halls 	Per HCF 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 
Repair shop & service station 	Per HCF 	4.14 	4.14 	4.14 	4.14 	4.14 
Restaurant 	Per HCF 	7.86 	7.86 	7.86 	7.86 	7.86 
Mixed use commercial 	Per HCF 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 	3.99 
Soft water service 	Per HCF 	2.79 	2.79 	2.79 	2.79 	2.79 
Theaters 	Per HCF 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 	3.42 
Warehouses 	Per HCF 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 	3.28 
 
Each user shall pay a minimum monthly charge as follows: 
2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
$1.60 	$1.60 	$1.60 	$1.60 	$1.60 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The base sewer charge includes a ten (10) percent allowance of metered water for non-sewage uses including, but not limited to, landscape irrigation. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 4, 2002; Ord. 2002 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1752 § 9, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2405, § 1, 3-18-2013)  
15.12.075 - Other water meter based sewer rate estimates and temporary rate determinations. 
A.  In addition to the schedule contained in Section 15.12.070, the city engineer may create other water meter based sewer rate estimates and temporary sewer rate categories when he/she determines that an existing category does not accurately reflect the cost of providing service to the user. Other water meter based sewer rate estimates may be revised or cancelled by the city engineer with notice. Any temporary rate so established shall be effective for a maximum of sixty (60) days or until the city council amends the schedule contained in Section 15.12.070. 
B.  The user shall pay the cost of processing any request for a determination pursuant to Section 15.12.070, or for a temporary rate pursuant to subsection A, subject to a minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
C.  Water meter based sewer estimate determinations of the city engineer shall be effective for not more than one (1) year. When the volume of wastewater produced by any premises is determined by other water meter based sewage estimates, the owner or occupant of such premises shall pay to the city the cost of making the original and each subsequent annual estimate, subject to a minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each estimate made. 
(Ord. 2002 § 3, 1998). 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2, 3-18-2013)  
15.12.080 - Commercial and industrial. 
For all commercial and industrial premises using metered water or a combination of metered and unmetered water, the base monthly sewer service charge shall be based upon the total quantity of wastewater discharged to the sewer system for both usage and capacity according to the following rates: 
A. 	Industrial Usage Charges 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
  1. 	Flow ($ per MG) 	$984.02 	$984.02 	$984.02 	$984.02 	$984.02 
  2. 	BOD ($ per 1,000 lbs.) 	529.00 	529.00 	529.00 	529.00 	529.00 
  3. 	SS ($ per 1,000 lbs.) 	657.00 	657.00 	657.00 	657.00 	657.00 
  4. 	Account charges (per year) 	23.72 	23.72 	23.72 	23.72 	23.72 
 
Capacity charge based upon the average daily flow during the maximum month of the last full year of operation or the capacity reserved by the industry through a written agreement with the city, whichever is greater: 
B. 	Industrial Capacity Charges 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
  1. 	Flow ($ per MG) 	$10,870.39 	$10,870.39 	$10,870.39 	$10,870.39 	$10,870.39 
  2. 	BOD ($ per lbs.) 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 	3.18 
  3. 	SS ($ per lbs.) 	5.20 	5.20 	5.20 	5.20 	5.20 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 5, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 10, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.090 - Commercial and industrial—Wastewater quantity determination. 
A.  The quantities of wastewater produced as described in Section 15.12.080 shall be determined in one of the following ways: 
1.  By use of measuring facilities installed at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises and approved by the city engineer. 
2.  If no meter is used then as determined by estimates of the city engineer which shall be conclusive. 
B.  Such determinations of the city engineer shall be effective for not more than one year. When the volume of wastewater produced by any premises is determined by the city engineer instead of by installation of a meter, the owner or occupant of such premises shall pay to the city the cost of making the original and each subsequent annual estimate, subject to a minimum charge of fifty dollars for each estimate made. 
(Ord. 2002 § 3, 1998: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.100 - Public and parochial schools. 
A.  Public and parochial schools will be charged a base rate for sewer service on the basis of average daily attendance as follows, provided the premises so charged for sewer service are used exclusively for school purposes with no residential uses thereon: 
Type of School 	Annual Base Charge Per Student 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
Primary and secondary schools 	ADA/yr 	$8.15 	$8.15 	$8.15 	$8.15 	$8.15 
Junior college, college, and university 	ADA/yr 	8.89 	8.89 	8.89 	8.89 	8.89 
 
* Starting July 1, 2010, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
B.  The charges shall be calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year's average daily attendance. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 6, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 11, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.110 - Churches and parsonages. 
Churches and parsonages shall be charged for base sewer service as follows: 
Churches and Parsonages 	 Units 
 Per Month 	2010-11 	2011-12 	2012-13 	2013-14 	2014-15* 
		$49.97 	$49.97 	$49.97 	$49.97 	$49.97 
 
* Starting July 1, 2015, the base sewer service charge shall be calculated based on a formula set forth in Section 15.12.025 of this chapter. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on July 1, 2010, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2094 § 7, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 12, 1990: Ord. 1657 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 1, 4-19-2010)  
15.12.120 - Governmental agencies. 
Nonoffice uses by governmental agencies such as the Merced irrigation district, the city, the county, the state and the federal government, shall be charged for sewer service at the same rate as those established for nongovernmental entity users. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.130 - Capacity agreement. 
Those dischargers with at least fifty thousand gallons flow per day or five percent of treatment plant capacity will execute a capacity agreement with the city and will be charged per Section 15.12.080. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.140 - Vacant premises—Disconnection determination. 
While any premises connected to the sewer system is vacant, the regular applicable minimum sewer charge shall be payable for such premises by the owner thereof, whether or not sewer service is used, unless such premises is physically disconnected from the sewer system or an affidavit is filed with and approved by the director of a predetermined nonuse period of not less than ninety days. Applications for determination by the director that the property has been physically disconnected from the sewer system shall be made to the director accompanied by a disconnection inspection fee in the sum of twenty-seven dollars and fifty cents. Premises so disconnected shall not be reconnected to the city sewer system by any person except with the permission of the director. If approval for reconnection to the sewer system is desired, an application for reconnection shall be filed with the director and accompanied by a reconnection inspection fee of twenty dollars. 
(Ord. 1752 § 13, 1990: Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.150 - Premises outside city. 
Sewer service charges for all users whose premises are located outside the city limits shall be calculated in the same manner as those for similar uses inside the city. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.160 - Industrial users—Costs of monitoring. 
In addition to the charges shown in this chapter, each user subject to the requirements of Chapter 15.29, Industrial Users, will pay the actual costs related to that specific user incurred by the city in the monitoring, implementation and related items required by Chapter 15.29. 
(Ord. 1549 § 4 (part), 1984).  
15.12.170 - Septic hauler discharge rates. 
For the privilege of using the city's waste water treatment plant, haulers of septic discharges resulting from the cleaning and emptying of septic sewer tanks and chemical toilets, shall be charged the rates and charges which shall be based on the volume in terms of gallons discharged into the waste water treatment plant as set forth below: 
	Volume in Gallons 	Fee 
A 	Less than 1,000 	$36.66 
B 	1,000 to 1,499 	$49.68 
C 	1,500 to 1,999 	$62.71 
D 	2,000 to 2,499 	$75.75 
E 	2,500 to 2,999 	$88.78 
F 	3,000 to 3,499 	$101.86 
G 	3,500 to 3,999 	$114.83 
H 	4,000 to 4,499 	$127.85 
I 	4,500 to 4,999 	$140.88 
J 	5,000 to 5,499 	$153.90 
K 	5,500 to 5,999 	$167.87 
L 	6,000 to 6,499 	$180.96 
 
The director of public works operations, subject to the approval of the city manager, is hereby authorized to establish and implement such administrative rules and regulations necessary to carry out the septic hauler discharge program within the waste water treatment plant facilities in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 2139 § 2, 2003: Ord. 2090 § 1, 2002).  
Chapter 15.16 - FACILITIES CHARGES* 
 
15.16.010 - Payment in compliance with chapter. 
Each property owner who connects to the city's sewer system shall pay to the city, at the time of issuance of a building permit, sewer facilities charges in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.16.020 - General terminology. 
Words, phrases or terms not specifically defined in this chapter, and having a technical or specialized meaning, shall be defined as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Reference to waste constituents and characteristics have the meanings ascribed thereto in the aforesaid Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and measurements thereof are as set forth in said publication, or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.16.030 - Plant component—Rate computation. 
A.  The connection charge to be paid by each property owner connecting to the city's sewer plant system to defray the cost of the city's sewer plant shall be computed as follows: 
		Current Quarter 
Connection charge 	= 	Consumer Price Index (USCA) 
* 	× 	Basic Charge 
 
*Base year index (January 2015) 
B.  The basic charge is ascertained by adding the following: 
1.  The average daily flow of wastewater, during any thirty-day period, at the rate of thirteen million four hundred forty thousand dollars ($13,440,000.00) per million (1,000,000) gallons; 
2.  The average daily load, during any thirty-day period, of Biological Oxygen Demand, using the five-day Standard Methods test (BOD), at two thousand eighteen dollars ($2,018.00) per pound; 
3.  The average daily load, during any thirty-day period, of suspended solids (SS), at one thousand seven hundred sixty-two dollars ($1,762.00) per pound. 
C.  Information and data to compute the basic charge shall be supplied by the property owner. If the property owner is unable to supply sufficient information or data, or if the information or data supplied is unsubstantiated, then the basic charge shall be as estimated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 2263 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2152 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1774 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 2, 4-19-2010)  
15.16.040 - Plant component—Standard rates. 
Notwithstanding Section 15.16.030 of this chapter, unless there are circumstances known at the time which would indicate that a different charge should apply, the following basic charge shall apply for the listed uses in computing the plant component connection charge required by Section 15.16.030 of this chapter: 
Category 	Unit 	Basic Charge 
1. Single-family residential 	Dwelling unit 	$4,769 
2. Multifamily residential 	Dwelling unit 	4,006 
3. Retail 	1,000 square feet 	3,628 
4. Office 	1,000 square feet 	2,779 
5. Institutional 	1,000 square feet 	2,779 
6. Light industrial 	1,000 square feet 	2,544 
7. Heavy industrial 	1,000 square feet 	3,385 
 
(Ord. 2263 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2152 § 2, 2004: Ord. 1774 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2353, § 2, 4-19-2010)  
15.16.050 - Line, pump and main component—Rate computation—North of Bear Creek. 
A.  The connection charge to be paid by each property owner connecting to the city's sewer system north of Bear Creek to defray the cost of the city's trunk line, pumps and force mains shall be follows: 
Category 	Unit 	Connection Charge 
1. Single-family residential 	Dwelling unit 	$1,267 
2. Multifamily residential 	Dwelling unit 	1,000 
3. Retail 	1,000 square feet 	781 
4. Office 	1,000 square feet 	781 
5. Institutional 	1,000 square feet 	781 
6. Light industrial 	1,000 square feet 	548 
7. Heavy industrial 	1,000 square feet 	729 
All others 	Average daily flow of sewage 	  
4.65 
per gallon per day 
 
B.  In the event the use of a property is intensified following connection to the sewer system, the property owner shall pay the difference between the connection charge for the prior use and the connection charge for the new use. 
C.  The connection charge paid by "all others" shall be an estimate of the average daily gallons of sewage per day as determined by the city engineer from data supplied by the user. At the end of one (1) full year of full-scale operation, the actual sewage use shall be calculated by using the volume of water consumed, or at the election of the user, by use of measuring facilities installed at the expense of the user and approved by the city engineer. If the actual average daily gallons of sewage per day varies by more than fifteen (15) percent from the estimate, an additional connection charge shall be owed by the city to the property owner who paid the estimated connection charge. 
D.  Industrial and commercial users who disagree with the rates established in subsection A of this section may furnish data acceptable to the city engineer to calculate an estimated average daily flow, and pay a connection charge based thereon, subject to the conditions established in subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 2263 § 3, 2006: Ord. 2152 § 3, 2004: Ord. 1663 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.16.055 - Line, pump and main component—Rate computation—South of Bear Creek. 
A.  The connection charge to be paid by each property owner connecting to the city's sewer system south of Bear Creek to defray the cost of the city's trunk line, pumps and force mains shall be as follows: 
Category 	Unit 	Connection Charge 
1. Single-family residential 	Dwelling unit 	$1,106 
2. Multifamily residential 	Dwelling unit 	873 
3. Retail 	1,000 square feet 	682 
4. Office 	1,000 square feet 	682 
5. Institutional 	1,000 square feet 	682 
6. Light industrial 	1,000 square feet 	478 
7. Heavy industrial 	1,000 square feet 	637 
All others 	Average daily flow of sewage 	  
4.06 
per gallon per day 
 
B.  In the event the use of a property is intensified following connection to the sewer system, the property owner shall pay the difference between the connection charge for the prior use and the connection charge for the new use. 
C.  The connection charge paid by "all others" shall be an estimate of the average daily gallons of sewage per day as determined by the city engineer from data supplied by the user. At the end of one (1) full year of full-scale operation, the actual sewage use shall be calculated by using the volume of water consumed, or at the election of the user, by use of measuring facilities installed at the expense of the user and approved by the city engineer. If the actual average daily gallons of sewage per day varies by more than fifteen (15) percent from the estimate, an additional connection charge shall be owed by the city to the property owner who paid the estimated connection charge. 
D.  Industrial and commercial users who disagree with the rates established in subsection A of this section may furnish data acceptable to the city engineer to calculate an estimated average daily flow, and pay a connection charge based thereon, subject to the conditions established in subsection C of this section. 
(Ord. 2263 § 4, 2006: Ord. 2152 § 4, 2004).  
15.16.070 - Connection charge north of Bear Creek—Outside North Merced sewer assessment district. 
A.  In addition to any other fee required to be paid in order to connect to the city sewer system, each property owner north of Bear Creek, and not included in the North Merced sewer assessment district, shall pay a connection charge to defray the cost of trunk lines, pumps, and force mains computed as follows: 
Connection charge = (Basic charge + interest from January 1, 1988, calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year's average interest rate earned on city investments) × 1.03. 
B.  The basic charge shall be ascertained by determining the general plan designation for the property to be connected. The basic charge, for each acre or fraction thereof is as follows: 
General Plan Designation 	Basic 
Charge 
Low-density residential 	$3,039 
Medium-density residential 	5,865 
High-density residential 	10,241 
Very high-density residential 	13,159 
Commercial 	6,990 
Industrial 	6,990 
Institutional (church schools) 	1,276 
 
(Ord. 2152 § 5, 2004: Ord. 1664 § 1, 1987).  
Chapter 15.20 - DISPOSITION OF REVENUES* 
 
15.20.010 - Service charges—Surplus. 
All revenue from sewer service charges shall be deposited into a fund to be known as the "sewer revenue fund" and shall be expended in accordance with the provisions of any applicable resolution of the city council authorizing the issuance of sewer revenue bonds. Surplus revenues in such fund and all revenue from sewer connection permits shall be deposited in the general fund and shall be accounted for separately, and shall be expended for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of sewage facilities, and for any lawful purpose as may be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.20.020 - Facilities charges. 
All revenue obtained from sewer facilities charges shall be deposited into a fund known as "sewer fund," which fund is created, and all funds so deposited shall be used for the acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of sanitary sewage facilities, including the payment of interest and principal on bonds which might be issued for the purposes set forth in this division. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.20.030 - Line extension charges. 
All revenue from sewer line extension payments shall be deposited into a trust fund, and all receipts shall be accounted for separately, and shall be used only for the purpose of reimbursing persons, including the city, who made sewer line extensions in accordance with Chapter 15.08. Any funds remaining after the installing applicant has been reimbursed for a particular sewer line extension, or after ten years have elapsed, shall be transferred to the sewer fund. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.20.040 - Plumbing permit fees excluded. 
The terms "sewer service charges," "sewer facilities charges" and "sewer line extension charges," as used in this chapter, shall apply only to those funds collected for the use or extension of the sanitary sewer system and shall not be construed to affect revenues derived from plumbing permit fees. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.20.050 - In lieu payments and temporary loans. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall restrict or prohibit the making of reasonable in lieu payments from the sewer fund created in this chapter to the general fund of the city or the making of transfers from the sewer fund as temporary loans to any department of the city government. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
Chapter 15.24 - USE RESTRICTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2402, § 4, Dec. 17, 2012, amended Ch. 15.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.24, §§ 15.24.010—15.24.170, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1489, § 1(part), adopted 1983; Ord. 1549, §§ 2, 3, adopted 1984; Ord. 1649, § 1, adopted 1987; Ord. 1747A, §§ 10—15, adopted 1989; and Ord. 2168, §§ 7, 8, adopted 2004. 
 
15.24.010 - Disposal—Outside of system. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes, in any place or manner except through and by means of an approved plumbing and sewage system, installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this division and of the plumbing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.020 - Disposal—In natural outlets. 
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.030 - Private sewage disposal systems—Temporary permit. 
Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.040 - Private sewage disposal system—In annexed territories. 
The owner or occupant of lands, buildings or premises having private sewage disposal systems, hereafter annexed to the city, may continue the use of such system within the city, provided that the same is not enlarged, modified, or expanded and is approved by the chief building official; however, in no event shall such system be used or be available for use upon failure as determined by the appropriate health official or regulatory authority, and the land, building, or premise shall thereafter be connected to the city's sewage system at the owner's sole cost and expense. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.050 - Prohibitions on discharge. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, wastewater into the POTW that contains substances or has characteristics which, either alone or by interaction with other wastewater, causes, threatens to cause or contributes: 
A.  Damage to the POTW. 
B.  Interference with the operation or maintenance of the POTW. 
C.  Obstruction of flow in the POTW. 
D.  Hazard to human life. 
E.  Interference with the POTW treatment plant processes or operations. 
F.  Interference with sludge processes, use or disposal. 
G.  The city to violate its NPDES permit or receiving water quality standards. 
H.  The POTW treatment plant's effluent or any other product of the POTW treatment plant, such as sludge, to be unsuitable for reuse or disposal. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
A.  Explosive Mixtures. Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, zylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. Any discharge of pollutants that causes a closed cup flashpoint at any point within the POTW of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Centigrade), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, is prohibited. 
B.  Noxious Material. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or prevent entry into a public sewer for its maintenance and repair. 
C.  Improperly Shredded Garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
D.  Radioactive Wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the POTW or personnel operating the POTW. 
E.  Solid or Viscous Wastes. Solid or viscous wastes in amounts which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW, or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, earth, bones, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, cement, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil and similar substances. 
F.  Excessive Discharge Rate. Wastewaters at a flow rate or containing such concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow rate during the user's normal operation and that would cause a treatment process upset, interference or a loss of treatment efficiency at the POTW treatment plant. 
G.  Toxic Substances. Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the administrator of the EPA pursuant to Section 307(a) of the federal act, or as established by the City, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols, or other taste or odor producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere with the treatment processes or efficiency of the POTW treatment plant, or that will be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. 
H.  Unpolluted Waters. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, water from cooling systems or of stormwater origin, which will increase the hydraulic load on the POTW without the prior approval of the city. The city may approve the discharge of such water to the POTW only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
I.  Discolored Material. Wastes with objectionable color not removable by the POTW treatment plant. 
J.  Corrosive Wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration of the POTW. All wastes discharged to the POTW must have a pH value in the range of six (6) to ten (10) standard units. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds, and substances which will react with water to form acidic products. 
K.  Temperature. Any waste having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five and one-half (65.5) degrees Centigrade), but in no case heat in such quantities that causes the temperature at the POTW treatment plant headworks to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Centigrade). 
L.  Oil and Grease. Grease in excess of three hundred (300) mg/l of animal and vegetable origin and one hundred (100) mg/l of mineral or petroleum origin, or any flammable wastes, and, grit and other harmful ingredients without an approved grease or sand/oil interceptor, as applicable. All grease interceptors shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 15.30. All oil/sand interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved in writing, prior to installation, by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Sand/oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers, which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. Oil/sand interceptors shall be constructed in commercial and industrial cleaning facilities. Where installed, all oil/sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at owner's expense in continuous efficient operation at all times. Materials collected shall be not be reintroduced into the POTW. 
M.  Cannery Wastes. Any fruit or vegetable processing wastes or any other processing plant wastes which are retained on a screen having twenty (20) meshes per inch each way. 
N.  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
O.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
P.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.060 - Limitations on point of discharge. 
No owner shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless the owner has been issued a permit by the city for a direct discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.070 - Holding tank wastes. 
An owner proposing to discharge holding tank waste into a public sewer must secure a holding tank waste discharge permit. Unless allowed by the city under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. The permit will state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge, and the wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into a public sewer, the owner shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.080 - Groundwater contamination cleanup. 
Notwithstanding Section 15.24.050(b)(A), water polluted with petroleum hydrocarbons constituents at levels not to exceed those specified in subsection D below may be temporarily discharged into the POTW in order to effectuate the cleanup of groundwater contamination. Discharge shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  A permit, revocable at will by the city engineer, shall be obtained to connect the hydrocarbon recovery system to the public sewer. The permit shall be conditioned by the city engineer to recover all costs to the city associated with the system and to guarantee the integrity of the POTW. 
B.  The discharge shall be allowed only when no other practical means of disposal is available. 
C.  The discharger shall be under a cleanup order from the state, city or county, and the cleanup order must be filed with the city engineer prior to issuance of the permit. 
D.  Unless further limited by the permit, discharge levels shall not exceed the following levels: 
Benzene: 	0.24 mg/l 
Toluene: 	8.0 mg/1 
Xylene: 	15.0 mg/1 
EDB: 	.001 mg/1 
Lead: 	1.0 mg/1 
1, 2 Dichloroethane, 
Tetrachloroethylene: 	0.23 mg/l (cumulative) 
 
E.  All discharges shall terminate immediately upon order of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.090 - Limitations on discharge. 
No owner shall discharge into a public sewer wastewater containing in excess of 1,000 mg/l biochemical oxygen demand or one thousand mg/l total suspended matter (based on 24-hour composite sample) without a valid wastewater discharge permit. Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements is prohibited and shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.100 - Incompatible pollutants. 
A.  To protect the POTW, to prevent the discharge of pollutants which would pass through the POTW without sufficient treatment, to prevent contamination of recovered byproducts produced by the POTW, and so as not to cause the city to violate its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit, all users discharging into a public sewer shall be required to remove incompatible pollutants from their waste, unless a wastewater discharge permit is first obtained from the city. 
B.  Any user requesting a wastewater discharge permit shall conduct a sampling and laboratory analysis program to the satisfaction of the city to establish the quantities and concentrations of incompatible pollutants. At the option of the city, the analyses may include, but not be limited to, measurement of arsenic, barium, cadmium, calcium, chemical oxygen demand, copper, cyanide, fluoride, iron, lead magnesium, mercury, methyl blue active substances, nickel, nitrogen, potassium, radioactivity, silver, sodium, total chromium, total filterable residue, toxicity, zinc, chlorinated hydrocarbons, and phenolic compounds. 
C.  The city will evaluate the probable impact of the discharge on the operation of the POTW, the ability of the POTW to comply with its NPDES permit , and the impact on recoverable byproducts. The city will then establish specific limitations on such incompatible pollutants as the city determines necessary. 
D.  Notwithstanding the above requirements, all users discharging into the POTW are required to remove incompatible pollutants from their waste in conformance with national pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.110 - Specific pollutant limitations. 
A.  No person shall discharge wastewater to the POTW that contains concentrations or a mass emission rate of material exceeding limits established by the table below. Material limits for heavy metals, cyanide and chlorinated hydrocarbons, and other materials are for the purpose of preventing the introduction of any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to cause the POTW treatment plant effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for discharge, disposal or beneficial use. 
SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS 
Material 	Limit on Discharge (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	0.036 
Cadmium 	0.2 
Chromium, total 	0.5 
Copper 	0.32 
Cyanide 	1.0 
Lead 	1.0 
Mercury 	0.01 
Nickel 	1.0 
Silver 	0.2 
Zinc 	0.60 
Totally identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons 	0.02 
Phenolic compounds 	1.0 
 
B.  Exemption to the specific pollutant limitations may be granted by the director if the user demonstrates that the discharge will not, either singly or by interaction, injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, have the reasonable potential to cause the city to violate its NPDES permit or the POTW treatment plant effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for discharge, disposal or beneficial use. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above requirements, all users discharging into the POTW are required to remove incompatible pollutants from their waste in conformance with national pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012; Ord. No. 2474, § 1, 5-15-2017)  
15.24.120 - Wastewater volume determination—Metered water supply. 
When charges and fees are based upon the water usage such charges and fees shall be applied against the total amount of water used from all sources unless in the opinion of the director, significant portions of water received are not discharged to the POTW. The total amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by means of public meters or private meters, installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.130 - Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions. 
When charges and fees are based upon water usage and when, in the opinion of the director, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the POTW because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means, the user charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the POTW. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user and approved by the city if the user is to avoid the application of the charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the city and at the user's expense. Such meters shall measure either the amount of wastewater discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be maintained at the expense of the user and be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the director. For users who, in the opinion of the director, divert a significant portion of their flow from the POTW, the charges and fees may be based upon measurement of the flow and volume to be discharged prepared by the user and approved by the city, provided the user obtains a wastewater discharge permit and pays the applicable charges and fees. The measurement must include the method, calculations and type of equipment used to determine the wastewater volume. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.140 - Discharge reports. 
The director may require that any person discharging wastewater into the POTW file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may include, but need not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, and any other information which relates to the generation of waste including wastewater constituents and characteristics in the wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site even though they may not normally be discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.150 - Negligence through equipment or waste—Right to discontinue service. 
The city may refuse to furnish sewer service and may discontinue all services to any premises where apparatuses, appliances or equipment using water is found by the director to be dangerous or unsafe or where the use of water on such premises is found by the director to be detrimental or injurious to the sewer service furnished by the city or to other premises, or where the director finds that negligent or wasteful use of water exists on any premises which affects the city's sewer service. The city shall have the right to refuse or discontinue sewer service to any premises if necessary to protect itself against fraud or abuse or to prevent a violation or potential violation of its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
15.24.160 - Special agreements. 
Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any owner may be established when in the opinion of the city unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 4, 12-17-2012)  
Chapter 15.28 - ENFORCEMENT* 
 
15.28.010 - Duty of public works department. 
The public works department of the city is charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter, or causing its enforcement by other city departments or other agencies, when necessary. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.020 - Disconnection for violation. 
In the event of violation (other than nonpayment of billed sewer service charges) of any provisions of this title, the director may disconnect any premises from the sewer system after first notifying in writing the person causing, allowing or committing such violation, specifying the violation and, if applicable, the time after which (upon failure of such person to prevent or rectify the violation) the director shall exercise his authority to disconnect the premises from the sewer system; provided, that such time shall not be less than five days after the date of presentation of such notice; provided further, that in the event such violation results in a public hazard, menace or nuisance, then the director may enter upon the premises without notice and do such things and expend such sums as may be necessary to abate such condition, and the reasonable value of the things done and the amounts expended in so doing shall be a charge upon the person so in violation. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.030 - Charges incorporated in utility bill—Delinquency—Disconnection notice. 
In the event of delinquency of sewer service charges or any portion thereof, the city shall exercise the procedures set forth in Section 15.32.160. 
(Ord. 1958 § 4, 1997: Ord. 1752 § 14, 1990: Ord. 1724 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.035 - Sewer service deposits. 
The decision of the city to require a new residential applicant to deposit a sum of money with the city prior to establishing an account and furnishing service shall be based solely upon the creditworthiness of the applicant as determined by the city in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Section 15.32.165. 
(Ord. 1958 § 5, 1997: Ord. 1752 § 15, 1990).  
15.28.040 - Reconnection—Fee. 
If service is disconnected because of nonpayment, or otherwise, there shall be no charge to the customer for the disconnection. Upon application for reconnection, the applicant will be subject to a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the reconnection during normal working hours and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the reconnection is made during off-hours, weekends, or holidays. This provision shall not be construed in any way as affecting the civil liability of the person in default for failure to pay the charges prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2168 § 9 (part), 2004: Ord. 1958 § 6, 1997: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.050 - Charges deemed debt due city. 
The charges imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt due the city from and against any person subject to the provisions hereof and such person is liable in a civil action in the name of the city, or its assignee, as plaintiff in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the charges imposed by this title, including penalties, costs of suit, and for attorney's fees, which sum, upon collection, shall be deposited in the city treasury. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.060 - Abatement of disconnected premises. 
In each case where premises are disconnected from the sewer system, the council shall cause the city to take or to request any authorized public officer to take such steps as may be legally taken to abate such premises and to prohibit occupancy of such premises until they are reconnected to the sewer system. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.070 - Duty to collect charges. 
The finance officer and all other appropriate city officers, agents or employees shall promptly, efficiently and economically take all steps, actions or remedies necessary for the collection of charges as provided in this chapter which are now or may hereafter be provided. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.080 - Right of entry for inspections. 
The officers, employees and inspectors of the public works department of the city shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect and to determine compliance with this division. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.090 - User's responsibility to pay. 
All persons using the sewer system of the city shall pay for such service and for the privilege of connecting to the sewer at the rates, at the time, and under the conditions set forth in this division, and shall comply with all provisions of this division relating to the use of the sewer system. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.100 - Issuance of cease and desist orders. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has occurred or may occur in violation of this division, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the city may issue an order to cease and desist, and direct the owner not complying with this division or discharge permit to: 
A.  Comply forthwith; 
B.  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the city; 
C.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation; or 
D.  Cease operation until appropriate remedial or preventive action is taken and approved by the city. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.110 - Submission of time schedule. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has occurred or may occur in violation of this division or wastewater discharge permit, the city may require the owner to submit for approval a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the owner shall take to prevent or correct the violation. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.120 - Falsification of information. 
It shall be unlawful knowingly to make any false statement, representations, record, report, plan or other document or knowingly to tamper with or render inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment installed or operated pursuant to this title or of any pest issued under this title. In addition to any punishment or remedy provided by law, any such falsification or tampering shall be grounds for revocation of any permit issued under Chapter 12.12. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.130 - Public nuisance. 
Waste or wastewater discharge, threatened waste or wastewater discharge, or any condition or act in violation of any provision of this division or of any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this division or of any order or directive of the director authorized by the provisions of said division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such nuisance may be abated, removed, or enjoined and damages assessed therefor, in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.135 - Injunctive relief. 
Whenever there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city attorney is authorized to petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both as may be appropriate to restrain the continuance of such violation. 
(Ord. 1747A § 16, 1989).  
15.28.140 - Civil penalties. 
Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this division, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to said divisions, or who intentionally or negligently discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who so violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation, national pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be civilly liable to the city in a sum not to exceed six thousand dollars for each day in which such violation occurs. The city may petition the superior court to impose, assess and collect such sums pursuant to this division and Section 54740 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.150 - Misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provision of this division, or of any permit issued pursuant to this division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed one year, or by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by both such imprisonment and fine. Every violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1747A § 17, 1989: Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.160 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
15.28.170 - Appeals. 
A.  Any user, permittee, applicant or other person aggrieved by any decision, action, finding, determination, order or directive of the director, made or authorized pursuant to the provisions of this division, or relating to any permit issued pursuant to said division, or interpreting or implementing the same, may file a written request with the director for reconsideration thereof within ten days of such decision, action, finding, determination, or order, setting forth in detail the facts supporting such user's or person's request for reconsideration. The director shall render a final decision within ten days of the receipt of such request for reconsideration. 
B.  Any user, permittee, applicant, or other person aggrieved by the final determination of the director may appeal such determination to the city council within ten days of notification by the director of his final determination. Written notification of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after notification of the final determination of the director and shall set forth in detail the facts and reasons supporting the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty days from the date of filing the notice of appeal. The appellant, the director, and such other persons as the council may deem appropriate, shall be heard at the hearing on such appeal. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the council may affirm, reverse or modify the final determination of the director as the council deems just and equitable, and in furtherance of the provisions, purposes and intent of this chapter. During the pendency of any such appeal, the final determination of the director shall remain in full force and effect. The council's determination on the appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. 1489 § 1 (part), 1983).  
Chapter 15.29 - INDUSTRIAL USERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2402, § 5, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, amended Ch. 15.29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.29, §§ 15.29.010—15.29.220, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 1489, § 1, adopted 1983; Ord. 1747A, §§ 18—23, adopted 1989; and Ord. 1756, §§ 1—3, adopted 1990. 
 
15.29.010 - Wastewater discharge permits. 
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the city before connecting to or discharging to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users connected to or discharging to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.020 - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
A.  Name, address, and standard industrial classification number of applicant; 
B.  Volume of wastewater to be discharged; 
C.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Sections 15.24.090 and 15.24.110 as determined by a laboratory approved by the city; 
D.  Time and duration of discharge; 
E.  Average and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any; 
F.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical, and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation; 
G.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant process on the premises including all materials, processes, and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged; 
H.  Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production; 
I.  Number and type of employees, and hours of work; 
J.  Any other information as may be deemed by the city engineer to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city engineer will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. After evaluation and approval of the application by the city engineer, the city engineer may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.030 - Wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following provisions: 
A.  A statement of duration; 
B.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is not transferable without prior notification to the city and provision of the existing wastewater discharge permit to the new owner or operator; 
C.  Effluent limitations, including best management practices; 
D.  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
E.  Requirements for installation of inspection, flow metering, and sampling facilities; 
F.  Pretreatment requirements; 
G.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting and notification requirements, including, but not limited to, sampling locations, sampling frequency, method of sampling, number of samples, sample types, standards for sampling and analyses, and reporting schedules; 
H.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
I.  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto; 
J.  Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge; 
K.  Compliance schedules; 
L.  Requirements to control slug discharges; 
M.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
N.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to insure compliance with this division and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.040 - Duration of wastewater discharge permits. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. At least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the permit, the user shall reapply and pay applicable fees for the renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions in this chapter. If the permit is not renewed prior to the expiration of the permit through no fault of the user, the permit shall be extended for up to one (1) additional year provided that the user has submitted a timely application for renewal and has paid all applicable fees. 
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the city during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his/her permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.050 - Transfer of a permit. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and are not assignable or transferable to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the prior written approval of the city. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the application of the terms and conditions of this chapter, including enforcement penalties, from applying to a succeeding owner or user or successor in interest or other assigns of a permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.060 - Revocation of permit. 
The city may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  Failure of the user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge; 
B.  Failure of the user to report, with reasonable advance notice, significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
C.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
D.  Violation of conditions of the permit; or 
E.  Failure to pay fees and charges or penalties established by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.070 - Permit denial. 
The city may deny the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit for any of the following reasons: 
A.  An incomplete permit application; 
B.  Failure to respond to a request for additional information in a timely manner; 
C.  Submittal of false or inaccurate data or information; 
D.  The user's discharge may harm the POTW, the city's employees, the public or the environment or may cause a nuisance; or 
E.  The user's pretreatment facilities are inadequate to protect the POTW or to achieve compliance with the standards and requirements in this division. 
Denial of permit does not allow said user to discharge without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.080 - Permit modification. 
The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
B.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time the wastewater discharge permit was issued; 
C.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
D.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW personnel or the receiving waters; 
E.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
F.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; 
G.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; or 
H.  To reflect a transfer of facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section 15.29.050. 
The user shall be informed of any modifications to its wastewater discharge permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the modification. Any permit modifications which result in new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.090 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  The city may require the user to construct, at his own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the user's expense. The monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises unless exemption from this requirement is granted by the city. 
B.  The monitoring facility shall include accommodations to allow access by city personnel, such as a cover secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling, flow measuring, and compositing of samples for analysis. The monitoring facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
C.  The sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.100 - Inspection and sampling. 
The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the provisions of this division are being met and all requirements are being complied with. The user shall allow the city or its agents ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where the user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
The city shall also have the right to inspect and copy any records kept by the user in connection with his wastewater discharge, materials removed therefrom, or materials that could be discharged but are otherwise disposed of. Production data, when required to determine compliance with discharge standards, shall also be subject to inspection and copying by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.110 - Certification requirements. 
A.  All reports required by this chapter and all applications for a wastewater discharge permit submitted pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following certification statement signed in accordance with Section 15.29.170: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
B.  All facilities determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user must annually submit the following certification statement signed by an authorized representative: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _______, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from _______ to _______ [month, days, year]: 
(a) The facility described as _______ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user; 
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon the following information: 
_____
_____
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.120 - Baseline monitoring reports. 
A.  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing users subject to categorical pretreatment standards currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of a discharge, new sources and sources that become subject to categorical pretreatment standards subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
B.  Reports required pursuant to paragraph A above shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners; 
2.  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
3.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user, including a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
4.  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
a.  Regulated process streams; and 
b.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  The pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
6.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, documentation to determine compliance with the standard. 
a.  The industrial user shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
b.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the industrial user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city; 
c.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Section 15.29.150; 
d.  The city may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
e.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
7.  A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
8.  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to any compliance schedule required pursuant to this section: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. 
b.  No increment referred to in subparagraph 1 above shall exceed nine (9) months. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city, including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
9.  All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with Section 15.29.110A of this chapter and signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.130 - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in paragraphs B(4)—(6) of Section 15.29.120. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.140 - Periodic compliance reports. 
Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the director, submit no less than twice per year reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the industrial user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.150 - Approved analytical methods; Sampling. 
A.  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report required by this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using analytical methods approved by EPA, California Department of Health Services, or the California State Water Resources Control Board. 
B.  Samples collected to satisfy the reporting requirements in this chapter must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
C.  Except as indicated in subsections (a) and (b) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
a.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
b.  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. For facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For periodic reports on continued compliance and reports for significant industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.160 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
Industrial users subject to reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with any best management practices required by this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. The records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation (through final judgment and all appeals) concerning the industrial user or the city, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.170 - Signatory requirements. 
All reports submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.180 - Pretreatment. 
Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all national pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements and the requirements of this division. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to meet the requirements of this division shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating and maintenance procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and must be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation and maintenance procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.190 - Dilution prohibited. 
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.200 - Protection from accidental discharge. 
A.  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this division. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. 
B.  The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.210 - Slug discharge control plan. 
The city may require any industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a plan to control slug discharges or to take such other actions that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Any slug discharge control plans required pursuant to this section shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
a.  A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
b.  A description of stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of slug discharges, including any discharges that would violate the discharge prohibitions in Chapter 15.24; and 
d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures or equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.220 - Notification of accidental or slug discharge. 
Industrial users shall immediately notify the city by telephone upon the occurrence of an accidental discharge, slug discharge, or any other discharge that has the potential to cause problems to the POTW or the treatment process. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user. 
This notification shall be followed, within five (5) days of the date of occurrence, by the submission to the city of a detailed written statement describing the causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve industrial users of liability for any expense, loss, damage, fines, penalties or other liability which might be incurred by the city as a result of the industrial user's discharge nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.230 - Notification of changed conditions. 
All industrial users must notify the city prior to any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under Section 15.29.240. 
A.  The city may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 15.29.020. 
B.  The city may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.240 - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
An industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place within one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 15.29.230. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.250 - Notification of violation. 
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the city by telephone within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation. Repeat sampling and analysis shall not be required where the city performs the required sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user unless the city notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.260 - Notices to employees. 
Industrial users shall inform their employees of the city's pretreatment requirements by making available to their employees copies of this division, together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.270 - Confidential information. 
A.  All information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods which would be detrimental to the user's competitive position. 
B.  When requested, and if agreed to by the city, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.280 - Special agreements. 
Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any user may be established when, in the opinion of the city, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. Notwithstanding promulgation of any special agreement or arrangement, all industrial users discharging into a POTW are required to remove incompatible pollutants from their wastewater in conformance with national pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.290 - List of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
At least annually the POTW shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the city a list of all industrial users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements as required by 40 CFR Section 403.8(f)(2)(viii). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.300 - Administrative penalties. 
The city may impose administrative civil penalties pursuant to California Government Code Section 54740.5 (or its successor statute) when any industrial user violates any provision of this chapter, any term or condition of a wastewater discharge permit or any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Civil penalties may be imposed by the city as follows: 
A.  In an amount up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports. 
B.  In an amount up to three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule established by the city. 
C.  In an amount up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation for each day for discharges in violation of any waste discharge limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued or adopted by the city. 
D.  In an amount up to ten dollars ($10.00) per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued or adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.310 - Procedure for imposition of administrative civil penalties. 
A.  Whenever the city finds that any industrial user has engaged in conduct which justifies imposition of civil penalties, the city shall serve or cause to be served upon such industrial user an administrative complaint either personally, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed and the civil penalty contemplated by the city and informing the industrial user that a hearing will be conducted within sixty (60) days after service of the administrative complaint. 
B.  Hearing. Unless the industrial user waives the right to a hearing, the city shall conduct a hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city council. The hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date of service of the administrative complaint. If the hearing officer finds that the industrial user has violated any provision of this chapter, any term or condition of a wastewater discharge permit or any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the hearing officer may assess a civil penalty against the industrial user taking into consideration all relevant circumstances. Appeal of the hearing officer's decision may be taken by the industrial user as provided in subsection C below. 
C.  Appeal. 
1.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be served on the industrial user by personal service or registered mail, return receipt requested. This decision shall be final unless a notice of appeal from the industrial user is received by the city within thirty (30) days of the industrial user's receipt of the hearing officer's decision. The signed return receipt of delivery of the decision by registered mail shall be conclusive proof for determination of the thirty-day appeal/review period. Review of the decision shall be before the city council. 
2.  Every notice of review shall contain: 
a.  A reference to the matter to be reviewed. 
b.  A statement of the interest of the appellant/user. 
c.  The specific grounds relied upon as to why the decision being appealed is improper or erroneous. 
3.  Appeals to the city council shall be de novo and not limited to the record established at the hearing. 
4.  The notice for review shall be accompanied by a non-refundable seventy-five-dollar ($75.00) filing fee. 
5.  The requirements of subsections 1 through 4 above shall be jurisdictional. 
6.  The decision of the city council, following a hearing upon ten (10) days notice to the applicant, shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.320 - Enforcement of the administrative civil penalty. 
A.  Any administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date the imposition is final. Payment shall be made either in cash or by certified check made payable to the city. 
B.  If full payment is not made within such thirty-day period, the city may commence further proceedings under this chapter for such violation. Alternatively, the city attorney may commence a court action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. 
C.  The amount of any administrative civil penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the industrial user from which the discharge resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty originated. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.330 - Injunctive relief. 
When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the superior court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on the activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.340 - Criminal prosecution. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any provision of any wastewater discharger permit, order, rule or regulation issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Every violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
15.29.350 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 5, 12-17-2012)  
Chapter 15.30 - DISCHARGES OF FATS, OILS, AND GREASE FROM FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
15.30.005 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial use of the city's sewer services and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils, and grease (FOG) into the public sewer, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for food service establishments (FSEs). 
B.  This chapter shall apply to both direct and indirect discharges of wastewater containing FOG carried to the public sewer. 
C.  The provisions set forth in this chapter are designed to ensure compliance with federal, state and local laws and regulations, and to allow the city to meet applicable standards. 
D.  This chapter also establishes quantity and quality standards on all discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the public sewer causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs). 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Article II. - Regulations 
 
15.30.010 - FOG wastewater discharge permit (FOG WDP) required. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any wastewater from FSEs directly or indirectly into the public sewer without first obtaining a FOG WDP pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.015 - FOG discharge limitation. 
No FSE shall discharge or cause to be discharged FOG into the public sewer that exceeds a concentration level adopted by the city or any local, state or federal agency or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages or SSOs in the public sewer or the FSE's sewer lateral. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.020 - Public nuisance; abatement orders and cleanup costs. 
A.  The discharge of FOG into the public sewer or sewer lateral that causes or contributes to an SSO or blockage of the public sewer or sewer lateral may cause a threat or injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and is hereby declared a public nuisance that may be abated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 8.40 of this Code or by any means otherwise provided by law. 
B.  Any FSE determined by the city engineer to have caused or contributed to an SSO or blockage in the public sewer or sewer lateral resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, shall be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance created by such SSO or blockage. 
C.  SSOs or blockages in the public sewer or sewer lateral caused by the FSE in whole or in part are the responsibility of the private property owner and the owner of the FSE. 
D.  If the city engineer determines that the public health and safety require the city to act immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by the FSE, to clear a blockage in the public sewer or sewer lateral caused by the FSE, or to make any repairs to the public sewer or sewer lateral needed as a result of an SSO or blockage caused by the FSE, the property owner and the owner of the FSE shall be jointly and severally liable for the city's costs for such abatement. The city's abatement costs shall constitute a debt to the city, due and payable upon demand and collectible in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.030 - Best management practices (BMPs) required. 
Every FSE shall implement BMPs in its operations, in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the city engineer, to minimize the discharge of FOG to the grease control device and/or the public sewer. Detailed requirements for BMPs shall be specified in the FOG WDP and all FSEs are required, at a minimum, to comply with the BMPs set forth therein as well as any additional BMPs established by the city engineer. BMPs may include, but are not limited to, kitchen practices and employee training procedures that are essential in minimizing FOG discharge to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.040 - Prohibitions. 
FSEs are prohibited from doing any of the following: 
A.  Installing food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction. All FSEs that undergo a change in operations or remodeling shall remove any existing food grinders concurrent with such change or remodeling, except as otherwise expressly allowed by the city engineer. 
B.  Introducing any additives into an FSE's plumbing system or grease control device for the purpose of emulsifying FOG, biologically and/or chemically treating FOG for grease remediation and/or as a supplement to maintenance of the grease control device, unless specific written authorization from the city engineer is first obtained. 
C.  Disposing waste cooking oil into the public sewer or storm drain. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as rendering bins, barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. 
D.  Discharging wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F into any grease control device, including, but not limited to, grease traps and grease interceptors. 
E.  Discharging wastes containing fecal materials from toilets, urinals, washbasins or other fixtures to waste lines directed to a grease control device, or vice versa. 
F.  Discharging FOG or solid materials removed from a grease control device to the public sewer. Grease removed from grease control devices shall be waste hauled to an approved disposal site as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease control devices. 
G.  Operating grease interceptors with FOG and solids accumulation exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. The grease and solids layers combined shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total interceptor liquid depth to avoid overloading the interceptor. 
H.  Discharging FOG or other pollutants above the local discharge limits set forth in Chapter 15.24 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.050 - FOG pretreatment required. 
Every FSE is required at the time of construction, remodel, and/or change in operations to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter, subject to the variance and waiver provisions of Section 15.30.100. The grease interceptor shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater from FSEs prior to discharge to the public sewer as determined by the most current edition of the California Plumbing Code (CPC). Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and clean up areas of any FSEs that are a source of FOG discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor. 
Compliance shall be established as follows: 
A.  New Construction of FSEs. New construction of any FSE shall include complete installation of an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor, with a minimum size of one thousand (1,000) gallons, prior to commencing discharges of wastewater to the public sewer. 
B.  Existing FSEs. 
1.  Any existing FSE, which, in the city engineer's determination, has caused or contributed to an SSO or grease-related blockage in the public sewer or the sewer lateral, has one (1) or more sewer laterals connected to a hot spot and/or has contributed significant FOG to the public sewer, shall be deemed to have reasonable potential to adversely impact the public sewer and shall be required to install a grease interceptor within one hundred eighty (180) days of written notification by the city engineer. 
2.  Any existing FSE or FSE that changes ownership or that undergoes remodeling and/or a change in operations, as defined in Chapter 15.04, shall be required to install a grease interceptor or to obtain a variance or waiver in accordance with Section 15.30.100. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.060 - Commercial properties. 
Any owner of a commercial property where FSEs are located or their official designee shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of a grease interceptor serving multiple FSEs that are located on a single parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.070 - Grease interceptor requirements. 
A.  Any FSE required by this chapter to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. 
B.  Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to Chapter 10 Traps and Interceptors of the most current edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the city engineer and shall have a minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. The city engineer reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor size, adequacy, location and need, based on review of relevant information, including, but not limited to, grease interceptor performance, waste stream characteristics, facility location, maintenance needs, and or inspection needs. 
C.  The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease. 
D.  An access manhole, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.080 - Grease trap requirements. 
A.  No new construction, change in operation or remodel of an FSE shall include installation of a grease trap without prior express written permission from the city engineer. 
B.  Existing grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by daily removal of the accumulated grease. 
C.  Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process. 
D.  Grease traps shall be inspected periodically to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
E.  Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.090 - Grease interceptor maintenance requirements. 
A.  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full contents of the interceptor, which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids. 
B.  All grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the maintenance frequency approved by the city engineer. 
C.  All grease interceptors are required to have grease retention fittings as designed for proper function. Any interceptor that does not have the grease retention fittings shall be repaired and/or retrofitted with appropriate grease retention fittings. 
D.  No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, public sewer, storm drain or public right-of-way, or onto the surface of any street or parking area. 
E.  The city engineer may require any FSE with a grease interceptor to submit data and information necessary to establish the required maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor. 
F.  The required maintenance frequency for every FSE with a grease interceptor shall be determined by the city engineer by one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptor does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total designed hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG from being discharged to the public sewer. 
2.  Every FSE with a grease interceptor shall fully pump out and clean its grease interceptor not less than once every six (6) months. 
3.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in subsection (F)(1) has not been established. The maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data has been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in subsection (F)(1) and guidelines adopted by the city pursuant to the FOG control program. The city may change the required maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions in accordance with the FOG control program. Based on the actual generation of FOG from the FSE, the required maintenance frequency may increase or decrease. 
4.  The owner, operator or FOG WDP permittee of an FSE may submit a request to the city engineer for a change in the required maintenance frequency at any time. The FSE has the burden of demonstrating that the requested change in frequency reflects actual operating conditions based on the average FOG accumulation over time and meets the requirements described in subsection (F)(1), and that it is in full compliance with the conditions of its FOG WDP and this chapter. Upon a determination by the city engineer that the requested revision is justified, the FOG WDP shall be revised accordingly to reflect the change in required maintenance frequency. 
5.  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation exceeding the requirements described in subsection (F)(1), the FSE shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all FOG and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the city engineer may also increase the required maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor. 
G.  Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and other materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be disposed of by waste haulers at an approved disposal site in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local laws. 
H.  The city engineer may direct city staff or a city contractor to pump and clean an FSE's grease interceptor if the FSE has failed to comply with the terms of this chapter. The FSE owner and property owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such work, and such expenses are deemed a debt of the FSE owner and the property owner to the city, enforceable and collectible as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.100 - Variance and waiver of grease interceptor requirements. 
A.  Variance From Grease Interceptor Requirements. An FSE may request that the city engineer grant a variance from the grease interceptor requirements in Section 15.30.070 to allow for the installation of an alternative grease control device in lieu of a grease interceptor, if the FSE demonstrates that the alternative grease control device equals or exceeds the effectiveness of a grease interceptor, and that it is impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease interceptor. The city engineer's determination to grant a variance will be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
2.  There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer. 
3.  The FSE can prove that the alternative grease control device is equally or more effective than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge. In addition, the FSE must be able to demonstrate, after installation of the proposed alternative grease control device its effectiveness to control FOG discharge through downstream visual monitoring of the public sewer, for at least three (3) months at its own expense. A variance may be granted if the results show no visible accumulation of FOG in the FSE's sewer lateral and/or tributary downstream sewer lines. Any variance issued pursuant to this section may be revoked at any time in the discretion of the city engineer. 
B.  Conditional Waiver of Requirement to Install Grease Interceptor. A conditional waiver of the requirement to install a grease interceptor may be granted for FSEs that the city engineer determines to have negligible FOG discharges and an insignificant impact to the public sewer. Although a waiver from installation of a grease interceptor may be granted, the FSE may be required to provide space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor. The city engineer's determination to grant or revoke a conditional waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  Quantity of FOG discharges as measured or indicated by the size of the FSE based on water usage, menu, seating capacity, number of meals served, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food, number of plumbing fixtures and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges. 
2.  Adequacy of implementation of BMPs and compliance history. 
3.  Sewer size, grade, condition based on visual and other information, FOG deposition in the sewer by the FSE, and history of maintenance and SSOs caused by FOG from the FSE. 
4.  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
5.  Any other condition that the city engineer deems reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges. 
C.  Waiver of Grease Interceptor Installation Requirement With a Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee. Where the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible and no equivalent alternative grease control device can be installed, an FSE may be granted a waiver of the grease interceptor requirement upon the payment of a grease disposal mitigation fee as described in Section 15.30.120. Additional requirements may also be imposed to mitigate the discharge of FOG into the public sewer. The city engineer's determination to grant the waiver upon the payment of a grease disposal mitigation fee will be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  There is inadequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
2.  There is inadequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the sewer lateral or the public sewer. 
3.  The FSE does not qualify for a variance from the requirement to install a grease interceptor pursuant to subsection A. 
D.  Application for Variance or Waiver of Grease Interceptor Installation Requirements. An FSE may submit to the City of Merced Industrial Waste Division an application for a waiver or variance from the grease interceptor requirements in Section 15.30.070. The FSE bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible or otherwise required. Upon determination by the city engineer that issuance of a variance or waiver is justified, the city engineer will issue or revise the FOG WDP to include the variance or waiver and relieve the FSE from the grease interceptor requirements. 
E.  Terms and Conditions of Variance or Waiver. A variance or waiver shall contain the terms and conditions that serve as the basis for its issuance. A variance or waiver may be revoked by the city engineer at any time upon his or her determination that any of the terms or conditions for its issuance are not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the variance or waiver was based have changed so that the justification for the variance or waiver no longer exists. Unless the variance or waiver is revoked pursuant to this paragraph, the variance or waiver shall be valid until the expiration date specified in the variance or waiver. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Article III. - Fees 
 
15.30.110 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the public sewer for the implementation of the program established in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.115 - Charges and fees. 
A.  The city may adopt charges and fees by resolution which may include: 
1.  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's FOG program; 
2.  Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards; 
3.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
B.  Costs incurred by the city as a result of required on-site sampling and analysis shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner, user or FOG WDP permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.120 - Grease disposal mitigation fee. 
Any FSE that operates without a grease interceptor or other grease control device approved by the city may be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance of the public sewer as a result of the FSE's inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to allow new construction or an existing FSE undergoing remodeling and/or a change in operations to operate without an approved grease interceptor unless the city engineer has determined that it is impossible or impracticable for the FSE to install and/or operate a grease interceptor under Section 15.30.100 of this chapter. 
A.  The grease disposal mitigation fee shall be established annually by the city engineer, and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the public sewer for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor. 
B.  The grease disposal mitigation fee may be waived or reduced, not more frequently than annually, if the FSE demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer that the FSE has used BMPs and waste minimization practices on a regular basis that have significantly reduced the introduction of FOG into the public sewer. 
C.  The grease disposal mitigation fee may not be waived or reduced if the FSE does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter and/or its discharge into the public sewer has caused or potentially caused or contributed to, alone or collectively, sewer blockage or SSOs in the sewer downstream or in the area surrounding the FSE, in the twelve (12) months prior to the waiver request. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Article IV. - Administration 
 
15.30.130 - FOG WDP application. 
A.  Any person required to obtain a FOG WDP shall complete and file with the city engineer, prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application in a form prescribed by the city engineer. All applicable fees required by this chapter shall accompany the application. The FOG WDP application may be obtained from the city's industrial waste division. 
B.  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, grease control devices, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
C.  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the FOG WDP application. 
D.  After evaluation of the data furnished, the FOG WDP may be issued, subject to terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and as otherwise determined by the city engineer to be appropriate to protect the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.140 - FOG WDP application fee. 
A FOG WDP application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Payment of the FOG WDP application fee must be received by the city engineer upon submission of the FOG WDP application. A permittee shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to renewal of any FOG WDP. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.150 - FOG WDP conditions. 
A FOG WDP may include, but is not limited to, any of the following conditions or limits: 
A.  Limits on discharges of FOG and other pollutants. 
B.  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors or other approved grease control devices. 
C.  Grease interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule. 
D.  Requirements for implementation of BMPs. 
E.  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of BMPs. 
F.  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests including the ultimate disposition of the wastes that contain FOG. 
G.  Requirements to self-monitor. 
H.  Requirements for the FSE to construct, operate and maintain, at its own expense, a grease interceptor or other approved grease control device and sampling facilities. 
I.  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the city engineer to protect the public sewer or as specified by other regulatory agencies. 
J.  Other terms and conditions which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.160 - FOG WDP modification of terms and conditions. 
A.  The terms and conditions of an issued FOG WDP may be subject to modification in the sole discretion of the city engineer during the life of the FOG WDP based on: 
1.  The permittee's current or anticipated operating data; 
2.  Changes in the requirements of state or federal regulatory agencies that oversee and monitor the city; or 
3.  A determination by the city engineer that such modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter and all applicable regulations. 
B.  A permittee may request modification of the terms and conditions of an issued FOG WDP. Any request shall be in writing, stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The city engineer shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing. 
C.  A permittee shall be informed of any change in the FOG WDP limits, conditions and/or requirements at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the FOG WDP shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.170 - FOG WDP duration and renewal. 
FOG WDPs shall be issued annually. At least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the FOG WDP, the permittee shall re-apply and pay applicable fees for the renewal of the WDP in accordance with the provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.180 - Alternative grease removal devices for limited food preparation establishments. 
A.  A limited food preparation establishment may request permission to install an alternative grease control device in lieu of a grease interceptor in writing. If the city engineer determines that the reasons for the request are valid, permission may be granted. 
B.  A limited food preparation establishment may be required to implement BMPs established by the city for FSEs. 
C.  A limited food preparation establishment that discharges FOG in excess of the defined limits may be reclassified as an FSE and required to install a grease interceptor and comply with the grease interceptor requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.190 - Non-transferability of a FOG WDP. 
A FOG WDP issued pursuant to this chapter is for a specific FSE, for a specific operation and creates no vested rights. No holder of a FOG WDP shall assign, transfer and/or sell the FOG WDP and/or use the FOG WDP on any premises or for any facilities, operations and/or discharges not expressly encompassed within the FOG WDP. Any FOG WDP that is transferred to a new owner and/or operator and/or to a new facility in violation of this chapter is void. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.200 - Facilities and drawing submittal requirements. 
Upon request by the city: 
A.  Any FSE may be required to submit two (2) copies of facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewer locations and connections. The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the city engineer for review of the existing or proposed grease control device, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the FSE of the responsibility to modify the facilities or procedures in the future as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge, and to meet the requirements of this chapter or the requirements of any other regulatory agency. 
B.  The city may require the drawings to be prepared by a California registered civil, chemical, mechanical, or electrical engineer. 
C.  All drawings shall be submitted to the industrial waste division. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.210 - Monitoring and reporting conditions. 
A.  The city engineer may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of BMPs, in accordance with the FOG control program. 
B.  The city engineer may require visual monitoring at the sole expense of the permittee to observe the actual conditions of the FSE's sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream. 
C.  The city engineer may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the permittee needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements specified in the FOG WDP or this chapter. Monitoring reports shall be in a manner and form approved by the city engineer and shall be submitted upon request of the city engineer. Failure by the permittee to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the city engineer, constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in the FOG WDP or in this chapter. The permittee shall be responsible for any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in undertaking such tasks and analyses. 
D.  Other reports may be required, such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the city engineer to ensure compliance with the FOG WDP or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.220 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
The permittee shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than three (3) years. The permittee shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to the city engineer and/or any enforcement officer. These records may include: 
A.  An on-site logbook of grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices. 
B.  A record of BMPs being implemented, including employee training. 
C.  Copies of records and manifests of waste hauling interceptor contents. 
D.  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors. 
E.  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the sewer lateral or public sewer. 
F.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the city engineer to ensure compliance with a FOG WDP or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.230 - Falsifying information or tampering with process. 
It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city and/or the city engineer, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.240 - Inspections and sampling conditions. 
A.  The city engineer and any enforcement officer may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the permittee is complying with all requirements. The permittee shall allow the city engineer or any enforcement officer access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE's grease control devices, and reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices. 
B.  The city engineer and any enforcement officer shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE's property, or other locations as determined by the city engineer or enforcement officer, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where an FSE has security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements so that the city engineer and/or any enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
C.  In order for the city engineer or enforcement officer to determine the wastewater characteristics of the user for purposes of determining compliance with FOG WDP requirements and the requirements of this chapter, the permittee shall make available for inspection and copying by the city engineer, an enforcement officer and/or service personnel, all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation and wastewater disposal. All such records shall be kept by the permittee a minimum of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.250 - Right of entry. 
Users or permittees of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city engineer and/or any enforcement officer reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the FSE is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No persons or occupants of the premises shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to the city engineer and/or any enforcement officer attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the public sewer. In the event of an emergency involving an actual or imminent SSO, the city engineer and/or any enforcement officer may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a public sewer with an FSE in order to prevent or remediate the actual or imminent SSO. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.260 - Notification of spill. 
A.  In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any FOG WDP condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG WDP or this chapter, the user/permittee shall immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the FOG WDP. If the material discharged to the public sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the user/permittee shall immediately notify the city. 
B.  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the city engineer at the address specified in the FOG WDP postmarked no later than two (2) business days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
C.  Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.270 - Notification of planned changes. 
A.  A permittee shall notify the industrial waste division at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion or remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. A permittee shall notify the industrial waste division in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and shall submit any information requested by the industrial division for evaluation of the effect of such expansion or remodeling on the permittee's FOG discharge to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Article V. - Enforcement 
 
15.30.280 - Harmful discharge. 
A.  The city may suspend the wastewater service or revoke a FOG WDP when such suspension or revocation is necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or which causes obstruction to the collection system or the POTW, or has the reasonable potential to cause the city to violate any condition in its permits. 
B.  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or revocation of a FOG WDP shall immediately stop or eliminate all discharges to the public sewer. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city engineer shall take such steps as he or she deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the collection system or the POTW. The city engineer shall reinstate the FOG WDP and/or the wastewater treatment service only upon proof of the elimination of the nonconforming discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city engineer within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.290 - Determination of non-compliance with FOG WDP conditions. 
A.  Sampling and Inspection Procedures. 
1.  Sampling and inspection of FSEs shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the city engineer. 
2.  Noncompliance with FOG WDP discharge conditions, or any discharge provisions in this chapter may be determined by an inspection of the grease control device and associated manifest and documentation, or analysis of a grab or composite sample of the wastewater of an FSE. 
3.  Any sample taken from a sample point, as determined representative by the city engineer, is considered representative of the discharge to the public sewer. 
B.  Notice of Violation. Any permittee found to be in violation of the FOG WDP terms and conditions may be issued a warning notice in which there will be a specified time period to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within the specified time period the permittee may be issued a notice of violation, with a specified time period to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within the time period specified the permittee shall be considered in noncompliance. 
C.  Noncompliance Fee. Any permittee determined to be in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its FOG WDP or with any provision of this chapter may be required to pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate the city for costs of additional inspection and follow-up, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to Section 15.30.320. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount determined by the city engineer. If the permittee remains compliant for twelve (12) consecutive months following the notice of noncompliance, the fee may be waived at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.300 - Compliance schedule. 
A.  Upon determination that a permittee is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its FOG WDP or any provision of this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device, the city engineer may require the permittee to enter into a compliance schedule on terms and conditions specified by the city engineer. 
B.  The compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a grease control device and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, implementation of BMPs and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
C.  If a permittee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule by the deadlines set forth therein, the city engineer may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG WDP pursuant to Section 15.30.310 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.310 - FOG WDP suspension and/or revocation. 
A.  The city may suspend and/or revoke any FOG WDP when the city engineer determines that a permittee: 
1.  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule order. 
2.  Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city and/or the city engineer. 
3.  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city and/or the city engineer to determine FOG WDP terms or conditions, discharge compliance or compliance with this chapter. 
4.  Falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method. 
5.  Refuses reasonable access to the FSE for the purpose of inspection and monitoring. 
6.  Fails to make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, FOG WDP fees or any other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
7.  Causes obstruction, sewer blockages or SSOs in the public sewer. 
8.  Violates grease control device maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of its FOG WDP or any provision of this chapter. 
9.  Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
15.30.320 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
B.  Any user or permittee in violation of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter, may be ordered by the city engineer to cease and desist operations until the violation is cured. Any user or permittee continuing operations after notice to cease and desist has been furnished shall be shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
C.  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter, or the doing of any act prohibited or the failure or omission to do any act required by this chapter, or the orders, rules, and regulations and permits issued under this chapter, is a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the city attorney. 
D.  If any violation of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter, causes damage to the POTW, the city engineer may seek to recover civil damages from the user causing such damage. 
E.  The city engineer is authorized to levy against any person administrative fines of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day in accordance with Government Code Section 54740.5, or its successor or statute, for any violation of this chapter, any term or condition of a FOG WDP, or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed penalty amount. The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail and shall inform the user that a hearing will be conducted by the impartial hearing officer within sixty (60) days of service unless the right to a hearing is waived. 
1.  If the hearing officer finds that the user has violated any provision of this chapter or any term or condition of a FOG WDP or any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the hearing officer may assess a civil penalty against the industrial user taking into consideration all relevant circumstances. The decision of the hearing officer shall be served on the user by personal service or registered mail. 
2.  The user has the right to appeal the decision of the impartial hearing officer to the city council. The appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of notice of the decision of the impartial hearing officer and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
3.  Any administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date the imposition is final. Payment shall be made either in cash or by certified check made payable to the city. 
F.  The remedies and provisions of this section are cumulative, and are in addition to any other remedy or provision of law." 
(Ord. No. 2402, § 6, 12-17-2012)  
Division II. - Water System  
Chapter 15.32 - REGULATION AND BILLING 
 
15.32.010 - Authority. 
The management, control and care of the municipal water system shall be vested in the city engineer, under the general direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. 1174 § 1, 1976: prior code § 31.1).  
15.32.020 - Administration of funds. 
The finance officer shall be in charge of the collection of all money that may become due the city for water services and shall pay the same into the water fund, as provided for in the city charter and in Section 15.36.010. 
(Prior code § 31.2).  
15.32.030 - Service—Generally. 
Water from the municipal water system shall be delivered to the customers thereof, both within and without the corporate limits, in accordance with the terms of this division. The city shall furnish the service complete from its main to the property line, in case of an alley; to the curb line from a street main when the sidewalk is adjacent to the property line; and to the back of the sidewalk from a street main when the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb line. The owner shall furnish, install and maintain all piping to the city service. 
(Ord. 2167 § 1, 2004: prior code § 31.3).  
15.32.040 - Metered services. 
A.  All water service installed on or after January 1, 1992, including, but not limited to, residential, commercial, industrial, schools, or public and government entities, shall be equipped with meters and shall be charged for water on the metered rate as specified in Section 15.36.050 of this title. 
B.  Any person or entity constructing new building or structure that requires water service shall purchase and install new water meter according to the city's specifications for each building or structure, and shall purchase and provide the city with a properly functioning electronic transmitter for the water meter for installation by the city. 
C.  On or before January 1, 2025, all water service connected to the city's water supply without meters shall be retrofitted and equipped with water meters and shall thereafter be charged for water on the metered rate provided in Chapter 15.36 of this title, as amended from time to time. The director of public works—water resources and reclamation is authorized to institute a water meter retrofitting program, which shall be implemented on or before July 1, 2007 to ensure compliance with the requirements of this provision. 
D.  The cost of installation of the water meter on new water service installed on or after January 1, 1992 shall be paid by the user of the water, except that if a meter was previously installed by the user at the user's expense and later removed and replaced by the city at the city's own undertaking, then the cost of the installation of the meter shall be borne by the city. For services existing prior to January 1, 1992, the city may recover the cost of providing the purchase, installation, and operation of water meters from rates, fees, and charges. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city is authorized to utilize funds collected from developers as water connection fees, pursuant to Government Code Section 66013, and deposited into the restricted water wells fund to retrofit existing single-family residences with unmetered services existing prior to January 1, 1992 with water meters, until all unmetered services are retrofitted with water meters. 
F.  Where clusters of multiple-family dwellings are located on a single parcel, a single metered connection may serve all units. 
(Ord. 2269 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 1799 § 1, 1991: prior code § 31.5). 
(Ord. of 2386, § 1, 4-16-2012)  
15.32.050 - Unmetered services. 
A.  Subject to Section 15.32.040 of this chapter, single-family residences, churches, schools, public parks and fire protection services without water meter on service prior to January 1, 1992 may continue to be charged for water on a flat rate schedule, provided the use is not expanded or changed, until retrofitted with a water meter on or before January 1, 2025 and shall thereafter be charged for water on the metered rate provided in Chapter 15.36 of this title, as amended from time to time. 
B.  Meters may be installed at the option of the city or the customer, in which event service will thereafter be rendered only on the basis of metered service. 
C.  The city shall have the right to install meters, at the customer's expense, on services where violations of any of the regulations governing extensions of service, wastage of water or time or method of irrigation have occurred. 
(Ord. 2269 § 3 (part), 2006: Ord. 1799 § 2, 1991: prior code § 31.7).  
15.32.060 - Special and amended rates—Authority. 
Anything to the contrary stated in this chapter notwithstanding, the city council shall have the power to establish by agreement or resolution the rates to be charged for providing water services to government agencies, including school districts, private schools and to any person at rates different from those heretofore set forth, on a basis that is fair and equitable to all the parties concerned. 
(Prior code § 31.9).  
15.32.070 - Wheel valves and curb shutoff valves. 
All water services shall have a wheel valve where the service pipe enters the house or structure. The city, upon request of a customer, will turn the curb shutoff valve on and off without charge to enable the customer to install the wheel valve. 
It is unlawful for a customer, or any person, to turn on or turn off a curb shutoff valve without the permission of the director of public works or his designee. 
Except as indicated above, a customer is subject to a charge for having a curb shutoff valve turned on and off. The charge is fifty dollars ($50.00) during normal working hours (eight a.m. to three p.m., Monday through Friday) and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) at all other times. 
(Ord. 1867 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1486 § 1, 1983: prior code § 31.10(a)). 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 3, 3-18-2013)  
15.32.080 - State connection regulations—Backflow control devices. 
A.  In making plumbing connections, the customer shall comply with the regulations of the state and county departments of public health. 
1.  In addition to the applicable state and county regulations, the following is prohibited, unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, because of the threat to the public health: 
a.  Unprotected cross connections between a public supply and any unapproved source of water; and 
b.  Water service to premises where there is a possibility of contaminated water back flowing into the public water system. 
2.  In addition, approved double check valves or other protective devices shall be installed on water services when: 
a.  Another source of water, whether cross connected or not, is in use or is available for use; or 
b.  Containing liquid substances of any kind are used, produced, or processed. 
B.  The director shall determine the type, design and layout of backflow control devices required at each premises, and the devices shall be installed at the expense of the customer. The control devices shall be inspected, tested, and approved by the director as a condition of services to the premises. 
C.  Pursuant to Merced Municipal Code Sections 17.28.020 and 17.32.080, the only approved residential fire sprinkler system shall be a 'multipurpose' design and shall be a 'passive purge' system as per NFPA 13D and the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2501, § 1, 6-17-2019; Ord. 2167 § 2, 2004: prior code § 31.10(b))  
15.32.090 - Valve inspections—Responsibility. 
The owner of any premises on or for which check valves or other protective devices are installed shall inspect these devices for water tightness and reliability at least once per year. Double check valves and other protective devices may, in addition, be inspected and tested for water tightness by the city at any time. If the inspection cannot be made without undue difficulty because of an obstruction or other interference, the customer will be notified and requested either to correct the condition or have the inspection made at his own expense and witnessed by the city. Any defects found in any backflow control device shall be corrected by the customer within three (3) days. Failure to correct such defects is cause for discontinuance of water service. 
(Prior code § 31.10(c)).  
15.32.100 - Water use outside of premises—Permission. 
No person shall supply water in any way for use outside of the premises to which the service is assigned or appurtenant, except by permission of the director. 
(Ord. 2167 § 3, 2004: prior code § 31.10(d)).  
15.32.110 - Vacant buildings. 
The water charges specified in this division will be charged against vacant or untenanted buildings, unless notice of the vacancy and a request for discontinuance of service is made to the office of the finance officer. 
(Prior code § 31.10(e)).  
15.32.120 - Open access to connections. 
Access to service connections and water meters must be provided at all times. 
(Prior code § 31.10(f)).  
15.32.130 - Service pipe maintenance—Right of entry. 
All persons must keep the service pipes in good order at their own expense and may be held liable for damages which may result from their failure to do so. When leaky faucets or fixtures are discovered and not immediately repaired, the water service may be disconnected. Authorized employees of the city shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to all parts of any premises supplied with water, except the interior of dwellings, but including the meter box, to see that the regulations contained in this chapter are observed and complied with. 
(Prior code § 31.10(g)).  
15.32.140 - Sprinkler systems. 
All sprinkler systems installed for the irrigation of lawns, plants and flowers shall be so designed and installed that the water is not sprayed or permitted to spray over or upon a sidewalk, alley or street. Portable sprinklers will not be permitted on the sidewalk, nor may they be placed in such a manner as to spray water upon sidewalks, alleys or streets, so as to prevent pedestrians or vehicles from using the public ways at all times without being struck or wet by the spray from the sprinklers. The irrigation with potable water of ornamental turf on public street medians is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 31.10(i)). 
(Ord. No. 2442, § 2, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2443, § 1, 6-15-2015)  
15.32.150 - Interference or bypass of system. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the city service lines, valves or meters or to construct a bypass around a meter or service. 
(Prior code § 31.10(h)).  
15.32.160 - Billing—Notice of delinquency—Disconnection. 
A.  The finance officer of the city shall cause the premises to be billed in advance in the case of unmetered service and in arrears in the case of metered service, monthly, bimonthly, or at such other intervals as he may determine in his discretion, and such water charges shall be included with the utility bill established by the city for water, sewer and refuse charges. 
B.  The city manager shall adopt administrative guidelines to provide procedures for payment and collection, including delinquency and termination, of municipal utility services in the city's Administrative Policy and Procedure Manual. 
C.  Under no circumstances shall the city be required to make service available to a residential occupant unless each residential occupant or representative of the residential occupants agrees to the terms and conditions of service, and meets the requirements of law and the city's rules and regulations. However, if one or more of the residential occupants or the representative of the residential occupant is willing and able to assume responsibility for subsequent charges to the account to the satisfaction of the city, or if there is a physical means legally available to the city of selectively terminating services to those residential occupants who have not met the requirements of the city's rules or for whom the representative of the residential occupants is not responsible, the city shall make service available to the residential occupants who have met those requirements or on whose behalf those requirements have been met. Additionally, those residential occupants shall be required to comply with the same deposit requirements as set forth in Section 15.32.165. 
D.  The city shall not seek to recover any charges or penalties for the furnishing of water, sewage, or refuse service to or for the customer's residential use from any subsequent customer on account of nonpayment of charges by a previous customer. Additionally, the city may not recover any charges or penalties for the furnishing of water, sewage, or refuse service to or for the customer's residential use from the property owner due to the nonpayment of charges by a previous residential occupant customer. 
(Ord. 2197 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1958 § 7, 1997: Ord. 1752 § 16, 1990: Ord. 1723 § 1, 1988: Ord. 1655 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1317 § 16 (part), 1980: prior code § 31.11(a) (part)).  
15.32.165 - Deposits for utility service. 
A.  Each new account for water or other utility service and each utility service account that is delinquent shall make a deposit prior to service or future service being rendered by the city in an amount estimated by the finance officer or his designee to be equal to the charges for services likely to be supplied during a period of three (3) months or two (2) billing periods, whichever is greater. This estimate shall be based upon the size of the service, the nature of the use of the property and the experience with other similar uses in the city. Failure to make the deposit will warrant the discontinuation of service. 
B.  The decision of the city to require a new residential applicant to deposit a sum of money with the city prior to establishing an account and furnishing service shall be based solely on the credit worthiness of the applicant as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 1958 § 8, 1997: Ord. 1752 § 17, 1990).  
15.32.180 - Owner is liable. 
Owners of property will be billed and held responsible for all charges upon the city utility bill, including the charges for garbage and refuse collection, sewer service charges and water charges, provided to their property when the account is established in the owner's name or the owner occupies the premises to which the service is provided, although payments will be accepted from tenants. 
(Ord. 1958 § 10, 1997: Ord. 1317 § 16 (part), 1980: prior code § 31.11(b)).  
15.32.190 - Unpaid account constitutes lien against property. 
All unpaid accounts for utility services established in the owner's name or where the owner occupies the premises shall be a lien against the real property subject to enforcement against subsequent owners of the premises. 
(Ord. 1958 § 11, 1997: Ord. 1317 § 16 (part), 1980: prior code § 31.11(c)).  
15.32.200 - Interpretation of chapter. 
The director is empowered to make interpretations of this division whenever a question may arise as to the necessity for, type or manner, or method in which materials, meters, or backflow control devices are installed. Such interpretation shall be in writing, and a copy thereof shall be filed in the office of the director. 
(Ord. 2167 § 4 (part), 2004: prior code § 31.23).  
15.32.210 - Records kept by director. 
The director shall keep complete records of all permits issued and other official work performed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2167 § 4 (part), 2004: prior code § 31.24).  
15.32.220 - Appeals. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, if a residential customer has (1) initiated a complaint or (2) requests an investigation within five (5) days of receiving a disputed bill, or (3) has within thirteen (13) days of receiving a notice of termination of services made a request for extension of the payment period of a bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay in full during the normal period for payment, his complaint will be investigated and reviewed by the city manager, or his designee within ten (10) calendar days. 
B.  The review shall include consideration of whether the customer shall be permitted to amortize the unpaid balance of the account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twelve (12) months. No termination of service shall be effected for any account under review or for any customer who complies with a written amortization agreement, and keeps the account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within five (5) calendar days of the decision with the city clerk setting forth his objections. After hearing the objections by such person and giving due consideration thereto, the city council shall make its decision on the matters contained in the appeal, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1958 § 12, 1997: prior code § 31.25).  
15.32.230 - Utility customers third party notification. 
The city shall make available to its residential utility customers who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older, or who are dependent adults as defined in Section 15610.23 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a third party notification service, whereby the city will attempt to notify a person designated by the customer to receive notification when the customer's account is past due and subject to termination. The notification shall include information on what is required to prevent termination of service. The residential customer shall make a request for third party notification on a form provided by the city, and shall include the written consent of the designated third party. The third party notification does not obligate the third party to pay the overdue charges nor shall it prevent or delay termination of service. 
(Ord. 2167 § 5, 2004: Ord. 1958 § 13, 1997).  
Chapter 15.36 - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
15.36.010 - Water fund—Created. 
A fund is hereby created to be known as the water fund. All revenues derived by the city from the sale of water or otherwise from the operation of waterworks or the provision of water service, within or without the boundaries of the city, shall be credited to the water fund. 
(Prior code § 31.12 (part)).  
15.36.020 - Water fund—Purpose. 
The water fund is created for the purpose of providing a source of operational funds, capital outlay funds, debt service funds and incidental funds for the acquisition, construction, operation, maintenance, expansion and improvement of waterworks and a water distribution system in and near the city, including the retirement of revenue bonds issued for the acquisition thereof and the retirement of revenue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued for the improvement thereof. 
(Prior code § 31.12 (part)).  
15.36.030 - Water fund—Use restriction. 
Except as stated in this chapter, the water fund, once created, shall remain inviolate for the purpose for which it was created. No other use may be made of such fund, unless the use of such fund for some other purpose is authorized by the affirmative votes of a majority of the electors voting on such proposition at a general or special election at which such proposition is submitted. 
(Prior code § 31.12 (part)).  
15.36.040 - Water fund—Constituent revenues. 
"Water fund," as the term is used in this chapter, applies only to those funds collected for the use or extension of the water system and shall not be construed to affect revenues derived from plumbing permit fees. 
(Prior code § 31.13).  
15.36.045 - Formula—Base water service charge. 
Unless otherwise indicated, starting July 1, 2022, all base water service rates and charges in this chapter shall be adjusted annually by an amount equal to the percent change in the All Urban Consumers Index, U.S. City Average (USCA), as supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless or until such time new rates are set by the city council. The amount of such base water charge shall be computed as follows: 
		Current Year Consumer 		
Monthly Water Rate 	= 	Price Index (USCA)   
Ending Scheduled Year CPI (USCA) 	× 	Base 
Charge 
 
(Ord. 2269 § 4, 2006). 
(Ord. No. 2380, § 2, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 2382, § 1, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
15.36.050 - Residential, industrial, and commercial metered service—Schedule. 
The base rate for metered water service per one hundred (100) cubic feet or fraction thereof is as follows: 
Base Rate 	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
Charge per 
HCF 	$0.73 	$0.74 	$0.75 	$0.77 
 
A minimum base monthly fee will be charged as follows: 
Minimum Base Monthly Fee 
Meter Size 	Water use 
Included (hcf) 	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
¾-inch or smaller 	20 	$30.39 	$31.00 	$31.62 	$32.25 
1-inch meter 	20 	$30.39 	$31.00 	$31.62 	$32.25 
1-½ inch meter 	40 	$60.32 	$61.53 	$62.76 	$64.02 
2-inch meter 	64 	$96.24 	$98.16 	$100.12 	$102.12 
3-inch meter 	128 	$192.01 	$195.85 	$199.77 	$203.77 
4-inch meter 	200 	$299.76 	$305.76 	$311.88 	$318.12 
6-inch meter 	400 	$599.06 	$611.04 	$623.26 	$635.73 
8-inch meter 	640 	$958.22 	$977.38 	$996.93 	$1,016.87 
10-inch meter 	960 	$1,437.10 	$1,465.84 	$1,495.16 	$1,525.06 
12-inch meter 	1,350 	$2,020.74 	$2,061.15 	$2,102.37 	$2,144.42 
 
In addition, for each reduced pressure backflow preventer served from the same service connection, a base monthly fee for annual testing and inspection shall be paid as follows: 
Base Rate 	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
Backflow Device Charge 	$8.75 	$8.93 	$9.11 	$9.29 
 
* Starting July 1, 2022, the base water service charge shall be adjusted annually based on a formula set forth in Section 15.36.045. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on January 1, 2019, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on July first of each year. 
(Ord. 2269 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2095 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 18, 1990: Ord. 1723 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 1656 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1486 § 2, 1983: prior code § 31.6(a)). 
(Ord. No. 2397a, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
15.36.060 - Metered service—Additional provisions. 
A.  Customers whose requirements may overburden the water system, or may require unreasonable investment in additional facilities, or may interfere with the supply to the existing customers, will not be supplied water under the schedule in Section 15.36.050. In such case, a special agreement will be required, under such terms as the conditions warrant. 
B.  If a meter is found to be out of order, the monthly charge shall be determined by the finance officer, based upon previous water consumption. 
C.  If a customer has more than one meter, a separate minimum charge will be made for each meter, as well as the amount registered for each meter. Compound meters, however, shall be considered as one meter. 
(Ord. 1799 § 4, 1991: Ord. 1656 § 1 (part), 1987: prior code § 31.6(b), (c), (d), (e)).  
15.36.070 - Drought water rate schedule. 
The rate schedule includes a drought rate schedule, which will be implemented only during times of significant drought. This drought rate schedule will only go into effect in the event of a Level 3 drought declared by the city council. 
Monthly Charges 
Meter Size 	Included (hcf) 	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
¾-inch or smaller 	20 	$31.10 	$31.72 	$32.35 	$33.00 
1-inch meter 	20 	$31.10 	$31.72 	$32.35 	$33.00 
1-½ inch meter 	40 	$61.74 	$62.97 	$64.23 	$65.51 
2-inch meter 	64 	$98.51 	$100.48 	$102.49 	$104.54 
3-inch meter 	128 	$196.56 	$200.49 	$204.50 	$208.59 
4-inch meter 	200 	$306.86 	$313.00 	$319.26 	$325.65 
6-inch meter 	400 	$613.26 	$625.53 	$638.04 	$650.80 
8-inch meter 	640 	$980.94 	$1,000.56 	$1,020.57 	$1,040.98 
10-inch meter 	960 	$1,471.18 	$1,500.60 	$1,530.61 	$1,561.22 
12-inch meter 	1350 	$2,068.66 	$2,110.03 	$2,152.23 	$2,195.27 
Volumetric Charge 		$0.98/hcf 	$1.00/hcf 	$1.02/hcf 	$1.04/hcf 
 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2496, § 1, adopted November 5, 2018, in effect, repealed § 15.36.070 and enacted a new § 15.36.070 as set out herein. Former § 15.36.070 pertained to flat rate—residence and church and derived from the Prior Code; Ord. 1486 § 5, 1983; Ord. 1656 § 1 (part), 1987; Ord. 1723 § 2 (part), 1988; Ord. 1752 § 21, 1990; Ord. 1799 § 3, 1991; Ord. 2095 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 2269 § 5 (part), 2006 and Ord. No. 2397a, adopted November 6, 2012.  
15.36.080 - Outside the city boundaries surcharge. 
The City of Merced provides water service to retail customers located outside of the city's jurisdictional boundaries and is authorized to receive a reasonable return on investment and risk for its delivery of services to non-owner customers. The water service rates includes the following outside the city surcharge: 
Outside City Monthly Charge 
Meter Size 	January 2019 	July 2019 	July 2020 	July 2021 
¾-inch or smaller 	$5.51 	$5.62 	$5.73 	$5.84 
1-inch meter 	$5.51 	$5.62 	$5.73 	$5.84 
1-½ inch meter 	$11.03 	$11.25 	$11.48 	$11.71 
2-inch meter 	$17.64 	$17.99 	$18.35 	$18.72 
3-inch meter 	$35.28 	$35.99 	$36.71 	$37.44 
4-inch meter 	$55.13 	$56.23 	$57.35 	$58.50 
6-inch meter 	$110.25 	$112.46 	$114.71 	$117.00 
8-inch meter 	$176.40 	$179.93 	$183.53 	$187.20 
 
(Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
15.36.090 - Flat rate—Hydrant and fire protection service. 
A.  For public fire hydrant service on private property, the per hydrant base charge is as follows: 
	Flat Rate—Hydrants and Fire Protection Service 
	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
Public Fire Hydrant Service on Private Property 	$15.19 	$15.49 	$15.80 	$16.12 
 
B.  1.  For private fire protection service, the following base rates shall be applicable to all automatic fire sprinkler systems: 
	Flat Rate—Hydrants and Fire Protection Service 
Private Fire Monthly Charges 
Connection Size 	January 
2019 	July 
2019 	July 
2020 	July 
2021 
2-inch 	$1.36 	$1.39 	$1.42 	$1.45 
3-inch 	$3.96 	$4.04 	$4.12 	$4.20 
4-inch 	$8.44 	$8.61 	$8.78 	$8.96 
6-inch 	$24.53 	$25.02 	$25.52 	$26.03 
8-inch 	$52.28 	$53.33 	$54.40 	$55.49 
10-inch 	$94.01 	$95.89 	$97.81 	$99.77 
12-inch 	$151.85 	$154.89 	$157.99 	$161.15 
 
2.  The applicant shall pay the cost of installing the fire sprinkler service. 
3.  The above rates are applicable only to fire sprinklers systems to which no connections for other than fire protection purposes are allowed, which are regularly inspected by the underwriters having jurisdiction, are installed according to the specifications of the city and are maintained to the satisfaction of the city. 
4.  If a distribution main of adequate size to serve a fire sprinkler system in addition to all other normal service does not exist in the street or alley adjacent to the premises to be served hereunder, a service main from the nearest existing main of adequate capacity will be installed by the city at the expense of the applicant. 
5.  The city may install, at the applicant's expense, the standard detector type meter approved by the board of fire underwriters for protection against theft, leakage, or waste of water. 
6.  The city will be required to supply only such water at such pressure as may be available from time to time as a result of the normal operation of the system. Customers may take water under this schedule only in case of fire or for purpose of periodical tests and inspections. 
C.  For service from fire hydrants, the following rates shall apply to water service furnished from fire hydrants for municipal, construction, and temporary usages: 
1.  For the city (internal service charge), flushing sewers and street sweepers shall be charged on a monthly basis $84.19*. 
2.  At the option of the city, a meter may be installed, at the applicant's expense, for service under this schedule. 
3.  Applicants for service under this schedule must obtain specific authority from the city prior to taking any delivery of water and shall use only the hydrants designed by the city. 
* Starting July 1, 2022, the base water service charge shall be adjusted annually based on a formula set forth in Section 15.36.045. 
The new rates set forth in this section shall be implemented on January 1, 2019, with subsequent scheduled increases implemented on July first of each year. 
**Unless otherwise indicated, starting July 1, 2022, all base water service rates and charges in this chapter shall be adjusted annually by an amount equally to the percent change in the All Urban Consumer Index, U.S. Average (USCA), as supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, unless or until such time new rates are set by the city council. The amount of such base water charge shall be computed as follows: 
		Current Year Consumer 		
Monthly Water Rate 	= 	Price Index (USCA)   
Ending Scheduled Year CPI (USCA) 	× 	Base 
Charge 
 
Capital Facility Charge Schedule 
Meter Size 	Capital Facility 
Charge 
1-inch 	$6,037.00 
1.5-inch 	$12,074.00 
2-inch 	$19,318.00 
3-inch 	$38,637.00 
4-inch 	$60,370.00 
6-inch 	$120,740.00 
8-inch 	$193,184.00 
10-inch 	$289,776.00 
12-inch 	$407,498.00 
 
(Ord. 2269 § 5 (part), 2006: Ord. 2095 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1752 § 22, 1990: Ord. 1723 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 1656 § 1 (part), 1987: Ord. 1486 § 6, 1983: prior code § 31.8 (c-e)). 
(Ord. No. 2397a, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
15.36.100 - Connection—Permit required. 
Whenever any person wishes to connect any building or premises to the city water system, he shall first make application to the city engineer for a water connection permit. If a water connection permit is issued, the city engineer shall cause such connection to be made with the city water main and extended to the point of service as described in Section 15.32.030. 
(Ord. 2167 § 6, 2004: Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(a)).  
15.36.110 - Connection—For replacement and relocation. 
When an existing water service connection is replaced by one of a larger size, or where it is necessary to relocate a water service for the convenience of a customer, or where relocation is required because the customer's construction will interfere with the operation or maintenance of the service connection, the charge for such replacement or relocation shall be the cost for labor, equipment and materials as the same is determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(b)).  
15.36.120 - Connection—Tap and service size. 
The size of the tap and service connection installed by any customer shall be as the city engineer may designate. 
(Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(c)).  
15.36.130 - Connection—Subdivisions. 
A.  Five or More Lots. The city will not provide water distribution lines or connection services to newly developing subdivisions of five or more lots. The subdivider or developer will arrange to have the water services installed at his expense upon furnishing proof that the work will be done in its entirety by a duly licensed and competent person in accordance with city standards. 
B.  Less than Five Lots. The city may elect, at its option, to install water services to newly developing subdivisions of four lots or fewer. Such installations will be accomplished at the expense of the developer or applicant. 
(Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(d)).  
15.36.140 - Connection—Individual lots. 
Water service to individual lots will be provided by the city at the expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(e)).  
15.36.150 - Connection—Determination. 
The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, establish the costs to be charged for installation of water service by the city. If no such ordinance or resolution is in effect, or if the ordinance or resolution in effect does not cover a given size, class or type of water connection, the charge for water service installation performed by the city shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon actual costs, including, but not limited to, labor, materials, and equipment. In those instances where, in the judgment of the city engineer, the best interest of the city would be served, the applicant for water service connection may be required to deposit with the city the estimated cost of such installation, prior to performance of such installation. 
(Ord. 1174 § 2 (part), 1976: prior code § 31.4(f)).  
15.36.160 - Connection—Major water facilities. 
A.  Each property owner who applies for connection of any building or premises to the city water system, or who applies for replacement of an existing water service connection with one (1) of larger size, shall, prior to issuance of the permit for such connection or replacement, pay to the city a major water facilities charge, based upon the size of the water service required for such building or premises. Each quarter, the major water facilities charge shall be adjusted by an amount equal to the percent change in the All Urban Consumers Index, U.S. City Average (USCA), as supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
The amount of such major water facilities charge shall be computed as follows: 
Major Water Facility Charge 	= 	Current Quarter CPI 
   (USCA)    
184* 	x 	Basic Charge 
 
*Base year index (January 2004) 
Base Water Facilities Charge 
Meter Size 	Capital Facility 
Charge 
1-inch 	$6,037.00 
1.5-inch 	$12,074.00 
2-inch 	$19,318.00 
3-inch 	$38,637.00 
4-inch 	$60,370.00 
6-inch 	$120,740.00 
8-inch 	$193,184.00 
10-inch 	$289,776.00 
12-inch 	$407,498.00 
 
Fire Flow Charge: 
Fire flow charge will be calculated for any extra fire flow required above the standard (one-inch meter) fire flow requirement of one thousand five hundred (1,500) gpm for two (2) hours. The fire flow charge will be based on the incremental increase in the fire flow requirements above the "standard" (one-inch meter). The incremental fire flow charge will be calculated as follows: 
 
B.  In the case of replacement of an existing water service connection with one (1) of larger size, credit shall be given against the major water facilities charge for the amount which was paid for the smaller connection, or would have paid therefore if this section had been in effect at the time such smaller connection was applied for provided the service is actually removed from the system. 
C.  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the water fund. 
(Ord. 2167 § 7, 2004: Ord. 2152 § 6, 2004: Ord. 1745 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1486 § 7, 1983: Ord. 1206 § 1, 1978: Ord. 1196 § 1, 1977: prior code § 31.4.5). 
(Ord. of 2386, § 2, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 2397a, § 1, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 2496, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
Chapter 15.40 - WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS 
 
15.40.010 - Generally. 
Water mains may be extended by an applicant in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and meeting "Standards of Minimum Requirements for Safe Practices in the Production and Delivery of Water for Domestic Use" of the California section of the American Water Works Association (California Health and Safety Code, Section 4010.5). The construction work shall be performed by a properly licensed contractor. Prior to approval of the plans and specifications, a deposit for engineering and inspection costs equal to three percent of the estimated cost of installation shall be deposited with the city before the applicant begins such work. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual costs incurred by city in support of such work. Final inspection acceptance of the work shall be withheld until all moneys due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual cost incurred by city, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1223 § 7, 1978: prior code § 31.14).  
15.40.020 - City may perform work. 
If the proposed water main extension is to serve a developed or populated area, the city may elect to perform the extension work. 
(Prior code § 31.15).  
15.40.030 - Along full frontage—Exception. 
Where a water main is to be extended to serve a parcel of land, the water line shall extend the full frontage of the parcel, unless it is determined by the director that the line is not likely to be extended to serve any other property. 
(Prior code § 31.16).  
15.40.040 - Line diameter. 
The inside diameter of every water line to be installed shall be not less than six inches, except as may be determined by the director. 
(Prior code § 31.17).  
15.40.050 - Required bonds. 
In the event the applicant installs water line extension facilities, he shall furnish the city with a corporate surety bond written by a company approved by the city, in an amount equal to at least one-half of the estimate made by the applicant's engineer of the installation costs, to guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a like surety bond in an equal amount to guarantee claims of persons employed by the applicant and claims of persons who furnish materials, supplies and implements used by the applicant on such work. 
(Prior code § 31.18).  
15.40.060 - Ownership. 
When water lines are installed in public streets or easements pursuant to the regulations of the city and have been accepted by the director, they become the property of the city and a part of the water system of the city. 
(Prior code § 31.19).  
15.40.070 - Extension cost—Collection from subsequent applicant. 
A.  Whenever an applicant applies for a permit to connect property fronting a water line, the installation cost of which was paid by a previous applicant or the city, such applicant shall pay to the city, prior to the granting of such permit, an amount calculated as "A" in the following formula: 
A = F × C × 0.75, where: 
1.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on water line. 
2.  C equals the cost per foot of installing the water line. 
3.  0.75 equals the factor composed of 0.50 (for one of the two sides fronting on water line), 0.10 (for street intersection allowance, and 0.15 (for administration and collection of the fee). 
B.  When the director determines that only one side of a street can be benefited by a water line installed by a previous applicant or city, subsequent applicants for permits to connect thereto shall pay to the city, prior to the granting of such permits, an amount calculated as "A" in the following formula: 
A = F × C × 1.35, where: 
1.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on water line. 
2.  C equals the cost per foot of installing the water line. 
3.  1.35 equals a factor composed of 1.00 (the total cost of the installation), 0.20 (for street intersection allowance), and 0.15 (for administration and collection of the fee). 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B above, an applicant shall not owe an extension fee if the water line was installed by a previous applicant over ten years prior to the date of applicant's application, or if the water line was installed through an assessment district or solely with state or federal grant monies. 
D.  Amounts collected as provided in this section (excluding the 0.15 fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing such main until such applicant has received an amount calculated as "R" in the following formula: 
R = T (0.60 × C × F), where: 
1.  T equals costs of installing water line; 
2.  C equals cost per foot of installing water line; and 
3.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on water line. 
E.  When the city engineer has determined that only one side of a street can be benefited and has made collections on that basis, amounts so collected (excluding the 0.15 fee for administration and collection) shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the cost of installing such water line until such applicant has received an amount calculated as "R" in the following formula: 
R = T (1.20 × C × F), where: 
1.  T equals total cost of installing water line; 
2.  C equals cost per foot of installing water line; and 
3.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property fronting on water line. 
(Ord. 2042 § 3, 2000: Ord. 1666 § 3, 1987: prior code § 31.20).  
15.40.080 - Extension cost refunds—Time limitations. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under subsection B, for lines installed by applicants, the city shall not make refunds to the installing applicants after the tenth anniversary of the date the water line was accepted by the city. 
B.  For lines installed pursuant to the Contract for Water and Sewer Services Between the City of Merced and the Regents of the University of California, recorded as Document No. 2003-028581 in the official records of the county of Merced, the city shall not make refunds to the University of California, Merced after the thirtieth anniversary of the date of the contract, entered into as of March 17, 2003. 
(Ord. 2167 § 8, 2004: Ord. 1666 § 2, 1987: prior code § 31.21).  
15.40.090 - Cost refunds—Oversize. 
A water line more than eight inches in diameter is considered oversize, and the city shall pay directly to the installing applicant the difference in cost between the average cost of installing an eight-inch diameter water line and the actual cost of installing the oversize water line; provided, that the installing applicant does not need more than an eight-inch diameter water line to serve his own premises. The city shall determine the average cost of installing an eight-inch diameter water line, and its findings shall be conclusive. 
(Prior code § 31.22).  
15.40.110 - Payment. 
Applicants subject to the charge identified in Section 15.40.070 shall pay such charge prior to obtaining the permit to connect the property to the water line, except that if the line and/or laterals are installed by the city and the applicant is to connect a single-family residence to the water line and the residence is, or will be owner occupied by a median-income family as determined by the income limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor, then the applicant may elect to pay the charge in twenty (20) annual installments, plus interest thereon on the unpaid balance. Interest shall be calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year's average interest rate earned on city investments. Applicants who make the election shall execute a promissory note and deed of trust evidencing the debt to the city. 
(Ord. 1844 § 5, 1993: Ord. 1666 § 1, 1987). 
(Ord. No. 2462, § 1, 7-5-2016)  
Chapter 15.42 - WATER CONSERVATION REGULATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2479, § 1, adopted October 16, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 15.42, §§ 15.42.010—15.42.100. Former ch. 15.42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1842 of 1993; Ord. No. 2167 of 2004; Ord. No. 2427, adopted May 5, 2014; Ord. No. 2438, adopted November 17, 2014; Ord. No. 2442, adopted June 1, 2015; and Ord. No. 2443, adopted June 15, 2015. 
 
15.42.010 - General provisions. 
Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure compliance with all federal, state and local requirements relating to water conservation and drought mitigation for the protection of public health, safety and welfare by: 
A.  Reducing the per capita water consumption throughout the city during years of normal precipitation and during years of drought; 
B.  Protecting and conserving the city's supply of water during specified times of emergency and/or crisis; 
C.  Minimizing and/or eliminating the water waste through voluntary compliance or punitive action, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions are to be construed as set forth in this section: 
A.  "Condition of Groundwater Basin" shall mean the condition of the city groundwater subbasin as determined by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
B.  "Director" shall mean the director of public works or designated authorized representative. 
C.  "Over Draft" shall mean the condition in which more groundwater is being pumped out than is replenished into the aquifer. 
D.  "Water Waste" shall mean water running off down gutters, streets, or sidewalks leading to significant puddling and unreasonable elimination without a reasonable purpose, and as further defined in Section 15.42.050. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.030 - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons using water both in and outside the city served by the city water system, and regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.040 - Provisions superseded. 
Notwithstanding other code provisions inconsistent with this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede and prevail until repeal of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.050 - Water conservation levels and prohibitions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, at least one (1) of the following four (4) levels of water conservation restrictions shall apply at all times. The applicable level(s) of water conservation restrictions shall be based upon the condition of groundwater basin determination of the California State Department of Water Resources then in effect, or by resolution of the city council based upon a recommendation by the director. 
The current level of water conservation restrictions, and any change in said level of water conservation restrictions, shall be communicated to the public by reasonable means to ensure compliance, including, but not limited to, posting on the city's website, publishing in the local newspaper, and written notice to be included with the city's water bills. 
All persons using water supplied by the city shall comply with the following mandatory water conservation restrictions: 
A.  Level 1: This level is in effect at all times and establishes the baseline conservation measures for the city. 
1.  Water waste prohibition: The following uses of water are defined as 'water waste' and are hereby prohibited except as otherwise authorized: 
(a)  The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches or other outdoor surfaces except when necessary to protect the public health and safety. 
(b)  The washing of the exterior of dwellings, buildings, and structures, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Window washing; 
(2)  Washing in conjunction with the painting of the exterior of a dwelling, building or structure; 
(3)  Washing of a dwelling, building or structure may be allowed once every twelve (12) months. 
All exceptions listed above must comply with Sections 15.42.100(A) and (B) and the hose(s) must be fitted with an automatic shutoff device(s). 
(c)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other such structure making use of water from the city domestic water system, unless such fountain or structure uses a recirculating water system. 
(d)  The use of water, except for domestic use, where an adequate source of water is available whether such alternate source is reclaimed water, well water, spring water, or other source. 
(e)  The external washing of trailers, trailer houses, mobile homes, and home exteriors unless in conjunction with painting the exterior of such trailers, or homes with an automatic shut-off device. 
(f)  The washing of boats or motor vehicles with a hose that is not fitted with an automatic shut-off device. 
(g)  The indiscriminate running of water or washing with water not otherwise prohibited above which is wasteful and without reasonable purpose. 
(h)  The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes during and within forty-eight (48) hours after measurable rainfall. 
(i)  All car wash fundraisers must be held at an established car washing facility that collects and recycles the run-off water before it enters the City's sewer system. When held in a parking lot, car washes can cause pollutants such as soap, dirt, oil grease, and other automotive fluids to enter the storm drain system. 
(j)  The serving of drinking water other than upon request in eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased. 
(k)  To promote water conservation, operators of hotels and motels shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The hotel or motel shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom using clear and easily understood language. 
B.  Level 2: This level shall be in effect when the Department of Water Resources determines the condition of groundwater basin is in a state of critical over draft. During any time in which level 2 restrictions are imposed the following mandatory conservation restrictions shall apply in addition to all level 1 restrictions on water waste. 
1.  Three-day watering schedule: 
(a)  Any sprinkling, watering, or irrigation between the mid-day hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. is prohibited. 
(b)  Watering by persons with even-numbered addresses or on properties without an assigned address is only allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. 
(c)  Watering by persons with odd-numbered addresses is only allowed on Wednesdays, Fridays, and Sundays. 
(d)  Any watering by persons on Mondays with the exception of parks is prohibited. 
C.  Level 3: This level shall be in effect when the city council has declared a state of emergency due to drought. During any time in which level 3 restrictions are imposed the following mandatory conservation restrictions shall apply in addition to all non-conflicting level 1 and level 2 restrictions. 
1.  Two-day watering schedule: 
(a)  Any sprinkling, watering, or irrigation between the mid-day hours of nine a.m. and nine p.m. 
(b)  Watering by persons with even-numbered addresses or on properties without an assigned address is only allowed on Tuesdays and Saturdays. 
(c)  Watering by persons with odd-numbered addresses is only allowed on Wednesdays and Sundays. 
(d)  Parks, commercial nurseries, cemeteries, and schools are exempt from subsections C.l of this section but will be requested to curtail all nonessential water use. 
2.  The drought water rate schedule pursuant to Merced Municipal Code Section 15.36.070 will be implemented. 
D.  Level 4: This level shall be in effect during times of catastrophe, i.e., system failure, natural disaster and/or when city council deems it necessary. During any time in which level 4 restrictions are imposed the following mandatory conservation restrictions shall apply in addition to all non-conflicting level 1, level 2, and level 3 restrictions. 
1.  Restricted watering: 
(a)  All landscape irrigation shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Minimal essential watering of trees and shrubs with a bucket, handheld hose with a positive shutoff nozzle, or low volume non-spray irrigation shall be allowed. 
(c)  Maintenance of landscaping within active public parks and playing fields, schools, and cemeteries, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according to the schedule established in level 3. 
(d)  All leaks detected in landscape irrigation systems or water systems shall be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the City of Merced unless other arrangements are made with the director. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017; Ord. No. 2497, § 1, 11-5-2018)  
15.42.060 - Variances. 
The director may grant variances for uses of water otherwise prohibited if found and determined that to fail to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection to the applicant or the public. The director's determination concerning variances shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.070 - Disconnection for violation. 
Any person within the water service area who is in violation of the water prohibition provisions of this chapter shall be subject to immediate disconnection of water service at the violator's expense. Upon disconnection of water service, a written notice shall be served upon the violator which shall state the time, place, and general description of the violation or penalty, and the method by which reconnection can be made. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.080 - Reconnection conditions. 
Where water service has been disconnected as authorized in Section 15.42.070, the water service shall be immediately reconnected on condition that reconnection charge is paid in an amount fixed pursuant to the Merced Municipal Code Section 15.28.040. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.090 - Equipment tampering illegal. 
It is unlawful for any person to remove, replace, alter or damage any water meter or components thereof including, but not limited to, the meter face, its dials or other water usage indicators. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.100 - Prohibited uses—mandatory. 
The following uses, methods, types, or techniques of use of water are hereby determined and declared nonessential and are prohibited: 
A.  All Users. 
1.  Allowing broken or defective plumbing, or sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems which permit the escape or leakage of water. 
2.  The use of water in any manner which causes, allows, or permits the flooding of any premises, or any portion thereof. 
3.  All uses of non-potable water without the permission of the Department of Public Works, except for the use of rainwater collected for irrigation purposes. 
B.  New planting. Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in Section 15.42.050 of this Chapter, new lawns, ground cover, or bedding plants, may be watered every day between nine p.m. and nine a.m. provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  New lawns, ground cover, or bedding plants shall not include the reseeding of existing lawns or replacement of existing ground cover, or bedding plants, and shall be newly rototilled earth; 
2.  A permit must be obtained from the Department of Public Works; 
3.  The permit shall be limited to thirty (30) days' duration; 
4.  No permit shall be issued if the city is in level 4 water conservation level; and, 
5.  The director may impose such other restrictions as are deemed necessary to prevent the water waste. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
15.42.110 - Implementation. 
A.  The director is hereby authorized and empowered to delegate authority hereunder to such deputies, officers, employees, or agents of the city as they shall designate, and to establish such rules, regulations, and procedures, and to prepare or furnish such forms, warnings, et cetera as deemed necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Upon a determination by the director or that a person has consumed or used water in violation of any of the mandatory provisions of this chapter, or of any exception granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.42.050, the director may issue an order to cease and desist from such violation, and further order such person to comply forthwith with such provisions or exceptions, or otherwise to take appropriate remedial or preventive action. Any cease and desist order may be served personally, by mail, or by leaving a copy at or posted upon the person's residence or place of business. 
C.  If, after the issuance of such cease and desist order, such person continues to consume or use, or again consumes or uses, water in violation of any such provision or exception, the director may issue a notice of intention to impose a penalty. Said notice shall: 
1.  Identify the date, time, and circumstances of violation; 
2.  State the amount of penalty to be imposed; and, 
3.  Advise the person of the appeal rights as provided herein. The notice of intention to impose a penalty shall be served in the same manner as the cease and desist order. 
D.  After a notice of intention to impose a penalty is served, a penalty shall be assessed to the utility account of the person in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the second violation, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third and each of any subsequent violations. The penalty shall be subject to collection in the same manner as any unpaid water service charges. 
E.  A person shall have the right to appeal the imposition of the penalty assessed to the utility account. The person must request an appeal hearing in writing within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the notice of intention to impose a penalty. The request for hearing must be addressed to the city clerk and shall be deemed served only when received by the city. Failure to properly serve the request for hearing within the fifteen-day period shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the matter, and the penalty will be assessed against the person's account. 
F.  The appeal hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city council by resolution to preside at and render judgment from administrative hearings transacted under the authority of this chapter who shall make a factual finding on the existence of a violation. The person to be assessed shall be allowed to present such witnesses and evidence as he or she may desire and may be represented by an attorney or other representative of his or her choosing. The hearing officer shall give written notice by first class mail of the date and time of the appeal hearing at least ten (10) days prior thereto. Said hearing shall be held not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of the request for hearing unless continued by mutual consent of the person to be assessed and the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If a violation is found, the penalty shall be assessed to the utility account. 
(Ord. No. 2479, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
Chapter 15.44 - WATER SHORTAGE REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO NON-COMMERCIAL VEGETABLE GARDENS 
 
15.44.010 - Purpose. 
On January 19, 1993, the city council declared that a water shortage emergency exists and as a result has adopted mandatory water conservation regulations and restrictions. The city recognizes that noncommercial vegetable gardening has become a popular way to supplement food sources by its citizens. The city further recognizes that watering vegetables is critical during certain periods of development and that some vegetables require a consistent supply of water or moisture in order to grow. The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific watering restrictions that only apply to non-commercial vegetable gardens as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2438, § 1, 11-17-2014)  
15.44.020 - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons using water in and outside the city who are served by the city water system, regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the city. These regulations only apply to the watering or irrigating of non-commercial vegetable gardens as defined and provided for within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2438, § 1, 11-17-2014)  
15.44.030 - Definitions. 
"Vegetable" means any plant, other than marijuana, whose fruit, nuts, berries, grains, seeds, roots, tubers, bulbs, stems, leaves or flower parts are used for food. 
"Vegetable garden" means any "non-commercial" vegetable garden planted primarily for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers or herbs, other than marijuana, for human consumption. The term 'non-commercial' includes incidental direct selling of produce from such vegetable garden to the public. The defined area in which such plants are planted shall only be treated as a 'vegetable garden' for the purposes of this chapter if at least eighty (80) percent of the area designated as the vegetable garden is planted with fruits, vegetables, flowers or herbs, other than marijuana, which are cultivated for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2438, § 1, 11-17-2014)  
15.44.040 - Watering restrictions. 
Vegetable gardens may be watered every day except for Mondays. The watering of vegetable gardens every day except for Mondays is restricted to before eleven a.m. and after seven p.m. 
The watering of vegetable gardens shall not be done in a manner or to the extent that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto adjoining sidewalks, driveways, streets, gutters or ditches. 
(Ord. No. 2438, § 1, 11-17-2014)  
Division III. - Storm Water System  
Chapter 15.50 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL 
 
15.50.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Merced "Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Chapter," and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of City of Merced by controlling non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system from spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than storm water, and by reducing pollutants in urban storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  This chapter is intended to assist in the protection and enhancement of the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto, by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges into the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
A.  "Best management practices" (BMPs) mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and education practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices found in the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to prevent or reduce, 
to  the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States (33 C.P.R. Section 328.3). Best management practices also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw material storage. BMPs are required to be implemented and maintained in a manner that is consistent with the California Storm Water Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent guidelines. 
B.  "Construction activity" includes any public or private projects involving roadwork, paving, utility installation, structural construction (new or redevelopment), demolition, grading, excavation, or landscaping that has soil disturbance or has pollutants exposed to storm water. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of a facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect life, public health, and safety. 
C.  "Development" means any new construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single or multifamily planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or grading for future construction. 
D.  "Enforcement official" or "enforcement officer" means the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer, or his or her designee, or any employee or agent of city authorized by resolution of the city council to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
E.  "Hazardous waste" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, that because of its quality, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code Section 25117). 
F.  "Illegal discharge" means any discharge to the storm water conveyance system that violates this chapter; or is prohibited by federal; state, or local laws, or that degrades the quality of receiving waters in violation of any water quality standard, such as the Regional Board Basin Plan or the California Toxics Rule. 
G.  "Illicit connection" means any connection to a storm drain system for which there is no permit or that is used for an illegal discharge. This includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Any connections that convey sewage, process wastewater and wash water to the storm drain system; 
2.  All connections from indoor drains or sinks; and, 
3.  All unapproved, undocumented drains from loading docks and hazardous materials handling areas directly connected to the storm drain system. 
H.  "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to an MS4 that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The phrase 'Illicit Discharge' includes all non-storm discharges not composed entirely of storm water and discharges that are identified under the Discharge Prohibitions of the General Permit No. CAS000004. The phrase 'Illicit Discharge' does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES Permit (other than the NPDES Permit for discharges from the MS4). 
I.  "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System ("MS4")" means the regulatory definition of an MS4 (40 CFR 122.26(b)(8)) which is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads, with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains); 
(i)  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created to or pursuant to state law) including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges into waters of the United States; 
(ii)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; 
(iii)  Which is not a combined sewer; and, 
(iv)  Which is not part of a publically owned treatment works ("POTW") as defined in 40 C.F.R. 122.2. 
J.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit" means a permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board, pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code (commencing with Section 13370), to control discharges from point sources to waters of the United States. 
K.  "Noncommercial vehicle washing" means the washing and rinsing of passenger vehicles on private property in which no commercial enterprise or non-profit fundraising is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles. 
L.  "Non-storm water discharge" means any discharge to the storm water conveyance system that is not entirely composed of storm water. 
M.  "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise. 
N.  "Pollutant" means any contaminant that can degrade the quality of the receiving water in violation of any water quality standard, such as the Regional Board's Basin Plan or the California Toxics Rule, or NPDES permit. 
O.  "Public works director—water resources and reclamation" means the public works director—water resources and reclamation of the City of Merced. 
P.  "City engineer" means the city engineer of the City of Merced. 
Q.  "Storm water" means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events, which is free of pollutants. 
R.  "Storm water conveyance system" means those artificial and natural facilities within City of Merced, whether publicly or privately owned, by which storm water may be conveyed to a watercourse or waters of the United States, including without limitation, any roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, aqueducts, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, open fields, parking lots, impervious surfaces used for parking, and natural and artificial channels or storm drains. 
S.  "Storm water pollution prevention plan" ("SWPPP") means a document that describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business, commercial development, residential development, or construction project, to eliminate non-storm water discharges and/or to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable (as defined by the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board), pollutant discharges to the storm water conveyance system. 
T.  "Surface water" means all water naturally open to the atmosphere (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, streams, impoundments, seas, estuaries, etc.) and all springs, wells, or other collectors directly influenced by surface water. 
U.  "Watercourse" means any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation, rivers, creeks, runs, and rivulets. 
V.  Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined in this Section, shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in such act or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.040 - Conflicts with other laws. 
A.  In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law, regulation, order, or permit, the requirement that establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. 
B.  To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.050 - Discharge of non-storm water prohibited. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 15.50.060, it is unlawful, and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to make or cause to be made any non-storm water discharge. 
B.  Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by Section 15.50.060, if the regional water quality control board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any storm water permit, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to a surface water or storm water conveyance, or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge shall be prohibited from entering the storm water conveyance system. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.060 - Exceptions to discharge prohibition. 
As allowed by the city's Phase II MS4 NPDES permit, the following discharges to the storm water conveyance system are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 15.50.050: 
A.  Any discharge or connections regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; 
B.  Discharges from the following activities, which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any NPDES permit: 
1.  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, 
2.  Incidental runoff from landscaped areas defined as unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use, 
3.  Rising ground waters or springs, 
4.  Passive foundation and footing drains, 
5.  Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps, 
6.  Air conditioning condensation, 
7.  Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, 
8.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, 
9.  Flows from fire suppression activities, including fire hydrant flows, 
10.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25117, 
11.  Diverted stream flows, 
12.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration or pumped to separate storm sewers, 
13.  Any discharge that the enforcement official, the local health officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines, in writing, is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety, 
14.  Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster, which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official, 
15.  Individual residential car washing on private property in which no commercial enterprise or non-profit fundraising is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.070 - Reserved.  
15.50.080 - Discharge in violation of permit. 
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to cause, either individually or jointly, any discharge to the storm water conveyance system that results in or contributes to a violation of this chapter and the city's MS4 NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.090 - Illicit connections prohibited. 
Prohibition of illicit connections includes: 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm water conveyance system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
C.  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a storm water conveyance system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.100 - Concealment and abetting. 
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, and a violation of this chapter for any person to cause, permit, aide, abet, or conceal a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.110 - Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater that causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq.) and/or Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.), and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.120 - Reduction of pollutants in storm water. 
Any person engaged in activities that may result in pollutants entering the storm water conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of non-storm water discharge and/or pollutant discharge. 
A.  Business-Related Activities. 
1.  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. The Enforcement Official may require any business in the city engaged in activities that may result in pollutant discharges to develop and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan, which shall include an employee training program. An employee training program is a documented employee training program that may be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a storm water pollution prevention plan, for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of pollutants to the storm water conveyance system. Business activities that may require a storm water pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures carried out partially or wholly out of doors. 
2.  Coordination with hazardous materials release response plans and inventory. Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and inventory plan, under Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-storm water discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
3.  Coordination with Hazardous Waste Generator Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures. Any business requiring a Hazardous Waste Generator Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures, pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this Chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-storm water discharge and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  Construction. 
1.  Any person performing construction activities in the city shall prevent pollutants from entering the storm water conveyance system and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, or regulations, including, but not limited to, the current California NPDES General Permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activity (Construction General Permit) and the city storm water management and discharge control chapter. All construction projects, regardless of size, having soil disturbance or activities exposed to storm water must, at a minimum, implement BMPs for erosion and sediment controls, soil stabilization, dewatering, source controls, pollution prevention measures, and prohibited discharges. 
2.  Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Enforcement Official prior to, or as a condition of, a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, grading permit, or development or improvement plan, upon inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit or approval of the proposed improvement plans, for projects subject to the state's current Construction NPDES general permit, the waste discharger identification (WDID) number and the SWPPP shall be submitted to the city. For projects with less than an acre of soil disturbance or not subject to the construction general permit, an erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the city. 
C.  Development. The enforcement official may require controls as appropriate to minimize the long-term, post-construction activity discharge of storm water pollutants from new development(s) or modifications to existing development(s). Controls may include source control measures to prevent pollution of storm water, treatment controls designed to remove pollutants from storm water, low impact development measures, and/or hydromodification measures to offset the difference between the pre and post-construction peak flow runoff rates and volumes. Proponents of all applicable development and redevelopment projects will be required to meet the requirements and design standards specified in the current State of California Phase II MS4 NPDES Permit and as described in further detail in the city's Storm Water Design Standards Manual. 
At the earliest planning stages, project proponents shall assess and evaluate how site conditions, such as soils, vegetation, and flow paths will influence the placement of buildings and paved surfaces. The evaluation will be used to optimize the site layout to meet the goals of capturing and treating runoff. Each project proponent will submit a map of the project dividing the site into discrete drainage management areas to show in each how runoff will be managed using site design measures, source controls, treatment controls, and hydromodification measures as defined by the current MS4 permit. All site design measures, source controls, treatment controls, and hydromodification measures must be selected, sized, and situated in accordance with the guidance provided in the current MS4 permit and the city's Storm Water Design Standards Manual. Documentation of the site's post-construction storm water design measures must be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval prior to the commencement of the project. 
Project proponents must sign an operation and maintenance agreement in which they legally bind themselves to maintain the installed post-construction design measures in an effective and good operational condition until the property ownership is transferred. A written operation and maintenance plan for the proposed storm water design measures is required to be submitted to and approved by the city with the signed agreement. The agreement will be recorded with the deed by the city clerk making it transferrable to the new owner; or, when there are multiple property owners responsible for the maintenance of the control measures, the agreement will consist of a legally binding covenant between the city and the homeowners association or maintenance district. The owner or association responsible for the maintenance of the control measures may be required by the city to submit an annual self-certification that the storm water control measures are effective and are being maintained in accordance with the submitted and approved operation and maintenance plan. 
D.  Compliance with Industrial or Construction Activity Storm Water Permit. 
1.  Any person subject to the state's current Industrial NPDES General Permit for storm water discharge shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement official upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
2.  Any person subject to the state's current Construction NPDES General Permit for storm water discharge shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, and development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
E.  Compliance with Best Management Practices. Every person or entity, including the above-listed categories, undertaking any activity or use of premises that may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination or illicit or illegal discharges shall comply with best management practice (BMPs) consistent with the California Storm Water Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.130 - Containment and notification of spills. 
Any person owning or occupying a premises, who has knowledge of any release of pollutants or non-storm water discharge from or across those premises that might enter the storm water conveyance system, other than a release or discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the release of pollutants or non-storm water discharge, and shall notify the enforcement official at the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the release of pollutants or non-storm water discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.140 - Inspection authority. 
A.  Right of Entry. 
1.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition constituting a violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty by this chapter. 
2.  Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry, and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.  In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
B.  Sampling Authority. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illegal discharge, non-storm water discharge to the storm water conveyance system, or similar factors. 
C.  Sampling Methods. 
1.  During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples. 
D.  Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Authority. 
1.  The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the storm water conveyance system. 
2.  Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.150 - Enforcement authority. 
A.  General Enforcement Authority. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer may delegate any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer to other City of Merced personnel. 
B.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. 
1.  In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, and is thus deemed a nuisance. 
2.  Any such nuisance may be abated as provided herein or as otherwise provided by law. 
C.  Administrative Enforcement Powers. The enforcement official may also exercise any of the following supplemental enforcement powers as may be necessary or advisable in the enforcement official's judgment under the circumstances. 
1.  Notice and Order to Abate. 
a.  Whenever the enforcement official finds that a discharge has taken place, or is likely to take place, in violation of this chapter, or order issued hereunder, the enforcement official may serve a written notice and order to abate upon the property owner and the person responsible for the discharge, by personal service or by registered or certified mail, or by regular mail with a declaration of mailing executed by the employee depositing the same in the U.S. mail. 
b.  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, or shorter period as may be prescribed in the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the enforcement official. 
c.  Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person of liabilities for violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice and order to abate. 
d.  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice and order to abate shall constitute a violation of this chapter. If a person fails to comply with the notice and order to abate, the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer may perform, or cause to be performed, such work as shall be necessary to correct the violation. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the property owner, and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.50.175 hereof. 
2.  Contents of Notice. 
a.  The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property where the violation exists and the address of the person responsible for or committing the act that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
b.  A brief and concise description of the violation or use of the property or act that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
c.  A description of the activities, practices, and/or abatement methods to be performed to correct the violation. 
d.  The date by which the violation must be corrected, which shall be a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.160 - Administrative citation. 
A.  If the owner, or person responsible for the violation, fails to correct the violation within the time specified in the notice and order to abate, the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer or designee, may cause an administrative citation imposing an administrative citation or penalty to be issued to the person responsible and/or to the owner of the property in accordance with Chapters 1.10 and 1.11 of this Code respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.165 - Emergency orders and abatements. 
A.  The enforcement official may order the immediate abatement of any discharge from any source to the storm water conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition that presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit. Abatement and cleanup of spills, illicit or illegal discharges, or dumping to the storm drainage system must occur within seventy-two (72) hours of notification; or sooner for high risk spills or discharges. For areas of uncontrolled pollutant sources, abatement must be performed within thirty (30) days of notification. 
B.  In emergency situations, where the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate danger to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate the threat or danger, or permit violation. 
C.  The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the property owner, and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of Section l5.50.175. 
D.  The enforcement official may order the immediate cessation of any activities that cause an illicit or illegal discharge or cause or potentially cause uncontrolled pollutants to enter the storm water conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the activities present an imminent danger to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit. Activities may not resume until the enforcement official has verified that the threat to the environment and the city's MS4 has been abated. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.170 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person served with a notice and order to abate, administrative citation, administrative penalty, or required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting, and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement official, or disputing the costs of enforcement, or otherwise aggrieved by the decision of the authorized enforcement official, may file a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days following the effective date of the notice and order, administrative citation, or administrative penalty, the enforcement official's decision or the delivery of an invoice for enforcement costs. 
B.  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall transmit the same to the director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer who shall request a report and recommendation from the authorized enforcement official, and shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest practical date. The director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer shall serve as the hearing officer. The determination of the appropriate hearing officer shall be the one to who the enforcement official does not report. 
C.  Due notice of the hearing shall be provided to the person appealing. 
D.  At the hearing, the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer may hear additional evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement official's decision, or the costs of enforcement. 
E.  Any user, permittee, applicant, or other person aggrieved by the final determination of the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer may appeal such determination to the city council within ten (10) days of notification by the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer of his final determination. Written notification of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after notification of the final determination of the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer and shall set forth in detail the facts and reasons supporting the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of filing the notice of appeal. The appellant, the director, and such other persons as the city council may deem appropriate, shall be heard at the hearing on such appeal. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the final determination of the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer as the city council deems just and equitable, and in furtherance of the provisions, purposes and intent of this chapter. During the pendency of any such appeal, the final determination of the director of public works—water resources and reclamation or the city engineer shall remain in full force and effect. The city council's determination on the appeal shall be final. 
F.  If all parties involved (at a minimum, the discharger and the enforcement official) agree that clean-up activities cannot be completed within the original timeframe, a new timeframe may be set as long as notification is made by the city to the regional water quality control board in writing within five (5) business days of the determination that the timeframe requires revision. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.175 - Enforcement costs recovery. 
A.  The cost of enforcement, abatement, and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property, and the costs therefore shall be invoiced to the owner of the property. Costs recoverable herein include all costs of abatement incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, administrative costs, and any and all costs incurred in the physical abatement. 
B.  If the owner of the property fails to pay the costs upon demand by the city, the city council may order the costs to be specially assessed against the parcel. The special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as are provided for ordinary county taxes. The city council may also authorize a notice of abatement lien to be recorded. The costs shall become a lien on the property. The director of public works—water resources and reclamation and/or the city engineer is authorized to prepare and record a notice of release of lien against the legal title of the subject property(ies), if the city is fully compensated for the amount of the lien placed upon the property. 
1.  Mitigation. The enforcement official shall have authority to order the mitigation of circumstances that may result in or contribute to illegal discharges. 
2.  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish elements of a SWPPP, and to require any business to adopt and implement such a plan, as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
3.  Best Management Practices. The enforcement official may establish the requirements of best management practices for any premises. 
4.  Seasonal and Recurrent Nuisance. 
a.  If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the enforcement official shall so declare. 
b.  Thereafter, such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.15.180 - Civil action. 
A.  In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. 
B.  Moneys recovered under this section shall be paid to city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing storm water discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction; 
2.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey that led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this division; 
3.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation; 
4.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish, and aquatic life. 
5.  Referral of the discharger to the State Water Board. 
6.  Referral of the discharger to the district attorney for criminal prosecution of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.185 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to comply with any of its requirements. 
B.  If any violation is continued, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.190 - Remedies not exclusive. 
A.  Remedies under this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. 
B.  The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.200 - Disclaimer of liability. 
A.  The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on scientific, engineering, and other relevant technical considerations. 
B.  The standards set forth herein are minimum standards, and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. 
C.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.210 - City of Merced authority. 
The enforcement official is authorized to make any decision on behalf of the city required or called for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015)  
15.50.220 - Judicial review. 
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedures Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 are applicable to judicial review of city's decisions pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2439, § 1, 3-2-2015) 
Title 17 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 17.04 - BUILDING CODE  
Article I. - International Building Code 
 
17.04.010 - Building Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2, 2016 California Building Code, Volumes 1 & 2, including Scope and Administration Division II, Appendix F, 'Rodent Proofing,' Appendix H, 'Signs,' Appendix I 'Patio Covers' and Appendix J, 'Grading,' based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council and amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the building code for the City of Merced. The appendix chapters in California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2, 2016 California Building Codes Volumes 1 and 2 may be allowed to be used as an alternate construction method. They must be used in their entirety and are subject to the approval of the building official. 
(Ord. 2294 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2205 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2016 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1923 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1819 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1735 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1697 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1539 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1323 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 8.1 (part). 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 1, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 2, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 2, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.04.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the building code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. 1323 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 8.1 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 17, 10-19-2009)  
Article II. - Additional Regulations 
 
17.04.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2413, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 2013, repealed § 17.04.030, which pertained to move-in inspections—moving and demolition permits and derived from prior code, § 8.2; Ord. 1539, § 4, adopted 1984; and Ord. 2016, § 2, adopted 1999.  
17.04.040 - Public improvements defined. 
For the purposes of Sections 17.04.060 through 17.04.080, "full public improvements" includes, but is not limited to, street trees, utility services, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and driveway approaches. 
(Ord. 1305 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1275 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 8.9 (part)).  
17.04.050 - New construction defined. 
For purposes of Sections 17.04.060 through 17.04.080 'new construction' means: 
A.  All new buildings or structures; 
B.  All new property development including parking lots; 
C.  Any building or structure altered or expanded in excess of fifty (50) percent of the value of such building structure; 
D.  Any alteration or expansion with a permit value in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) with annual adjustment to the CPI annually on January 1; and, 
1.  The value in subsection D. above shall not include any of the following items: Accessibility upgrades, rooftop solar installations, installation of fire sprinklers and maintenance items including, but not limited to, reroofing, replacement of mechanical equipment and energy efficiency upgrades. 
E.  Any work on a building or structure to change the occupancy to a more hazardous use and which requires a building permit. 
F.  The department head for development services has the discretion to make adjustments to the valuation with due cause. 
(Ord. 1460 § 1, 1982: Ord. 1305 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1275 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 8.9 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2413, § 4, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 3, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.04.060 - Certificate of final inspection—Issuance requirements. 
Before a certificate of final inspection is issued on any new construction, full public improvements shall be installed and streets shall be dedicated in conformance with the standard specifications of the city and in accordance with the adopted general and specific plans and applicable plan lines of the city. 
(Ord. 1548 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1305 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1275 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 8.9 (part)).  
17.04.070 - Certificate of final inspection—Deferral of full improvements—Bond. 
Notwithstanding Section 17.04.060, construction of full public improvements may be deferred if, in the opinion of the city engineer, it would be impractical or infeasible to require full public improvements before final inspection. In those instances where full public improvements are to be deferred, the developer or owner shall supply a bond or other good and sufficient security or a letter of agreement to waive their right of protest and participate in an improvement district which in the opinion of the city attorney will adequately guarantee the future construction of the improvements. 
(Ord. 1305 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1275 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 8.9 (part)).  
17.04.080 - Certificate of final inspection—When public improvements may be limited. 
Notwithstanding Section 17.04.060, on parcels of five (5) acres or more, where new construction is planned on only a portion of the property, the public improvements may be limited, upon approval of the city engineer, to that portion of the property where the new construction is planned. 
(Ord. 1305 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1275 § 1 (part), 1979: prior code § 8.9 (part)).  
17.04.090 - Drainage of lots. 
Lots shall be provided with adequate drainage and shall be graded so as to drain surface water away from foundation walls not unto any adjacent lot(s) and toward approved point of disposal. 
(Ord. 2016 § 3, 1999: Ord. 1539 § 5, 1984: prior code § 8.10).  
17.04.100 - Permit issuance—Required license. 
No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any construction work on commercial or industrial projects regulated by this chapter, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked California contractor's license and city contractor's business license except when and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1697 § 4, 1987).  
17.04.110 - Residential fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the fees for residential construction of new buildings and structures identified in Sections 8.04.235, 15.16.030, 15.16.040, 15.16.050, 15.16.055, 15.16.070, 15.36.160. 15.40.070, 15.08.130, and 17.58.020 may, at the request of the owner, be postponed until the date of final inspection or the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first, subject to the following: 
1.  By exercising the postponement of payment, the applicant and owner agree and consent to any action by the city to deny approval of or to disconnect all utilities upon a breach of any condition by the applicant or owner. All fees are required to be paid prior to final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. 
2.  If the fees are not paid within one (1) year from issuance of the building permit, the owner agrees to pay the fee in effect at the time of final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 1857 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1837 § 1, 1992). 
(Ord. No. 2413, § 5, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 4, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.04.120 - Nonresidential fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the fees for nonresidential construction of new buildings and structures identified in Sections 15.16.030, 15.16.040, 15.16.050, 15.16.055, 15.16.070, 15.36.160. 15.40.070, 15.08.130, and 17.58.020 may, at the request of the owner, be postponed until the date of final inspection or the date a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first, subject to the following: 
1.  An additional two (2) percent of the above fees to cover administrative costs is paid at the time of application for a building permit. 
2.  A contract is executed al lowing the city to deny approval of or to disconnect utilities upon a breach by the owner. 
3.  If the fees are not paid within one (1) year from issuance of the building perm it, the owner agrees to pay the fee in effect at the time of final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 1857 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1845 § 1, 1993). 
(Ord. No. 2413, § 6, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 5, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.04.130 - Fee schedule. 
Fees for permits required under this title shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2294 § 7, 2007: Ord. 2100 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1987 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1923 § 2, 1996).  
Chapter 17.05 - RESIDENTIAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2450, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2015, amended Ch. 17.05 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.05, §§ 17.05.010—17.05.020, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2366, § 6, adopted Dec. 20, 2010; Ord. No. 2374, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2011; and Ord. No. 2413, § 7, adopted Nov. 18, 2013. 
 
ARTICLE I. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
17.05.010 - Residential Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2.5, '2016 California Residential Building Code' including Scope and Administration Division II, Appendix chapters, E, 'Manufactured Housing Used as Dwelling,' G, 'Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs,' H, 'Patio Covers,' and J, 'Existing Buildings and Structures,' based on the 2015 International Residential Building Code as published by the International Code Council and amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the Residential Building Code for the City of Merced. The appendix chapters in California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2.5, 2016 California Residential Building Code may be allowed to be used as an alternate construction method. They must be used in their entirety and are subject to the approval of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015; Ord. No. 2467, § 7, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.05.015 - Climatic and geographic design criteria. 
Table R301.2(1), three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the City of Merced's criteria for climatic and geographic design. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015)  
17.05.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the residential code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015)  
ARTICLE II. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.05.030 - Small residential solar systems—Defined. 
Unless otherwise specified, the following definitions shall be applicable small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
A.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal. 
B.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city. 
C.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
D.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
"Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in Civil Code Section 801.5(a)(1) and (2), as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015)  
17.05.040 - Small residential solar systems—Permitting process. 
The expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with the applicable requirements contained in Section 17.05.030 of the Merced Municipal Code and all of the following: 
A.  The building official shall develop a checklist of all requirements that small rooftop solar energy systems must comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
B.  The checklist and required permitting documentation shall be published on a publically accessible internet website. 
C.  As allowed by available resources, the building division shall allow for electronic submittal of a permit application and associated documentation and shall allow electronic signature in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The building division shall determine whether the application and supporting documentation are complete and meet all requirements of the California Building Standards Codes and then shall promptly approve or deny the application in writing. 
E.  If the application is approved, the building division shall issue all required permits. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015)  
17.05.050 - Small residential solar systems—Inspection process. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited, streamlined permitting process shall only require one (1) inspection, unless the installation is found to be out of compliance with the California Building Standards Codes or a separate fire safety inspection is required. 
(Ord. No. 2450, § 1, 11-16-2015)  
Chapter 17.06 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
17.06.010 - Existing Building Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 10, '2016 California Existing Building Code' based on the 2016 International Existing Building Code and as amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the existing building code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 7, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 8, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 9, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.06.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the existing building code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 7, 12-20-2010)  
Chapter 17.07 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
17.07.010 - Green Building Standards Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11, '2016 California Green Standards Code' as published by the International Code Council for the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the green building standards code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 8, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 9, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 10, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.07.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the green building standards code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 8, 12-20-2010)  
Chapter 17.08 - HOUSING CODE 
 
17.08.010 - Uniform Housing Code—Adoption. 
That certain document, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as "Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition," including the appendix thereto, prepared by the International Conference of Building Officials as amended by the State Building Standard Commission, is adopted by reference as the housing code of the city. 
(Ord. 2016 § 4, 1999: Ord. 1921 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1826 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1738 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1692 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1541 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1328 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 2 (part), 1978: prior code § 8.3 (part)).  
17.08.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the housing code or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1328 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 2 (part), 1978: prior code § 8.3 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 18, 10-19-2009)  
Chapter 17.09 - HISTORICAL CODE 
 
17.09.010 - Historical Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 8, '2016 California Historical Building Code' as published by the International Code Council for California Building Standards Commission is adopted by reference as the historical building code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 9, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 10, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 11, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.09.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision of the historical code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 9, 12-20-2010)  
Chapter 17.10 - ENERGY CODE 
 
17.10.010 - Energy Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 6, '2016 California Energy Code' as published by the International Code Council for California Building Standards Commission is adopted by reference as the energy code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 10, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 11, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 12, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.10.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision of the energy code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 10, 12-20-2010)  
Chapter 17.12 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 
 
17.12.010 - California Administrative Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part I, '2016 California Administrative Code' as published by the International Code Council for California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the administrative code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 2294 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2016 § 5, 1999: Ord. 1924 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1823 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1740 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1694 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1542 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 8.11 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 2, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 12, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 13, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.12.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provisions of the administrative code or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 8.11 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 19, 10-19-2009)  
Chapter 17.16 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE 
 
17.16.010 - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings—Adoption. 
That certain document in book form entitled "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition," three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as amended by the State Building Standard Commission, which provides for a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished, and providing procedures for processing appeals on decisions made by the chief building official, and providing for enforcement of orders, performance or work, repair or demolition, and for recovery of costs of repair or demolition, as hereinafter amended, deleted and added to, is hereby adopted by reference as the abatement of dangerous buildings code of the city. 
(Ord. 2151 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2016 § 6, 1999: Ord. 1922 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1822 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1739 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1693 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1538 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1327 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 8.12 (part)).  
17.16.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provisions of the abatement of dangerous buildings code or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1327 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 8.12 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 20, 10-19-2009)  
17.16.030 - Establishment of building and housing board of appeals. 
That Section 205 of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code be amended to read as follows: 
Section 205—BOARD OF APPEALS 
 A. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Chief Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of the Merced Municipal Code, including all Building Code, Housing Code, Administrative Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Fire Prevention Code, and Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code adopted by reference, there shall be and hereby is created a Building and Housing Board of Appeals, consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by motion of the city council adopted by at least five (5) affirmative votes, at least three (3) of whom shall be registered or licensed professionals in the trade of design, engineering, construction, or inspection of buildings, all of whom are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, engineering, or fire inspection. In addition thereto, the Chief Building Official shall be an ex officio member, shall act as Secretary to the Board, and shall have a voice but no vote or authority to make or second any motion upon any matter before the Board. 
 B. The members so appointed shall serve for a term of four (4) years. The members first appointed to the Board shall classify themselves by lot that by the following City Council election the term of two (2) of the members shall expire. Said lot shall provide for the grouping of terms to such an extent as is necessary in order that the term of at least two (2) members shall expire on each succeeding City Council election. 
 C. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its hearings and shall render all of its decisions and findings in writing. The Board shall hold office at least once a year, or as called for by a majority of the members of the Board, or as requested by the Chief Building Official. The decision of the Board shall be final and conclusive on all matters decided therein. Upon receipt of the Board's written decision, the Chief Building Official shall proceed in accordance therewith. 
 D. The Building and Housing Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of, nor shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of, the Merced Municipal Code including all Building Code, Housing Code, Administrative Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Fire Prevention Code, and Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 2151 § 2, 2004).  
17.16.040 - Recordation of notice and order. 
That Section 402 of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code be amended to read as follows: 
Section 402—RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER 
 A. Upon issuing a notice and order, the Chief Building Official, or a duly appointed deputy, may, in the exercise of his discretion, file in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Merced a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building is a substandard building, and that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the correction ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a substandard building on the property described in the certificate, or an appeal has been granted declaring the building to not be substandard, the Chief Building Official, or a duly appointed deputy, shall file a new certificate with the County Recorder certifying that the building has been demolished, that all required corrections have been made, or that an appeal has been granted so that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is appropriate. 
 B. When the Chief Building Official has not, in the exercise of his discretion, recorded a certificate under the provisions of subsection (A) of this Section, if compliance is not had within the time specified in the notice and order, and if no appeal has been properly and timely filed, or an appeal has been heard and denied, the Chief Building Official, or a duly appointed deputy, shall at that time file a certificate in the Office of the County Recorder of the County of Merced, in accordance with and subject to the provisions set forth in subsection (A) of this Section. 
(Ord. 2151 § 3, 2004).  
17.16.050 - Notice to vacate. 
That subsection 404.1 of Section 404 of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code be amended to read as follows: 
Section 404.1. Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 401.3, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, 
or to remove or deface this Notice. 
By Order of the Chief Building Official 
City of Merced 
(Ord. 2151 § 4, 2004).  
Chapter 17.20 - ELECTRICAL CODE  
Article I. - California Electrical Code 
 
17.20.010 - California Electrical Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 3, '2016 California Electrical Code' based on the 2014 National Electrical Code and amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the electrical code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 2294 § 3, 2007: Ord. 2205 § 2, 2005: Ord. 2098 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2016 § 7, 1999: Ord. 1925 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1824 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1696 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1537 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1436 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 1320 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1231 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 1149 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code 11.1 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 3, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 13, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 14, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.20.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provisions of the electrical code or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1436 § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 1320 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1231 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 1149 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 11.1 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 21, 10-19-2009)  
Article II. - Additional Regulations 
 
17.20.050 - Commercial and industrial structures. 
A one (1) line diagram of the service(s), subfeed(s), subpanel(s) and floor plan layout shall be required for any hotel, motel, commercial, industrial, or similar use. The diagram shall indicate volts, watts or amps, conduit and conductor sizes, feeder and disconnect sizes, over-current and short circuit protection, services, panels and circuits. 
(Ord. 2281 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2074 § 1, 2001: Ord. 2016 § 8, 1999: Ord. 1436 § 3, 1982: prior code § 11.6).  
17.20.060 - Permit issuance—Required licenses. 
No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any electrical work regulated by this chapter, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked California electrical contractor's license and city contractor's business license, except when and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1436 § 4, 1982).  
17.20.070 - Permit issuance—To single-family dwelling owner. 
Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do any electrical work regulated by this chapter in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and the event that any person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 1436 § 5, 1982).  
Chapter 17.24 - MECHANICAL CODE  
Article I. - California Mechanical Code 
 
17.24.010 - California Mechanical Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on fi le in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 4, '2016 California Mechanical Code' based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code and as amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the mechanical code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 2294 § 4, 2007: Ord. 2098 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2016 § 9, 1999: Ord. 1920 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1820 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1736 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1690 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1540 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1326 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 3 (part), 1978: prior code § 15A.1 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 4, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 14, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 15, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.24.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the mechanical code of the city or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1326 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1229 § 3 (part), 1978: prior code § 15A.1 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 22, 10-19-2009)  
Article II. - Additional Provisions 
 
17.24.030 - Permit issuance—Required licenses. 
No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any mechanical work on commercial or industrial projects regulated by this chapter, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked California mechanical contractor's license and city contractor's business license, except when and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1690 § 2, 1987).  
Chapter 17.28 - PLUMBING CODE  
Article I. - California Plumbing Code 
 
17.28.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and be cited as the "plumbing code of the city." 
(Prior code § 20.1).  
17.28.020 - California Plumbing Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 5, '2016 California Plumbing Code' based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code and as amended by the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the plumbing code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 2294 § 5, 2007: Ord. 2098 § 3, 2002; Ord. 2016 § 10, 1999: Ord. 1927 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1821 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1737 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1691 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1536 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1324 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1228 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 1148 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code 20.2 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 5, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 15, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 16, 12-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.28.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code, for any person to violate any provision of the plumbing code of the city or any code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 1324 § 1 (part), 1980: Ord. 1228 § 1 (part), 1978: Ord. 1148 § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 20.2 (part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 23, 10-19-2009)  
Article II. - Additional Provisions 
 
17.28.040 - Permit issuance—Required licenses. 
No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this chapter, except to a person holding a valid unexpired and unrevoked California plumbing contractor's license and city contractor's business license, except when and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1228 § 3 (part), 1978: Ord. 1148 § 3 (part), 1975: prior code § 20.2.11 (part)).  
17.28.050 - Permit issuance—To single-family dwelling owner. 
Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this chapter in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the event that any person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 1228 § 3 (part), 1978: Ord. 1148 § 3 (part), 1975: prior code § 20.2.11 (part)).  
17.28.060 - Public sewer connection—Required. 
The chief building official of the city is empowered and it is made his duty in all cases where there is a public sewer within six hundred (600) feet of any lands, buildings or premises to construct, or cause to be constructed, a sufficient sewer or drain pipe in the manner hereinafter required, which shall connect such lands, buildings or premises, and all vaults, cesspools, ditches, water closets, and waste pipe therein or thereon used as a receptacle or conductor of filth with such nearest accessible public sewer, unless such connection is impracticable by reason of the topography of the ground, which connecting sewer or drain pipe shall be of materials as specified in this chapter. Whenever the inspection superintendent requires that any lands, buildings or premises be connected with the public sewer in the manner provided in this chapter, the plumbing official shall serve upon the owner, agent or occupant thereof, a notice in writing specifying the time when such connection must be made, which time shall not be more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the day of service of such notice. If such owners, agents or occupants shall fail or neglect or refuse to connect such lands, buildings, or premises with the public sewer within the specified time in such notice, the inspection superintendent shall cause such connection to be made and the amount paid for the construction of the same shall be assessed against the premises so drained. The amount of such charge shall constitute a lien upon the premises so drained, and such assessment shall be collected and the lien enforced by suit in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1536 § 3, 1984: Ord. 1228 § 4, 1978: Ord. 1148 § 3, (part), 1975: prior code § 20.2.12).  
17.28.080 - Contractor's license not required for laying outside sewer pipe. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any person to hold a valid, unexpired and unrevoked California plumbing contractor's license in order to engage in the occupation of laying sewer pipe outside of buildings and inside of property lines. The city shall not refuse to grant a permit, inspection tags or approval of such work on the grounds that such person does not possess a plumbing contractor's license; provided, that such work is not in violation of any provision of state law concerning the licensing of contractors. 
(Prior code § 20.4).  
Chapter 17.32 - FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2468, § 1, adopted December 5, 2016, amended chapter 17.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 17.32, §§ 17.32.010—17.32.190, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2414, § 1, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2424, § 2, 4-21-2014. 
 
17.32.010 - Adoption. 
Subject to the particular additions, deletions, and amendments herein set forth in this chapter, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, the rules, regulations, provisions, and conditions set forth in that certain code entitled International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, including appendices Chapter 4, and Appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, E, F, G, H, I, J and L as published by the International Code Council, is adopted and shall be designated, known, and referred to as the International Fire Code, and the California Fire Code of and for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.020 - Violation penalties. 
109.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.030 - Issuance of citations by designated officers and employees. 
Officers or employees of the City of Merced Fire Department, as designated by the fire chief, who have the discretionary duty to enforce a statute or ordinance may, pursuant to Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California and subject to the provisions hereof, arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in the officer's or employee's presence which he or she has the discretionary duty to enforce, and to issue a notice to appear and release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5C of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.040 - Chapter 1, scope and administration. 
Chapter 1 as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
A.  Section 101.1, Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Merced, herein referred to as 'this Code.' 
B.  Section 105.2, Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: Section 105.2 Inspection authorized. Before a new operational permit is approved, the Fire Code Official shall inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces, or areas to be used to determine compliance with this Code or any operational constraints required. In instances where laws, rules, regulations, provisions, or conditions are enforceable by departments or organizations other than the Fire Department, joint approval shall be obtained from the departments or organizations. 
C.  Information on Construction Documents Detail Page. 
Section 105.4.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
For all Group A, E, F-1, H, I, L, R-1, R-2, R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4, and all other buildings 5,000 square feet or greater in area a 'detail' page shall be submitted. The 'detail' page shall be an 8 ½" x 11" document and an electronically submitted "detail" page for emergency responder data files shall be submitted to and approved by fire department prior to permit issuance. Detail page shall include site plan showing: 
a.  Property, site layout 
b.  Roads, fire access lanes, and building access points 
c.  Premises Identification (address, building identification, suites, room numbers, etc.) 
d.  Hydrants and FDC locations 
e.  Knox product locations 
f.  Fire alarm control locations 
g.  Fire riser locations 
h.  Hose valve locations 
i.  'Main Electrical' and 'Main Gas Disconnect' locations 
j.  Hazardous materials storage 
Exception: Occupancy Group R-3 One and Two Family Dwellings. 
D.  LP-gas 
Section 105.6.28 , item number 1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to include the following: Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless the fire code official has issued a permit for installation for that location. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  Containers not exceeding five (5) gallon water capacity, used for "barbecue" cooking, when used and stored outside of buildings. 
2.  Approved containers not exceeding sixteen and four-tenths (16.4) ounces when displayed for sale in mercantile occupancies. 
3.  Factory installed containers for recreational vehicles not exceeding ten (10) gallon water capacity. 
4.  Factory installed tanks that are permanently attached to recreational vehicles. 
E.  LP-gas 
Section 105.7.12 the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to include the following: 
Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless the fire code official has issued a permit for installation for that location. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  Containers not exceeding five (5) gallon water capacity, used for "barbecue" cooking, when used and stored outside of buildings. 
2.  Approved containers not exceeding sixteen and four-tenths (16.4) ounces when displayed for sale in mercantile occupancies. 
3.  Factory installed containers for recreational vehicles not exceeding ten (10) gallon water capacity. 
4.  Factory installed tanks that are permanently attached to recreational vehicles. 
F.  Section 108.1, Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 108.1 Board of Appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall be the City of Merced Building and Housing Board of Appeals. The Fire Code Official shall be an ex officio member of said Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Fire Code Official. 
G.  Section 109.4, Chapter 1 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.050 - Chapter 3, general requirements. 
Requirements for outdoor storage of pallets. 
Section 315.7 is hereby added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
Requirements for Outdoor Storage of Pallets. 
1.  Open yards required by the California Building Code shall be maintained around structures. CFC 2803.1 (Yard — An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by the California Building Code, on the lot on which a building is situated.) CFC Definitions Section 202. 
2.  Piles shall be a minimum of 25 feet from a structure. 
3.  Piles shall not be located within 10 feet of a property line. 
4.  The maximum dimensions of a pile shall not exceed 20 feet x 70 feet. 
5.  Pile height shall not exceed 20 feet. 
6.  There shall be 10 feet of aisle ways between piles. 
7.  Piles shall be placed in grids not to exceed 140 feet by 150 feet. 
8.  Each grid shall be separated by an approved fire apparatus access road. 
9.  Permanent pallet storage areas shall be surrounded with an approved fence. Fences shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
10.  Adequate water supply as required by the fire department shall be provided for fire suppression needs. 
11.  Note: Pallets shall not obstruct fire apparatus access roads or fire apparatus access to water supplies (fire hydrants, etc.) 
 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.060 - Chapter 4, emergency planning and preparedness. 
Emergency planning and preparedness 
Emergency preparedness requirements 
Fire safety and evacuation plans. 
Section 403.11.5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added: Group S Occupancies greater than 100,000 square feet. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for buildings greater than 100,000 square feet in aggregate floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.070 - Chapter 5, fire service features. 
Chapter 5 as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
A.  Section 503.2, Chapter 5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: Fire apparatus access roads shall be installed and arranged in accordance with Sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.8. 503.2(a) Roads. Required access roads from every building to a public street shall be all-weather hard-surfaced (suitable for use by fire apparatus) right-of-way not less than 22 feet in width as measured from the face of the curb. Such right-of-way shall be unobstructed and maintained only as access to the public street. 
B.  Section 503.2.1, Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 22 feet as measured from the face of the curb, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches. 
C.  Where new or remodeled building(s) or premises are provided with automatic security gates, the following methods of entry shall be required: Key switch. The key switch shall be keyed the same as the City of Merced approved master key (Knox); and, Radio Operated controller (Click2Enter or other approved equipment). 
When Fire Department access is blocked due to a non-automatic gate, any locking devices used on such gate shall be operable with an approved key box access key. 
D.  Section 507.5.4, Chapter 5 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. The Fire Department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
Where fire hydrants and/or Fire Department connections are installed in inconspicuous locations, the Fire Code Official may require hydrant locations to be identified by the installation of blue reflective markers and the location of the Fire Department connections to be identified by green reflective markers. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.080 - Chapter 9, fire protection systems. 
Chapter 9 as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Fire Protection Systems 
Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
A.  Section 903.1.2, Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is added to read as follows: 
903.1.2. Determination of Building Area. For purposes of determining building area for automatic fire sprinkler system requirements, the following criteria shall be used: 
1.  Area or occupancy separation walls will not be allowed to reduce the overall square footage in an area of a building in order to circumvent the requirements for an automatic sprinkler system. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Party walls located on a lot-line between two buildings in accordance with California Building Code, Section 706. 
b.  Firewalls without openings installed in accordance with California Building Code, Section 706 and with specific fire wall requirements in Section 903.2 of this Code based on occupancy. 
2.  Determination of building area for combustible construction shall be measured to the building perimeter roof drip line, including architectural features, such as, but not limited to, mansards, towers, porte cocheres, etc., with the exception of 44" maximum depth roof eaves. For non-combustible construction, building area shall include all perimeter roof areas exceeding 44" that are required by NFPA 13 to have fire sprinkler protection under the projection. The area of open shafts or courts need not be included in calculating floor area. When multiple buildings are considered as one building per California Building Code, the combined floor areas shall be used to determine the automatic fire sprinkler requirements. 
B.  Section 903.1.3, Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is added to read as follows: 903.1.3. Applicability to Existing Buildings. For existing buildings an automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed in those circumstances described in this subsection. Installation requirements shall be as set forth for new buildings by Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19.1.2. 
1.  Building Additions. When additions exceed 25% of the existing building square footage and the total proposed building area is 5,000 square feet or greater, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the building. The 25% threshold shall be cumulative over the life of the building. 
Exception: Building additions of non-combustible construction and non-combustible uses such as covered pedestrian walkways. 
2.  Change of Occupancy. In existing buildings 5,000 square feet or greater, when a Change of Occupancy, in accordance with the California Building Code is made and the proposed new occupancy is more hazardous to life and safety than the existing occupancy an automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed throughout the building. 
Exceptions: 
a.  If the area in which the Change of Occupancy occurs is less than 25% of the actual floor area of the existing building, the area of the new occupancy is 5,000 square feet or less, and fire sprinklers are not required based on occupancy by Section 903, and automatic fire sprinkler system is not required for any portion of the building. The 25% limit is cumulative over the life of the building. 
b.  If the area in which the Change of Occupancy occurs exceeds 25%, but is less than 50% of the actual floor area of the existing building, only that portion of the building changing occupancy is required to have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed. An approved fire separation shall be required between portions of the building with fire sprinklers and those portions without. 
c.  If individual or cumulative Change of Occupancies exceeds 50% of the overall floor area of the existing building, then the entire building shall have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed throughout. 
3.  Fire Damage Repairs. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed as a condition of fire damage repair building permit as follows: 
a.  When a fire occurs in any existing occupancy, and the building permit repair costs exceed 50% of the current building valuation, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the building as required for a new building in Section 903. 
b.  Fire damage repair costs and building valuation shall be based on the ICC Building Valuation Tables in use by the City's Development Services Department at the time of the issuance of the fire damage repair permit. 
C.  Fire Protection Systems 
Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
New Construction. 
Section 903.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
An approved automatic fire sprinkler system is required in all new buildings and structures constructed on or after the effective date of this ordinance, notwithstanding the use and occupancy thereof, when the total floor area under one roof is five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. 
EXCEPTION: 
If the provisions of the 2016 California Fire Code Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 are more restrictive, then the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
D.  Section 903.2.10, Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the California Building Code as follows: 
1.  Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage is 5,000 square feet or greater; or 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.090 - Chapter 56, explosives and fireworks. 
Section 5608.2 of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5608.2 Fireworks Prohibited Except as authorized by Chapter 8.22 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
The use and sale of 'safe and sane' fireworks for public display shall be permitted within the city, in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 8.22 of the Merced Municipal Code. It is unlawful for any person to possess, store, to offer for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks except as provided in Chapter 8.22 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.100 - Chapter 57, flammable and combustible liquids. 
A.  Restricted Locations of Flammable and Combustible Liquids in Tanks. 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Storage of Class I and II Liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited, with the exception of protected tanks designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the 2016 California Fire Code. The provisions of this section shall not apply to facilities for the production, generation, or transmission of electric energy that provide power to entities furnishing retail electrical services to facilities within the City of Merced. 
Exception: Listed generators for emergency/standby power. 
B.  Maintenance of Protected Aboveground Tanks. Section 5704.2.9.8 is hereby added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
Protected aboveground tanks and connected piping shall be maintained in a safe operating condition. Protected aboveground tanks shall be maintained in accordance with their listings. 
Damage to protected aboveground tanks shall be repaired using material having equal or greater strength and fire resistance or the protected aboveground tank shall be replaced or taken out of service. 
C.  Manufacture of Biodiesel at Residential Occupancies. 
Section 5704.3.4.2 number 7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding subsection 7.1 to read as follows: 
The manufacture and storage of biodiesel is prohibited in Residential Occupancies and in U Occupancies associated with Residential Occupancies. 
D.  Manufacture of Ethanol at Residential Occupancies. 
Section 5704.3.4.2 number 7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended by adding subsection 7.2 to read as follows: 
The manufacture and storage of ethanol is prohibited in Residential Occupancies and in U Occupancies associated with Residential Occupancies. 
E.  Flammable and Combustible Liquids 
Dispensing, Use, Mixing, and Handling 
Operating Heating, Lighting, and Cooking Appliances Prohibited. 
Section 5705.3.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to include the following: 
Class II and III Liquids 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.110 - Appendix 4, special detailed requirements based on use and occupancy. 
Appendix 4 as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.120 - Appendix B, fire-flow requirements for buildings. 
Appendix B as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.130 - Appendix BB, fire-flow requirements for buildings. 
Appendix BB as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.140 - Appendix C, fire hydrant locations and distribution. 
Appendix C as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.150 - Appendix CC, fire hydrant locations and distribution. 
Appendix CC as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.160 - Appendix D, fire apparatus access roads. 
Appendix D as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
A.  Table D103.4, Appendix D of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
Table D103.4 - Requirements for dead-end fire apparatus access roads 
LENGTH (feet) 	WIDTH (feet) 	TURNAROUNDS REQUIRED 
0—150 	22 	None required 
151—500 	22 	120-foot Hammerhead, 60-foot "Y" or 96-foot-diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with Figure D103.1 
501—750 	26 	120-foot Hammerhead, 60-foot "Y" or 96-foot-diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with Figure D103.1 
Over 750 	Special approval required 
 
B.  Section D103.5, Appendix D of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The minimum gate width shall be 22 feet (6096 mm). 
2.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
3.  Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one person. 
4.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
5.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. 
6.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools or when a KNOX padlock or key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location. 
7.  Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the Fire Code Official. 
8.  Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. 
9.  Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
C.  Figure D103.1, Appendix D of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
Figure D103.1 - Dead-end fire apparatus access road turnaround. 
1.  60-Foot "Y"- Minimum road width 22'; Typical radius 33' inside and 47' outside. 
2.  Minimum clearance around a fire hydrant—Minimum road width 22'. 
3.  120-Foot Hammerhead—Minimum road width 22'; Typical radius 33' inside and 47' outside. 
4.  Acceptable Alternative to 120-Foot Hammerhead—Minimum road width 22'; Typical radius 33' inside and 47' outside. 
D.  Section D103.6.1, Appendix D of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
D103.6.1 Roads 22 to 26 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads 22 to 26 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane. 
Refer to Fire Prevention Policy FPG-01 for examples of fire apparatus access roads. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.170 - Appendix E, hazard categories. 
Appendix E as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.180 - Appendix F, hazard ranking. 
Appendix F as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.190 - Appendix G, cryogenic fluids-weight and volume equivalents. 
Appendix G as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.200 - Appendix H, hazardous materials management plans and hazardous materials inventory statements. 
Appendix H as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.210 - Appendix I, fire protection systems-noncompliant conditions. 
Appendix I as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
17.32.220 - Appendix L, requirements for fire fighter air replenishment systems. 
Appendix L as contained in the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2468, § 1, 12-5-2016)  
Chapter 17.34 - REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE 
 
17.34.010 - Referenced Standards Code—Adoption. 
Those certain documents, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 12, '2016 California Referenced Standards Code' as published by the International Code Council for the California Building Standards Commission are adopted by reference as the referenced standards code for the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 11, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2413, § 16, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2467, § 17, 1-5-2016, eff. 1-4-2017)  
17.34.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this Code, for any person to violate any provision of the referenced standards code or any code updated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2366, § 11, 12-20-2010)  
Chapter 17.36 - SIGNS  
Article I. - Definitions 
 
17.36.010 - Generally. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and the derivatives of any thereof, shall have the meanings that follow. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in any particular tense, number, or gender include any other tense, number, and gender. The word "may" is always directory and discretionary and not mandatory; the word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory or discretionary. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1 (part)).  
17.36.013 - Amenity sign. 
"Amenity sign" means a wall-mounted or freestanding sign that promotes features and/or services of an apartment. 
(Ord. 2008 § 2, 1999).  
17.36.015 - Apartment or condominium complex. 
"Apartment" or "condominium complex" means a residential complex which contains more than four (4) dwelling units. 
(Ord. 2008 § 3, 1999).  
17.36.020 - Barber pole. 
"Barber pole" means a stationary cylindrical pole of red, white, and blue spiral stripe design and which identifies a barber shop. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(1)).  
17.36.030 - Billboard. 
"Billboard" means any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity, which is not sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(2)).  
17.36.035 - Blade sign. 
"Blade sign" means a pedestrian-oriented, noninternally illuminated double-faced sign, comprised of one (1) individual panel, projecting from the building wall on which it is mounted. A blade sign cannot exceed a total of five (5) square feet of signage per side, has at least six (6) inches between the building wall and the edge of the sign nearest the building, and cannot project more than forty-two (42) inches from the building wall on which it is mounted. 
(Ord. 2230 § 1, 2006).  
17.36.040 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(3)).  
17.36.050 - Building floor area. 
"Building floor area" means the sum of the areas computed from the outside dimensions of a building, including corridors and other design features, for each floor contained therein including mezzanine floors. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(4)).  
17.36.060 - Building frontage. 
"Building frontage" means the length of a side of a building which faces directly upon a public street. For purposes of this chapter, "faces directly upon a public street" means that the area formed by extending lines to the street from the two (2) building sides which intersect the subject side of the building will not intersect at any portion of an existing structure or a proposed structure shown on an approved site utilization plan or other specific or master plan or will not intersect any portion of another lot. 
If a building is curved or triangular, the building frontage shall be the shortest distance between the points on the outside extremity of the building elevation measured parallel to the public street upon which such building fronts. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(5)).  
17.36.070 - City. 
"City" means the City of Merced, California, including all of the territory and jurisdiction thereof as presently constituted, and any and all of the same which shall later come into existence by any manner or means whatsoever. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1 (6)).  
17.36.075 - Colors, trademark. 
"Trademark colors" are specific colors, commonly arranged in a certain pattern, that are utilized by a business to establish identity, recognition and association between such color and such business. For example, McDonald's is identified by yellow arches on a red background. 
(Ord. 2092 § 1, 2002).  
17.36.080 - Corner triangle. 
"Corner triangle" means the triangular area created by a line connecting points along the front and side lot lines which points are established forty (40) feet in distance from the intersection of the extension of such front and side lot lines within the street right-of-way, and by a line connecting points along the front lot line and driveway apron, which points are established ten feet in distance from the intersection of the extension of such front lot line and driveway apron within the perpendicular to the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1808 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(7)).  
17.36.090 - Council. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(8)).  
17.36.095 - Decorative wall. 
"Decorative wall" means a wall which: 
A.  Serves as a component of the site or landscape design; and 
B.  Functions as a connection between buildings, to screen parking lots or mechanical equipment, as a retaining wall, and/or an architectural or landscape feature. 
(Ord. 1808 § 2, 1992).  
17.36.097 - Decorative wall sign. 
"Decorative wall sign" means a sign which contains individual letters, except for logos, on a decorative wall. 
(Ord. 1808 § 3, 1992).  
17.36.100 - Development sign. 
"Development sign" means any sign erected during construction and development of industrial or residential subdivisions, office complexes, apartment complexes or shopping centers. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(9)).  
17.36.110 - Direct illumination. 
"Direct illumination" means a light source in which the light rays go through the face of the sign. The term includes illuminated tubing and strings of lights. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(10)).  
17.36.120 - Director of planning. 
"Director of planning" means the employee of the city within the planning department charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(11)).  
17.36.130 - Directory sign. 
"Directory sign" means any sign which includes only the names and locations of businesses, firms, offices, residential complexes or establishments but does not otherwise promote or advertise the business or residential complex. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(12)).  
17.36.140 - Display surface. 
"Display surface" means the area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the message. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(13)).  
17.36.150 - Display surface area. 
"Display surface area" means and includes the sum of the separate display surfaces of a sign, including the reverse side of any sign when the reverse side actually may be viewed from any city street, expressway, freeway, or other public right-of-way. The area of each display surface shall be computed by calculating the area of the circle, square, triangle, rectangle, or combination of such geometric designs necessary to enclose such surface. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(14)).  
17.36.160 - Erect. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1(part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(15)).  
17.36.170 - Face. 
"Face" (of a building) means the outer surface of the walls of a building which directly front upon a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(16)).  
17.36.180 - Fascia. 
"Fascia" means the horizontal facing on a roof located beyond the exterior walls of a building. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(17)).  
17.36.190 - Flag. 
"Flag" means any sign, banner, pennant, or valance designed to be flown on a flagpole. The term does not include the U.S. Flag or other governmental flag. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1(part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(18)).  
17.36.200 - Flashing sign. 
"Flashing sign" means any sign which has any flashing device, intermittent illumination, revolving or rotating lighting device, or constant lighting device in which the brilliance thereof is caused to vary by mechanical or other means. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(19)).  
17.36.205 - Freestanding building. 
A "freestanding building" means a building with only one (1) tenant. 
(Ord. 1808 § 4, 1992).  
17.36.210 - Freestanding sign. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces in the ground. 
(Ord. 2008 § 4, 1999: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(20)).  
17.36.220 - Freeway. 
"Freeway" means a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to which such owners have only a limited or restricted right or easement of access, and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of California, or as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1(part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(21)).  
17.36.230 - Front/Frontage. 
"Front/frontage" means that portion of a lot or building which faces a street. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(22)).  
17.36.240 - Instructional sign. 
"Instructional sign" means any sign which does not contain advertising or promotional matter but relates solely to traffic or pedestrian control, warnings or hours of operation. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(23)).  
17.36.250 - Landscaped freeway. 
"Landscaped freeway" means a section or sections of a freeway which is now, or hereafter maybe, improved by the planting on at least one side of the freeway right-of-way of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental vegetation which shall require reasonable maintenance; provided, however, that planting for the purposes of soil erosion control, traffic safety requirements, reduction of fire hazards or traffic noise abatement, shall not change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1(part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(24)).  
17.36.255 - Logo. 
"Logo" means a distinctive symbol or design consistently used by a business and by which the specific business intends to be known through association, resemblance, or convention. 
(Ord. 1790 § 1, 1991).  
17.36.260 - Marquee. 
"Marquee" means any permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property and shall include but not be limited to a canopy, walkway covering or similar covering structure. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code 32.1(25)).  
17.36.265 - Monument sign. 
A "monument sign" means a sign which contains individual letters, except for logos, on a monument structure. 
(Ord. 1808 § 5, 1992).  
17.36.267 - Monument structure. 
"Monument structure" means a structure detached from any building and supported by a solid foundation/base which is secured to the ground and consists of color and materials consistent with the building, office, complex, shopping center, or apartment/condominium complex. 
(Ord. 2008 § 5 1999: Ord. 1808 § 6, 1992).  
17.36.270 - Moving sign. 
"Moving sign" means any sign which has any visible moving parts, visible revolving or rotating parts, or visible mechanical movement of any description. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(26)).  
17.36.280 - Nameplate. 
"Nameplate" means a sign less than one square foot in area containing the name of an occupant of a building, with of without ail internal address, room or suite number. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(27)).  
17.36.290 - Nonconforming sign. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which was legal at the time it was erected but does not accord or comply with the requirements of this chapter, or an amendment hereto. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(28)).  
17.36.295 - Office building. 
"Office building" means a building utilized for commercial office use not within an office complex. 
(Ord. 1862 § 1, 1993).  
17.36.300 - Office complex. 
"Office complex" means two or more office buildings located on one or more contiguous parcels and which utilize common off-street parking and access. 
(Ord. 1808 § 7, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(29)).  
17.36.310 - On-site or accessory sign. 
"On-site" or "accessory sign" means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity, which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code 32.1(30)).  
17.36.320 - Owner. 
"Owner" means the person in which title is vested, or a duly authorized agent of such owner. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(31)).  
17.36.330 - Parking lot sign. 
"Parking lot sign" means a sign placed or displayed on a parking lot to supply information to people using such lot, including information with respect to liability, as well as entry, exit, and directional information as is necessary to facilitate the safe movement of vehicles served by the parking area. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(32)).  
17.36.340 - Permanent sign. 
"Permanent sign" means and includes every sign, except "temporary sign," as defined in this article. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(33)).  
17.36.350 - Person. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, or association of persons, joint venture, corporation or company, and any officer or agent thereof. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(34)).  
17.36.360 - Planning commission. 
"Planning commission" means the city planning commission. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(35)).  
17.36.370 - Political sign. 
"Political sign" means a sign designed for the purpose of advertising support of, or opposition to, a candidate or proposition at a public election. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(36)).  
17.36.380 - Primary front/frontage. 
"Primary front/frontage" means the frontage on a lot or building that has the highest traffic volume. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(37)).  
17.36.390 - Projecting sign. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(38)).  
17.36.400 - Shopping center. 
"Shopping center" means a group of businesses which function as an integral unit on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels and which utilize common off-street parking and access. 
(Ord. 1808 § 8, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(39)).  
17.36.410 - Sign. 
"Sign" means and includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space, when erected out-of-doors (or indoors in the case of a window sign) and in view of the general public for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interests of any person. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(40)).  
17.36.420 - Sign structure. 
"Sign structure" means the structural elements of a sign and the supporting structure thereof when it is not a part of a building and which is capable of supporting any sign. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(41)).  
17.36.430 - Street. 
"Street" means the surface of and the space above any public street, road, highway, thoroughfare, way, court, parkway, drive, or other such interest or place over which there is public control or direction as to the use or occupancy thereof, which now or hereafter shall exist within the city, but shall exclude alleys or sidewalks. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(42)).  
17.36.440 - Temporary sign. 
"Temporary sign" means and includes any sign approved for display for a set length of time. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(43)).  
17.36.445 - Tenant. 
"Tenant" means a business establishment or organization which occupies a building space for the purpose of performing a service or providing a commodity. 
(Ord. 1808 § 9, 1992).  
17.36.450 - Wall sign. 
"Wall sign" means any sign attached to, or erected against, the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a place approximately parallel to the plane of the wall. "Wall" shall not include windows or window walls. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(44)).  
17.36.460 - Window sign. 
"Window sign" means any sign displayed on the inside or outside of a window facing and visible from a public street, walkway or parking lot, or a parking lot, pedestrian plaza or walkway accessible to the public. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.1(45)).  
Article II. - General Regulations 
 
17.36.470 - Permit-Required—Application—Exceptions. 
No person shall erect, maintain, alter, relocate, change or otherwise modify any sign or allow or permit any sign to be erected, maintained, altered, relocated, changed or otherwise modified without first applying to the director of planning for and obtaining issuance of a sign permit and paying the fee as set forth in Chapter 17.04, as in the case of building permits or as set by resolution of the city council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following signs: 
A.  A sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of the property on which it is placed; 
B.  A construction sign identifying the architect, engineer, contractor of builder associated with any construction work on the property on which it is placed; 
C.  Bulletin board for public, charitable or religious institutions; 
D.  Nameplate sign; 
E.  Memorial sign or tablet, or name of building and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other incombustible material; 
F.  Traffic or other municipal sign; 
G.  Legal notice or legal advertisement; 
H.  Sign used by a public utility regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission to protect the health, safety or welfare or to promote the convenience of the general public; 
I.  Sign regulating on-premises traffic parking; 
J.  Sign on the exterior surface of a vehicle as set forth in Section 17.36.040; or 
K.  A temporary window sign in conjunction with a nonresidential use and not exceeding twenty-five percent of the window surface area of the window on which the sign is located or affixed. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.2).  
17.36.480 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
All applications for a sign permit shall be made on an application form supplied by the planning department, and shall be accompanied by the required fee, and shall be in the number of copies required by the director of planning. The application shall also be accompanied by such profiles, plot plans, drawings, photographs, color or material samples, or such other pertinent information as may be required by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.4).  
17.36.490 - Requirements. 
All signs: 
A.  Shall be erected in compliance with the building, electrical and fire prevention codes of the Merced Municipal Code, and the general orders of the California Public Utilities Commission (if applicable), as they now exist or as hereafter amended, enacted or adopted; 
B.  If erected upon a building, shall be mounted upon either: 
1.  A wall of the building, in which case the sign shall not project or extend above or over the highest point of the wall of the building to which it is affixed, 
2.  The roof of the building which has a pitch of at least three (3) vertical to twelve (12) horizontal feet, in which case a sign not exceeding two (2) feet in vertical height may be located parallel to and not more than three (3) feet from the lower edge of the slope, 
3.  The vertical or substantially vertical portion of a roof, screen or penthouse, in which case a sign shall not extend above the portion of the roof, roof screen or penthouse to which it is affixed, 
4.  The exterior wall surface of a water tank or water tower if the sign is composed solely of painted surface areas, or 
5.  On a marquee, providing that the frame and background are of metal construction and the sign is completely within the border line of the marquee's outer edge and in no instance lower than seven and one-half (7½) feet above the sidewalk or thoroughfare; 
C.  Shall be erected so as not to extend into any area within a street or other public right-of-way; 
D.  If erected within a corner triangle: 
1.  The lower edge of the display surface shall be at least ten (10) feet in height above the established curb grade of the adjacent street or other public rights-of-way, 
2.  The sign shall not extend into any area within a street or public right-of-way, and 
3.  The width of diameter of the supporting member of the sign shall not exceed twelve (12) inches; 
E.  Shall be erected at a location and in a manner that it will not interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, device, and shall not obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrians or vehicular traffic; 
F.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no new billboard shall be permitted within the city after the adoption of this chapter. Billboards existing on and prior to the adoption of this chapter may continue to exist at their current location, subject to the provisions in Section 17.36.510 of this chapter, and may be maintained or replaced from time to time, provided, however, that the total display area of any existing billboard shall not be enlarged in any way; 
G.  The prohibition contained in subsection C of this section shall not apply to any sign within a redevelopment agency project area located partially or wholly within the city. 
(Ord. 2270 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1419 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.5).  
17.36.500 - Sign area determination. 
In determining the total square footage of signing on any property in any area of the city, there shall be included all signs which require a sign permit and all signs regulating on-premises traffic parking which, through color, shape, logo, or similar device, are identified with a use on the property. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.6).  
17.36.510 - Illegal signs. 
The following on-site signs are declared to be illegal and shall be removed by the owner without compensation: 
A.  Any sign erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use. 
B.  Any sign which was lawfully erected but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the sign is located has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. 
C.  Any sign which has been more than fifty (50) percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign cannot be repaired within thirty (30) days of the date of its destruction. 
D.  Any sign whose owner, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels that sign, or expands or enlarges the building or land use upon which the sign is located, and the sign is affected by the construction, enlargement, or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement, or remodeling of the sign exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of reconstruction of the building. 
E.  Any sign whose owner seeks relocation thereof and relocates the sign. 
F.  Any sign for which there has been an agreement between the sign owner and the city, for its removal as of any given date. 
G.  Any expired temporary sign. 
H.  Any sign which is or may become danger to the public or is unsafe. 
I.  Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city or county. 
(Ord. 1808 § 10, 1992: Ord. 1687 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.3).  
17.36.520 - Sign removal—Without notice. 
The director of planning shall remove any sign without giving notice, if the sign: 
A.  Was erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter upon any property belonging to the United States, state, county, city, or any special purpose district; or 
B.  Is found by the director to be unsafe and an immediate peril to persons or property. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.7(a)).  
17.36.530 - Sign removal—With notice. 
A sign shall be removed upon the expiration of thirty days' written notice to remove or alter the sign given to the sign permittee or to the owner, agent or other person having the beneficial use as a tenant, lessee or otherwise, of the building, structure or land upon which the sign is located in the absence of a permit, and who has failed to comply with the order and no appeal from the order is pending, if the sign has been constructed, erected, altered, relocated, changed or modified, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.7(b)).  
17.36.540 - Sign removal—Cost. 
A.  The actual cost of removing or altering any sign to comply with this chapter incurred shall be paid to the city by: 
1.  The person to whom a sign permit was issued, or in the absence of a permit, then by: 
2.  The owner of the building or structure upon which the sign is erected, or 
3.  The owner of the property upon which the sign is located if the sign is not erected upon a building or structure. 
B.  The actual cost of removal or alteration shall become a debt owing the city for the collection of which the city may maintain a civil action thereon in its own name. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.7(a)*). 
*Editor's Note: Ordinance 1337 contained two subsections numbered 32.7(a).  
17.36.550 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Any order or decision of the director of planning concerning a sign may be appealed to the planning commission by the owner of the sign, the person to whom a permit for the sign previously was issued, the owner of the building or structure upon which the sign is erected, the owner of the property upon which the sign is located if it is not erected upon a building or structure, or any other person aggrieved by the decision or order, in the following manner: 
A written appeal and the fee therefor shall be submitted to the director of planning who shall file it with the planning commission. The appeal must state the substance of the decision or order appealed from, and the provisions hereof which support the appeal. 
B.  Within thirty days following filing of the appeal, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing at which the person filing the appeal, the director of planning, or their representatives shall be heard. Written notice of the date, hour and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the person filing the appeal at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  Within thirty days following completion of the hearing, the planning commission shall confirm, modify or reject the decision or order of the director of planning on the basis of the evidence submitted which established that such decision or order is consistent or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The person who appealed from the decision or order shall be furnished with a written copy of the decision of the planning commission and the reasons therefor. 
D.  When written notice is required to be given to any of the following persons under any section of this chapter, it shall be given by enclosing a copy of the notice, order or decision in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid and, respectively, addressed to: 
1.  The person to whom a sign permit has been issued as the address appears on the application for the permit, and when no address appears, to general delivery, City of Merced; 
2.  The owner of any building, structure or property upon which a sign is erected or located as the name of the owner and the owner's last known address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, and when no address appears, to general delivery, City of Merced; or 
3.  The person having the beneficial use of any building, structure or land upon which a sign is erected or located at such building or property. 
E.  The envelope shall be deposited in the United States mail. 
F.  Each notice, order or decision mailed in the manner set forth above shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.8).  
17.36.560 - Real estate sale signs. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, signs indicating the location of real property for sale including but not limited to the words "open house" may be placed upon property not being so advertised, provided the following conditions are met: 
The written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property upon which the sign is placed is first obtained. 
B.  In a residential property of less than one acre, said signs shall not exceed a total of six square feet in area on one side, nor twelve square feet on all sides. 
C.  On real property (except residential) of over one acre, the total display surface area of signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet. 
D.  On residential real property of one acre or more or on other real property of less than one acre, the total display surface area of signs shall not exceed twelve square feet. 
E.  In addition to the display service area of signs allowed by B, C, and D, an additional sign, not to exceed twelve square feet, bearing the words "open house" shall be allowed for a period not exceeding eight hours per day. 
F.  Real estate signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.9).  
17.36.570 - Temporary signs—Conditions—Permit. 
No person shall erect, display, maintain or allow or permit to be erected, displayed, or maintained a temporary sign or signs except on the following conditions: 
A.  (1)  A "temporary sign(s)" without direct illumination shall be allowed to advertise. 
A commercial business or activity on any commercially zoned property, or an apartment or condominium complex, not to exceed a total of one hundred twenty (120) days for commercial and ninety (90) days for apartment or condominium complexes in any one calendar year for all temporary signs, and not to exceed more than thirty (30) days at any one time; 
(2)  Temporary signs for apartment or condominium complexes shall be limited to banners, freestanding signs and amenity signs, and shall not exceed thirteen (13) square feet per side or twenty-six (26) square feet when affixed to building walls. 
(3)  The number of temporary signs shall not exceed the number contained in the following chart: 
Number of Apartments 	Number of Temporary Signs 
Up to 4 apartments 	l 
Up to 8 apartments 	2 
Up to 16 apartments 	3 
Up to 32 apartments 	4 
Up to 64 apartments 	5 
Up to 128 apartments 	6 
More than 128 apartments 	7 
 
(4)  All banners shall be affixed to building walls. 
B.  Banners or similar temporary signs which announce a civic or charitable activity may be allowed in the public right-of-way with the consent and subject to the conditions of the development services director. 
C.  A temporary sign(s), without direct illumination, to advertise a religious, charitable, cultural or educational organization or activity shall be allowed for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days in any one calendar year; provided, that the total display service area of the sign(s) does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, the sign(s) does not exceed six (6) feet in height, if freestanding, and the sign(s) is located at least five (5) feet inside the property line in a residentially zoned area, and at least two (2) feet inside the property line in other areas. 
D.  A temporary sign permit shall have been obtained from the development services director of planning who, prior to issuance of said permit, shall have determined that the proposed location, method of installation and support of the temporary sign will not endanger the public health, welfare or safety. 
E.  Payment of a fee for said temporary sign permit as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 2008 § 6, 1999: Ord. 1808 § 11, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.10).  
17.36.572 - Apartments or condominiums. 
A.  An apartment or condominium complex shall be allowed one wall sign identifying the complex with an area not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet for each street frontage having a curb cut up to a maximum of two (2) wall signs per complex. 
B.  With a conditional use permit, an apartment or condominium complex may be permitted one decorative wall sign which meets the requirement of Section 17.36.655F. 
C.  With a conditional use permit, an apartment or condominium complex with four hundred (400) feet or more of street frontage, or two street frontages, may be permitted one additional decorative wall sign. If two signs are located on any single street frontage the signs shall be separated by a minimum of two hundred (200) feet. 
D.  In lieu of subsection B or C of this section, a monument structure may be permitted for an apartment or condominium complex with a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of frontage subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  The monument structure shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above sidewalk grade, or finished floor of the nearest building, whichever is lower, and shall not exceed twenty-four square feet per side. Monument sign shall not cover more than 40% of the face of the monument structure. With a conditional use permit, a monument structure may be up to thirty-six square feet per side and a monument sign may cover up to eighty percent of the face of the monument structure and include a reader board area. The foundation/base shall be a minimum eighty percent of the monument structure length. Materials, color, and arrangement shall be compatible and consistent with the apartment or condominium complex, and the monument structure shall be integrated into site landscape design. 
(2)  The monument sign shall have a minimum three foot setback from any property line and shall not be permitted in a corner triangle. 
(3)  An apartment or condominium complex with four hundred feet or more of street frontage may be permitted one additional monument sign. In no case shall both monument signs be located on any single street frontage if the apartment or condominium complex has two or more frontages. 
E.  A directional sign, for the purpose of providing direction, shall be permitted on each street frontage having a curb cut. The directional sign shall be no larger than six square feet. The directional sign may not exceed four feet in height. The directional sign may contain the name of the apartment or condominium complex. Materials, color, and arrangement shall be compatible and consistent with the apartment or condominium complex. 
(Ord. 2008 § 7, 1999).  
17.36.575 - Window signs. 
A.  Window signs shall be non-illuminated (except "open/closed" signs) and shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the window area. 
B.  Window signs shall not be counted toward the sign area permitted for the building or use. 
(Ord. 1808 § 12, 1992).  
17.36.580 - Use permit procedure. 
Whenever a use permit is required by this chapter, the procedure contained in Title 20 shall be followed and requirements thereof complied with. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.11).  
17.36.585 - Shopping center signs—C-T zone. 
Freestanding signs in a shopping center located in the C-T zoning district are prohibited unless the shopping center has at least two hundred feet of property frontage. A conditional use permit limiting the freestanding sign(s) to one hundred square feet per face shall be required if the shopping center property frontage exceeds two hundred feet. 
(Ord. 2008 § 9, 1999).  
17.36.590 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.12).  
Article III. - Regulations for North Merced 
 
17.36.600 - Prohibited signs. 
No person shall erect, place, maintain or allow or permit to be erected, placed or maintained in the area of the city north of Bear Creek any banner connected to a tree(s), billboard, flashing sign, moving sign, movable freestanding sign, or sign connected with a home occupation. 
(Ord. 1808 § 13, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.20).  
17.36.610 - Generally. 
In addition to the general requirements for signs within the city, all signs requiring sign permits shall comply with the following special requirements for the area north of Bear Creek. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21 (part)).  
17.36.630 - Individual letters—Exceptions. 
All signs shall contain individual letters, except directory signs, nameplates, parking lot signs, political signs, development signs, real estate signs, temporary signs, signs identifying the location of a manager of an office, or tenant identification signs in a commercial office building which do not exceed two square feet. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(b)).  
17.36.640 - Wall type. 
Except as may be indicated otherwise in this article, only building wall signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 2092 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 1808 § 14, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(c)).  
17.36.650 - Total square footage—Commercial zone. 
A.  Total square footage of all signs on a use within a building zoned commercial, except C-O (or zoned P-D (Planned Development) with commercial uses, except C-O uses in areas designated for office use), may not exceed the square footage contained in the following chart: 
	10 Feet or 
Under 	20 Ft 	40 Ft 	60 Ft 	80 Ft 	100 Ft 	125 Ft 	150 Ft 	200 Ft 	250 Ft 	300 Ft 	350 Ft or over 
_____
					Square Feet 						
Under 50 Ft* 	20 	22 	24 	27 	31 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 
100 Ft* 	22 	24 	27 	31 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 	99 
200 Ft* 	24 	27 	31 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 	99 	112 
300 Ft* 	27 	31 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 	99 	112 	126 
400 Ft* 	31 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 	99 	112 	126 	141 
500 Ft* Or Over* 	36 	42 	49 	57 	66 	76 	87 	99 	112 	126 	141 	157 
 
(If building frontage and/or distance from property line measurement(s) are between two values on chart, interpolate between the values to arrive at permitted sign area.) 
NOTE: The amounts of signing shown in the above chart are maximum cumulative amounts for retail commercial uses located north of Bear Creek within the city. A retail commercial use requiring a conditional use permit may be allowed less than the maximum, based upon additional design criteria. Individual retail commercial uses containing more than twenty-five thousand square feet of building area are eligible under a conditional use permit for a discretionary sign square footage bonus of up to fifty percent of the amounts shown. 
*  Distance from property line (in feet). 
B.  A building of less than twenty-five thousand square feet, which has one building frontage and an exterior building side not on the public street, is permitted signage as follows: 
Total sign area for a building be either: 
1.  The amount permitted for the building frontage plus the amount that would be permitted for exterior building side were said exterior building side the same distance from the property line as the building frontage; or, 
2.  A commercial building which consists of two or more usable stories is permitted up to fifty percent additional sign area with a conditional use permit. 
C.  For any building allowed to utilize two building frontages or a building frontage and a building side for computing signing the maximum size for any one building frontage or side cannot exceed fifty percent of the total of all authorized signing, or the maximum amount of signing authorized by subsection A for that building frontage or side, whichever is greater, except by conditional use permit. 
D.  A commercial building which contains two or more tenants is permitted a two square foot tenant identification sign for each tenant in addition to permitted wall signing. 
E.  Shopping centers with tenants having no exterior walls may be allowed a directory sign, mounted to a building, of up to twelve square feet with a conditional use permit. 
F.  When a building frontage consists of more than one wall segment located at varying distances from the street property line in question, maximum sign size from the chart in subsection A shall be based upon: 
1.  The building frontage setback of the wall segment on which the sign is to be located; and, 
2.  The sum of the lineal length(s) of: 
a.  The wall segment upon which the sign is to be located; and, 
b.  Any additional wall segments which have an equal or less building frontage setback. 
G.  If a use within a building does not have a building frontage, then the use's portion of the side of the building closest to a street shall be treated as though it were a building frontage. 
H.  If a use within a building has two or more building frontages, the total allowed sign square footage for the use within the building shall be limited to the total square footage of signs allowed by the chart on the two building frontages closest to the street. 
(Ord. 2092 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 1808 § 15, 1992: Ord. 1500 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(d)).  
17.36.660 - Total square footage—C-O zone—Use permit. 
On property zoned C-O (or zoned P-D (Planned Development) and designated for office uses), total signing shall be limited to the following: 
A.  Tenant identification signs shall be plaque signs not exceeding two square feet for each tenant; 
B.  A tenant identification sign(s) of individual letters up to a maximum of one-fourth square foot of signing for each lineal foot of building frontage may be allowed with a conditional use permit, but in no case shall the sign exceed twenty-five square feet; 
C.  Directory signs as provided in Section 17.36.670; 
D.  Each building shall be permitted up to four square feet for a plaque identification sign; 
E.  A building or office complex identification sign(s) of individual letters up to a maximum of one-fourth square foot of signing for each lineal foot of building frontage shall be allowed but shall not exceed twenty-five square feet. 
F.  If a building, or a use within a building has two building frontages, the total allowed sign square footage can be computed by combining the signing allowed on each frontage. 
G.  Notwithstanding subsection E, an additional fifty percent of signage (not to exceed 37.5 square feet) may be allowed for the following with a conditional use permit: 
1.  A building with two or more usable stories; 
2.  A single story building with one hundred feet or more of frontage; 
3.  An office complex. 
(Ord. 1808 § 16, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(e)).  
17.36.665 - Monument signs and decorative wall signs. 
In commercial zones and P-D zones, a monument sign or decorative wall sign identifying a freestanding building, office building, tenant in an office building, office complex or shopping center, and counts toward the maximum allowed sign area, may be allowed subject to the following: 
A.  A freestanding building, office building, tenant in an office building or office complex may be permitted a monument sign or a decorative wall sign with a conditional use permit, and a church may be permitted a decorative wall sign with a conditional use permit. 
B.  A shopping center of less than thirty-five thousand square-feet may be permitted a monument sign or a decorative wall sign with a conditional use permit. Refer to Section 17.36.667 for shopping centers over thirty-five thousand square-feet. 
C.  A freestanding building located within a shopping center may be permitted a monument sign or decorative wall sign with a conditional use permit. 
D.  An office complex with four hundred feet or more of street frontage may be permitted two monument signs or decorative wall signs with a conditional use permit. 
E.  A monument structure shall not exceed a height of four feet or a length of six feet, and a monument sign shall not cover more than forty percent of the face of the monument structure. In granting a conditional use permit, the structure height may be reduced below the four-foot maximum if the height is greater than six feet above sidewalk or curb grade. The foundation/base shall be a minimum eighty percent of the monument structure length. Materials, color and arrangement shall be compatible and consistent with the freestanding building, office building, office complex, or shopping center. 
F.  A decorative wall shall not exceed a height of four feet and a decorative wall sign shall not cover more than twenty percent of the face of the decorative wall. Materials, color and arrangement shall be compatible and consistent with the freestanding building, office building, office complex, shopping center or church. 
G.  A monument structure or decorative wall shall have a minimum three-foot setback from any property line and shall not be permitted in a corner triangle. 
H.  Individual letters and logos for a monument structure or decorative wall may be internally illuminated. 
I.  A monument sign or decorative wall sign shall include a street address not to be counted towards the total sign area permitted. 
(Ord. 2092 § 3 (part), 2002: Ord. 1862 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1808 § 17, 1992).  
17.36.667 - Free-standing signs identifying shopping centers over thirty-five thousand square feet. 
Shopping centers having at least thirty-five thousand square feet of gross floor area and located within commercial zones and P-D zones may be allowed a free-standing sign with a conditional use permit subject to review by the planning commission and to the following limitations: 
A.  The shopping center sign may advertise the name of the center, the tenants in the center, or both the center and tenant names. Tenant advertising on a shopping center sign is part of the overall sign area permitted by Section, 17.36.650, "Total Square Footage—Commercial Zone." The area of the name of the shopping center is in addition to the permitted copy area. 
B.  Individual letters are required; Logos may be permitted. The background area immediately adjacent to the copy portion of the sign may include trademark colors, however, it may not be illuminated and must be constructed of a material that is compatible with the texture and materials of the shopping center buildings. Additionally, background area with trademark colors will be considered park of the total allowed signage. Individual letters and logos may be internally illuminated. 
C.  Materials, color and arrangement shall be compatible and consistent with the shopping center buildings. 
D.  A maximum of two shopping center signs may be allowed. At least eight hundred feet of combined arterial street frontage is required to qualify for one sign, except that shopping centers existing at the time of adoption of this section meeting all other requirements of this section are not bound by this requirement. An additional one thousand five hundred feet of frontage is required for a second sign. 
E.  The maximum height and size allowances for shopping center signs are different in the Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) and Regional Commercial (R-C) land use designations. See table below: 
Shopping Center Sign Standards by Land Use Designation 
Sign Feature 	General Plan Land Use Designation 
	Neighborhood Commercial 	Regional 
Commercial 
Overall Height (as measured from top of sidewalk or curb) 	12.5 feet + 2' appurtenance 	20' + 3' appurtenance 
Structure Area 	12.5' high by 8' wide / 100 square feet per face 	20' high by 13' wide / 260 square feet per face 
Sign Area 	40% of Structure Area, not to exceed 40 square feet per face 	40% of Structure Area, not to exceed 104 square feet per face 
 
F.  A minimum of ten square-feet of "Sign Area" is required for each tenant displayed on a shopping center sign 
G.  The foundation base shall be a minimum eighty percent of the sign structure length. 
H.  The sign structure shall have a minimum three-foot setback from any property line and shall not be permitted in a corner triangle. 
I.  The location of the shopping center sign shall be determined by the planning commission. 
J.  An application to construct a shopping center sign shall be signed by all property owners of the shopping center. 
K.  Compliance with Section 17.36.780 "Use Permit—Criteria." 
(Ord. 2092 § 3 (part), 2002).  
17.36.670 - Directory signs. 
A.  Directory signs shall be limited to no more than one twelve square foot sign for each driveway entrance to a building or office complex and one six square foot sign for each pedestrian entrance. 
B.  The number of directory signs may not exceed the number of entrances unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
C.  If visible from a public street, a directory sign shall be wall-mounted and illuminated only with indirect lighting. 
D.  A building sign(s), office complex sign(s) or tenant identification sign(s), with the exception of plaque signs, may be internally illuminated with a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. l808 § 18, 1992: Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(f)).  
17.36.680 - Flags—Use permit. 
Flags may be allowed with a conditional use permit, but the square footage shall be counted toward the total sign square footage allowed on the property. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(g)).  
17.36.690 - Electronic time/temperature—Use permit. 
A building wall or fascia sign not exceeding six square feet per face that displays the time and/or temperature by electronic means may be allowed with a use permit on property zoned commercial or zoned P-D (Planned Development) with commercial uses. 
(Ord. 1337 § l (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(h)).  
17.36.700 - Barber poles. 
Barber poles shall not exceed two and one-half feet in length and shall be wall-mounted to the business being identified. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(i)).  
17.36.710 - Manager location sign. 
A sign which identifies the location of a manager of an office or residential complex shall not exceed one square foot in area. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21 (j)).  
17.36.720 - On-site development sign—Conditions. 
An on-site development sign, limited to identifying the name of the development, the builder/developer, any logo, and the sales agent, shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
A.  A tentative or final map for the development has been approved; 
B.  The display surface area does not exceed eighty square feet and the sign is not over fourteen feet in height; 
C.  The sign is located at least five feet inside the property line; 
D.  The sign is not directly illuminated; 
E.  The sign is removed within six months after completion of construction, or within two years from the time construction of the development begins, whichever is less, except that said period may be extended by conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(k)).  
17.36.730 - On-site development sign—Alternative—Permit. 
In lieu of an on-site development sign allowed by Section 17.36.720, or in those instances where a tentative or final map is not required for construction work, an on-site construction sign identifying the architect, engineer, contractor, builder, sales agent or future tenant associated with the work shall be allowed with a sign permit under the following conditions: 
A.  The display surface area of the sign(s) shall not exceed thirty-two square feet if the property is less than one acre, nor more than thirty-two feet per frontage if the property is one acre or more; 
B.  Only one sign per frontage shall be allowed; 
C.  The height of any sign shall not exceed eight feet; 
D.  The sign(s) shall not be directly illuminated; 
E.  The sign is located at least ten feet inside the property line; 
F.  The sign is removed within seven days after substantial completion of the construction. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(m)).  
17.36.740 - Off-site development—Conditions. 
An off-site development sign identifying the location of a development shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
A.  A tentative or final map for the development has been approved; 
B.  The display surface area does not exceed ten square feet, and the sign is not over six feet in height; 
C.  The sign is not directly illuminated; 
D.  The sign is removed within six months after completion of construction, or within two years from the time construction of the development begins, whichever is less, except that said period may be extended by conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21 (l)).  
17.36.760 - Residential subdivisions—Use permit. 
Residential subdivisions may be allowed a wall-mounted entrance sign identifying the complex under a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(o)).  
17.36.770 - Six-inch street address—When a requirement. 
All commercial uses, industrial uses, and residential uses of over four units shall install street address numbers of at least six inches high which are clearly visible from the nearest street. Sample street address numbers shall be shown on all construction drawings for building permits and on building elevations required for any city permit. The numbers shall be considered an architectural feature with color and/or material consistent with the building trim. 
(Ord. 1337 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 32.21(p)).  
17.36.780 - Use permit—Criteria. 
In addition to any other criteria that may be considered regarding an application for a conditional use permit required by this article, the planning commission and/or director of development services shall consider: 
A.  The availability of appropriate sign locations of sufficient size upon the structure; 
B.  Compatibility of the proposed signs with surrounding uses; 
C.  The proximity of signs to adjacent streets; 
D.  The size of logos on fascias with limited vertical distance; and 
E.  Such other factors that may pertain to the overall appearance and quality of signing for the particular area within which a sign is proposed. 
(Ord. 1853 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1790 § 3, 1991: Ord. 1337 § l (part), 1980: prior code § 32.22).  
17.36.790 - Logos. 
Notwithstanding Section 17.36.630, a logo, with or without individual letters, shall be permitted so long as the logo does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total permitted sign area. With a conditional use permit, the percentage may be increased by up to fifty percent (50%) of the total permitted sign area. 
(Ord. 1853 § 2, 1993: Ord. 1790 § 2, 1991).  
17.36.795 - Administrative conditional use permit. 
A.  Applications for the conditional use permits required under Chapter 17.36, excepting section 17.36.640, may be acted upon by the development services director within the conditions, limitations and procedures imposed on the planning commission by Chapter 20.64 and this chapter. 
B.  In the event the director of development services is of the opinion the conditional use permit application is of such magnitude as to be of special interest to the people of the city and the planning commission, he/she shall refer the request to the planning commission for hearing and decision. 
C.  Appeal from the decision of the director of development services shall be to the planning commission in accordance with Section 20.64.110. 
(Ord. 2008 § 8, 1999: Ord. 1853 § 3, 1993: Ord. 1808 § 20, 1992).  
Article IV. - Regulations for Downtown[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2409, § 1, adopted June 17, 2013, retitled Ch. 17.36, Art. IV, Regulations for Redevelopment Project Areas to read as set out. 
 
17.36.800 - Design review commission. 
All signs erected, placed, maintained (other than as described in Section 17.36.860) or modified within boundaries established in Chapter 20.86 thereof shall be reviewed by the design review commission staff as set forth in Chapter 20.86 and shall be subject to the following special requirements which are in addition to all other applicable requirements contained in this chapter and Title 20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 3, 6-17-2013)  
17.36.810 - Freeway district. 
A.  The freeway district includes all the development project area between the Southern Pacific railroad tracks and Highway 99, all commercially zoned areas within the redevelopment project area east of G Street and north of Highway 99, and all properties with State Highway 59 frontage located north of the Southern Pacific Railroad south of West 16th Street and east of Bear Creek. 
B.  In addition to other allowed signs, the following uses within this district may be allowed one on-site freestanding freeway sign with a maximum height not to exceed fifty (50) feet above the crown of the freeway: 
1.  a hotel or motel; 
2.  a restaurant or drive-in; 
3.  a gasoline station; 
4.  a shopping center 
5.  an auto sales lot or showroom. 
The square footage of the freestanding sign shall be in addition to that allowed by Section 17.36.830. 
C.  In lieu of the sign described in B. above and subject to conditional use permit approval, two or more of the businesses therein described with lot areas totaling at least twenty-five (25) acres or more may be allowed up to two off-site or one on-site and one off-site freestanding signs provided that the following minimum conditions are met: (1) all the uses are in a C-G (General Commercial) or C-T (Thoroughfare Commercial) zone;(2) no sign is over seventy-five (75) feet above the crown of the freeway; (3) the sign(s) is within two hundred (200) feet of the freeway; (4) the square footage of the sign(s) does not exceed nine hundred fifty (950) square feet per face, or nineteen hundred (1,900) square feet total sign area; and (5) the height of the sign(s)does not exceed seventy-five(75) feet. 
The square footage of the freestanding sign(s) shall be in addition to that allowed by Section 17.36.830 and Title 20. 
D.  For those properties with State Highway 59 frontage north of the Southern Pacific Railroad south of West 16th Street to Bear Creek, the freestanding sign shall be located adjacent to the south property line and the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 2083 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2015 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1932 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1747 § 1, 1989: Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.820 - Vehicle sales district. 
A.  The vehicle sales district includes all the redevelopment project area between T Street and Bear Creek and between the alley south of 19th Street and the Southern Pacific railroad tracks. 
B.  In addition to other allowed signs, vehicle dealers within this district may be allowed one freestanding sign not to exceed two hundred square feet with a maximum height of twenty-five feet. The freestanding sign shall be in addition to the total square footage of signing allowed by Section 17.36.830. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.830 - Total square footage. 
A maximum of one (1) square foot of signing is permitted for each foot of primary building frontage. Buildings of two (2) or three (3) stories (exclusive of mezzanine) are permitted a fifty (50) percent increase in maximum signing and buildings of four (4) or more stories (exclusive of mezzanine) are permitted a hundred (100) percent increase in maximum signing, provided, that signs for first floor uses do not exceed one (1) square foot per foot of primary building frontage. All signs must be placed at ground floor level or uppermost floor level and no roof-mounted signs are permitted. 
B.  An additional fifty (50) percent of the allowed signing in subsection A of this section is permitted for each foot of secondary building frontage. 
C.  If no building exists on a lot, one (1) monument sign for a business located on the lot shall be permitted not to exceed fifty (50) square feet of sign area. 
D.  For buildings that are set back more than fifty (50) feet from the property line, the design review commission may permit an additional five (5) square feet of signing for every twenty (20) feet the building is set back from the property line. 
E.  The amount of signing permitted in subsections A and B of this section cannot be combined onto one (1) side of the building. The signing must be used on the side of the building from which it is calculated. 
F.  Instructional signs that are four (4) square feet or less per face shall not count towards total square footage. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.835 - Blade signs. 
Blade signs that identify a business and are counted towards the maximum allowed sign area for a particular parcel may be permitted in redevelopment project areas, by an application for administrative staff review through the planning department, if the following requirements are met: 
A.  A blade sign must have a vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or other public right-of-way and cannot exceed a height of more than six (6) feet above the height of the entryway of the building on which the sign is mounted; 
B.  A blade sign must be attached by a wrought iron or similar metal framework to the building wall. Materials, color, and arrangement of the sign shall be compatible and consistent with the building and neighboring structures. 
(Ord. 2230 § 2, 2006).  
17.36.840 - Window signs. 
No more than thirty-five (35) percent of all the window area can be covered. Temporary window signs that will exist for less than thirty (30) consecutive days do not need prior design review commission approval. Any permanent signage affixed to the window shall be of high quality materials and shall not include tempera paint. Permanent window signs shall be counted towards the total square footage permitted in any particular parcel. 
(Ord. 2230 § 3, 2006: Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.850 - Prohibited signs. 
No person shall erect or place or allow or permit to be erected or placed any of the following signs in the design review boundaries as described in Section 20.86.010 thereof: 
A.  Projecting signs, with the exception of a blade sign as defined in Section 17.36.035 of this chapter and meeting the requirements in Section 17.36.835 of this chapter; 
B.  Freestanding signs over six (6) feet in height (inclusive of supports) measured at grade or exceeding thirty (30) square fee per face, except as permitted by Section 17.36.810(B), Section 17.36.810(C) and Section 17.36.820 of this chapter; 
C.  Billboards, unless located in an industrial zone; 
D.  Signs emitting any foreign materials (sound, smoke, etc.); 
E.  Signs with flashing or pulsating illumination (except for the sign(s) described in Section 17.36.810(C) of this chapter which may be allowed by conditional use permit; 
F.  Signs affixed to, laid upon, painted on or attached to the roof of any structure or building; 
G.  A United States flag and/or a California flag of any size shall be permitted to be flown less than forty (40) feet above grade; all other flags shall be considered signs subject to all limitations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2230 § 4, 2006: Ord. 1747 § 2, 1989: Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 4, 6-17-2013)  
17.36.860 - Sign maintenance. 
Sign maintenance does not require review by the design review commission. Sign maintenance is defined as repainting a sign the same color or repairing broken or defective parts of the sign. Sign maintenance does not include altering in any way the contents, design or structure of the sign, or improving the sign beyond its original condition. Maintenance of nonconforming signs shall also be subject to the limitations set forth in Sections 17.36.510 and 17.36.880. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.880 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, altered, reconstructed, relocated or expanded in any manner unless and until the sign is made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. Ordinary maintenance and minor repairs which will not increase the normal life of the sign are permitted. 
B.  Replacement of a sign face, or one (1) or more removable panels on the sign, to display new content or design shall not be permitted unless and until the entire sign is made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In the event of a change of name or logo of the business identified or advertised by a nonconforming sign, the entire sign shall be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.890 - Historical resources. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, a sign which has been designated an historic resource in accordance with Chapter 17.54 shall not be subject to the requirements of this article or Section 17.36.510. 
(Ord. 1633 § 1 (part), 1986).  
17.36.900 - Public parking lots. 
Wall signs shall be permitted facing city-owned parking lots in accordance to the requirements set forth in Section 17.36.490 of this chapter. A building adjacent to a city-owned parking lot shall be permitted to have signage on the wall facing that parking lot. The building elevation fronting on that parking lot shall be counted as building frontage and the wall sign shall count towards the total square footage of signage permitted. 
(Ord. 2230 § 5, 2006).  
Chapter 17.38 - PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES FEE 
 
17.38.010 - Established. 
For the purpose of providing additional revenues with which to finance the acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities, each applicant for a building permit for residential development shall pay, in addition to any other fees or charges provided elsewhere in this code, a park and recreation facilities fee. 
(Ord. 1237 § 4, 1979: prior code § 18.11).  
17.38.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of construing the park and recreation facilities fee, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  The term "dwelling unit" means and includes each single-family dwelling and each unit of an apartment, duplex or multiple dwelling structure designed as a separate habitation for one (1) or more persons. 
B.  The term "mobile home space" means and includes each space in a mobile home park designed to be used for parking a mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis. 
(Ord. 1237 § 5, 1979: prior code § 18.12).  
17.38.030 - Amount. 
The park and recreation facilities fee required by Section 17.38.010 shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 18.40 of this code. 
(Ord. 1643 § 6, 1987: Ord. 1237 § 6, 1979: prior code § 18.13).  
17.38.040 - Payment. 
The park and recreation facilities fee is payable prior to issuance of building permit. Upon posting surety bond or other security acceptable to the city, the applicant for building permit may elect to defer payment of the fee until the time of issuance of acceptance notice (green tag) by the division of building and safety, department of public works. 
(Ord. 1237 § 7, 1979: prior code § 18.14).  
17.38.050 - Coordination with subdivision ordinance. 
The park and recreation facilities fee imposed by Section 17.38.010 is intended to coordinate with the provisions of Chapter 18.40 of this code, requiring the dedication of land, or payment of fees in lieu of such dedication, for park and recreation purposes upon the subdivision of land. The dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu of dedication of land, or the payment of reduced fees for low-cost housing, pursuant to Chapter 18.40 of this code, in amounts sufficient to satisfy the provisions of Chapter 18.40, shall be deemed the equivalent of payment of park and recreation facilities fee pursuant to Section 17.38.010, so that no person shall be required, with respect to any one (1) dwelling unit, to pay both the park and recreation facilities fee required by Section 17.38.010 and the fee in lieu of dedication of land, or the dedication of such land pursuant to Chapter 18.40. 
(Ord. 1237 § 8, 1979: prior code § 18.15).  
17.38.060 - Disposition of funds. 
All sums paid as park and recreation facilities fees may be deposited in the same fund as fees paid in lieu of dedication of land pursuant to Chapter 18.40 of this code, and may be used for any of the purposes for which the in lieu fees may be used, or, at the discretion of the city council, may be used for any purpose reasonably related to the acquisition, improvement, expansion, operation, or maintenance of public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. 1237 § 9, 1979: prior code § 18.16).  
Chapter 17.40 - CAMPGROUNDS 
 
17.40.010 - Camp car or trailer—Defined. 
A camp car or trailer, subject to the provisions of this chapter, is defined as any unit or structure designed, constructed or used for living or sleeping purposes for human habitation, which is equipped with wheels or similar devices for the purpose of transporting such unit or structure from place to place, whether by motive power or by other means. 
(Prior code § 9.1).  
17.40.020 - Camp car or trailer—When deemed a dwelling. 
Any camp car or trailer, as defined in the preceding section, from which the wheels, or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting such unit or structure from place to place, have been removed, shall constitute the same a dwelling, subject to the requirements of the building code of the city, as set forth in Chapter 17.04, and the State Housing Act. 
(Prior code § 9.2).  
17.40.030 - Camp car or trailer—Used as living quarters. 
No camp car or trailer shall be used for living or sleeping purposes or as a place of human habitation within the city, unless it is located and maintained within a camp ground within the city, which camp ground is kept and conducted as such and shall have paid a business license therefor, under the provisions of Chapter 5.08. 
(Prior code § 9.3).  
Chapter 17.44 - EXCAVATIONS 
 
17.44.010 - Permit—Required—Exceptions. 
No person shall make or construct any excavation in the city without first having received a permit to do so from the city engineer; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to excavations for foundations for, or cellars under, buildings or structures, or for the laying of pipes for sewers, gas or water, electric wires or cables; the granting of permits for which are provided for in other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1317 § 7, 1980: prior code § 17.4).  
17.44.020 - Permit—Refusal. 
The city engineer may refuse to grant any permit for an excavation provided for in Section 17.44.010, where such excavation may result in the creation of a hazard to public peace, health or safety, or may create or constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1317 § 8, 1980: prior code § 17.5).  
Chapter 17.48 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Prior history: Prior code §§ 12.A.1.1—12.A.1.18,12.A.2.1—12.A.2.6,1 2.A.3.1—12.A.3.3,12.A.3.3-1—12.A.3.3-5. 12.A.3.4-1—12.A.3.4-2, 12.A.4.1-1—12.A.4.1-5, 12.A.4.2, 12.A.4.2-1, 12.A.4-2-2 and 1 2.A.4.2-3 and Ord. 12.50. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2321, adopted Nov. 17, 2008, amended Ch. 17.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.48 was comprised of §§ 17.48.010—17.48.220, and derived form Ord. 1679, adopted in 1987; Ord. 1794, adopted in 1991; and Ord. 2069, adopted in 2001. 
 
17.48.005 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65202, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the City of Merced does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.010 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Merced are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effort of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.020 - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
G.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.030 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
A.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective biers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Controlling fill, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.040 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
1.  "A Zone" — see "special flood hazard area (SFHA)." 
2.  "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
3.  "Accessory structure" means a structure that is either (1) solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or (2) a small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value. 
4.  "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fanshaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
5.  "Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
6.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the city engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
7.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
8.  "Area of special flood hazard" — See "special flood hazard area." 
9.  "Backfill" means the placement of fill material within a specified depression, hole or excavation pit below the surrounding adjacent ground level as a means of improving floodwater conveyance or to restore the land to the natural contours existing prior to excavation. 
10.  "Base flood" means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
11.  "Base flood elevation" (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE and AH that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
12.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
13.  "Building" — See "structure". 
14.  "Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
15.  "Curvilinear line" means the border on either a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that delineates the special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related erosion hazard areas and consists of a curved or contour line that follows the topography. 
16.  "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
17.  "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
18.  "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
19.  "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
20.  "Fill" is the placement of fill material at a specified location to bring the ground surface up to a desired elevation. 
21.  "Fill material" can be natural sand, dirt, soil or rock. For the purpose of floodplain management, fill material may include concrete, cement, soil cement, brick or similar material as approved on a case-by-case basis. 
22.  "Flood, flooding, or floodwater" means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; and (b) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition. 
23.  "Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
24.  "Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevation, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
25.  "Flood hazard boundary map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
26.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
27.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
28.  "Floodplain or floodprone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
29.  "Floodplain administrator" is the city engineer (see Section 17.48.120) designated to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
30.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
31.  "Floodplain management regulations" means Chapter 17.48 of the Municipal Code and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power, which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
32.  "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flooding hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed to conform with sound engineering standards. 
33.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
34.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water space elevation more than one (1) foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
35.  "Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
36.  "Floodway fringe" is the area of a floodplain on either side of the designated floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
37.  "Fraud and victimization" (related to "variances") means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flooding damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
38.  "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
39.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
40.  "Governing body" is the Merced City Council, which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
41.  "Hardship" (related to "variance") means the hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. Hardship requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as exceptional hardships. All of these problems can be resolved through other means, without granting a variance. This is so even if the alternative means are more expensive or complicated than building with a variance, or if they require the property owner to put the parcel to a different use than originally intended, or to build elsewhere. 
42.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
43.  "Historic structure" means any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district qualifying as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
44.  "Landfill" means a permitted location for the disposal, placement or dumping of garbage, trash, debris, junk or waste material. 
45.  "Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
46.  "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
47.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
48.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreation vehicle." 
49.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
50.  "Map" means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Flood Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
51.  "Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
52.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
53.  "Minimum necessary" (related to "variances") means the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant of a variance with a minimum deviation form the requirements of this chapter. In the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, for example, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only that level that the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter. 
54.  "New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
55.  "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
56.  "Obstruction" includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
57.  "One hundred year flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood which has a one (1) percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood," which will be the term used throughout this chapter. 
58.  "Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
59.  "Public safety and nuisances" (as related to "variances") means the granting of a variance must not result in additional threats to public safety or create nuisances. This chapter is intended to help protect the health, safety, well being and property of the local citizens. This is a long-range community effort made up of a combination of approaches such as adequate drainage systems, warning and evacuation plans, and keeping new property above the flood levels. These long-term goals can only be met if exceptions to the requirements of this chapter are kept to a bare minimum. 
60.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
61.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
62.  "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the Municipal Code or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
63.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
64.  "Sheet flow area" — See "area of shallow flooding." 
65.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A0, A 1-A30, AE, A99, AH. 
66.  "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include any preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
67.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
68.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
69.  "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
70.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
71.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with Chapter 17.48 of the Municipal Code. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Chapter 17.48 of the Municipal Code is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
72.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
73.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.050 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.060 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 27, 1991 and the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated August 2, 1995 and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) are on file at 678 West 18th Street, (Civic Center) in the Department of Development Services. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.070 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.080 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.090 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.100 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Merced, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.110 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard, established in Section 17.48.060. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city engineer and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 17.48.130 of this chapter; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.120 - Designation of the city engineer. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.130 - Duties and responsibilities of the city engineer. 
The duties and responsibilities of the city engineer shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  Permit review. 
1.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with another existing and anticipated development, will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMRs) shall be approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits shall not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.48.060, the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
2.  Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse be maintained. 
3.  Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, after BFE changes due to physical alterations, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
D.  Notify FEMA in writing whenever the city boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new city limits. 
E.  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
1.  The certification required by subsection C.1. of Section 17.48.140 (floor elevations); 
2.  The certification required by subsection C.2. of Section 17.48.140; 
3.  The certification required by subsection C.3.c. of Section 17.48.140 (elevation of floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
4.  The certification required by subsections C.4.a. or C.4.b. of Section 17.48.140 (wet floodproofing standard); 
5.  The certification of elevation required by Section 17.48.160.B. (subdivision standards); 
6.  The certification required by Section 17.48.170 (manufactured homes); and 
7.  The certification required by Section 17.48.190.A. (floodway encroachments). 
F.  Make interpretation where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. 
G.  Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by city staff. 
H.  Biennial report. complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure city's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
J.  Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 17.48.070 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.135 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.48.060. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Merced. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 17.48.040; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 17.48.140.C.3 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 17.48.140.C.3. 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 17.48.140.C.3 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7.93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 17.48.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.140 - Standards of construction. 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 17.48.170. 
B.  Construction materials and methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
4.  Require within zones AH or AO that adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and floodproofng. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement in zones AE and AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection C.3. hereof. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the city engineer. 
2.  New construction and substantial improvement in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection C.3. hereof. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the city engineer. 
3.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsections C.1. or 2. hereof or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the city engineer. 
4.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvement that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Either a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade (openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater); or 
b.  Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 17.48.170. 
5.  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
a.  Attached garages. 
(1)  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See Section 17.48.140.C.4. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See Section 17.48.140.C.5.b. 
(2)  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB6. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
(1)  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 17.48.040, may be constructed such that is floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(i)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(ii)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(iii)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(iv)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
(v)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 17.48.190; and 
(vi)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with Section 17.48.140.C.3. 
(2)  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 17.48.140. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.150 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Other utilities are addressed in Sections 17.48.140 and 17.48.160D. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.160 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the city engineer. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
F.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the SFHA and BFE. 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads in the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the BFE, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.170 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within a special flood hazard area on the flood insurance rate map (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. Upon placement or completion of improvement of the manufactured home, the requirements of this subsection shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Such certifications shall be provided to the city engineer. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on the flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A. of this section will be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
Upon placement or completion of improvement of the manufactured home, the requirements of this subsection shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Such certifications shall be provided to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.180 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites with a floodplain shown on the flood insurance rate map will either: 
A.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
B.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
C.  Meet the permit requirements of Sections 17.48.110 through 17.48.130 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 17.48.170. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.190 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.48.060 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 17.48.140 through 17.48.190. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.200 - Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. Though these standards vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, in general, a properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
The City of Merced desires to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling, and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.210 - Appeals board. 
A.  The city council of the City of Merced shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
D.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the city engineer that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
E.  The city engineer will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.220 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 17.48.110 through 17.48.190 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary," considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon (1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; (2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and (3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create "nuisances," cause "fraud or victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A. through E. hereof are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors in subsection C. of Section 17.48.210 and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
17.48.230 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2321, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Chapter 17.52 - REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA 
 
17.52.010 - Permit for exterior painting. 
A.  Within any redevelopment project area (as defined in State Health and Safety Code Section 33320.1 et seq.), and within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries thereof, no person shall paint, or allow or permit the painting of, the exterior of any building or structure without first obtaining a permit and paying a fee of ten dollars to the building official therefor. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this section. 
(Ord. 1513 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1387 § 1981: prior code § 8.4).  
17.52.020 - Permit for exterior modifications. 
A.  Within any redevelopment project area (as defined in State Health and Safety Code Section 33320.1 et seq.), and within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries thereof, no person shall modify or allow or permit the exterior modification of any building or site in the manner listed in this subsection without first obtaining a permit and paying a fee of ten dollars to the building official therefor: 
1.  Removal or emplacement of landscaping, fencing or screening on the site; 
2.  Construction of exterior structures above grade; 
3.  Removal or emplacement of window and door awnings, shutters, marquees or other covers visible from the exterior; 
4.  Addition or deletion of exterior openings for doors or windows. 
B.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this section. 
(Ord. 1513 § 2, 1983).  
Chapter 17.54 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
17.54.010 - Findings and purposes. 
A.  It is hereby found that structures, sites and areas of special character or special historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest or value have been and continue to be unnecessarily destroyed, impaired or neglected despite the feasibility of preserving them. 
B.  It is further found that the prevention of such needless destruction and impairment is essential to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Merced. 
C.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Merced through: 
1.  The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of structures, site sand areas that are reminders of past eras, events and persons important to local, state or national history, or which provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past or are elements in the history of architecture or which are unique and irreplaceable assets to the City of Merced and its neighborhoods, or which provide for this and future generations examples of the physical soundings in which past generations lived; 
2.  The development and maintenance of appropriate setting sand environments for such structures, in such sites and areas; 
3.  The enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods and areas of the city, and the increase of economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants; 
4.  The preservation and encouragement of a city of varied architectural styles, reflecting the distinct phases of its history—cultural, social, economic, political and architectural; 
5.  The enrichment of human life in its educational and cultural dimensions in order to serve spiritual as well as material needs by fostering knowledge of the living heritage of the past. 
(Ord. 1474 § (part), 1983).  
17.54.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
A.  "Alteration" is any change to or modification of a historic resource. 
B.  "Architectural" is anything pertaining to the science, art or profession of designing and constructing buildings. 
C.  "Certificate for alteration" is an approved certificate issued for the construction, demolition, alteration, removal or relocation of any publicly or privately owned historic resource. 
D.  "Commission" is the historic preservation commission appointed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  "Culture" or "cultural" is anything pertaining to the concept, skills, habits, arts, instruments, or institutions of a given people at a given point in time. 
F.  "District" or "historic district" is a geographically definable area within the City of Merced possessing a significant concentration linkage, or continuity of historic resources and which has been so designated pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  "Historic" or "historic resource" is a structure, natural feature, site or other artifacts of architectural, artistic, cultural, engineering, aesthetic, archeological, historical, political, or social significance to the citizens of the City of Merced, the state, or the nation. 
H.  "Natural feature" is any tree, plant life, geographical or geological site or feature. 
I.  "Owner" is any person, association, partnership, firm, corporation or public entity appearing as the holder of title on any property as shown on the records of the County Assessor or on the last assessment roll of the County of Merced, as applicable. 
J.  "Site" is a place or plot of land where something was, is or will be. 
K.  "Structure" is any building or any other man-made object affixed on or under the ground, 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.030 - Historic preservation commission. 
The planning commission, in addition to its other powers and duties, shall serve as the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 5, 6-17-2013)  
17.54.040 - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  With the consent of the property owner, designate historic resources; 
B.  Review applications for, and issue certificates for alteration for construction, alteration, or demolition of designated historic resources; 
C.  Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historic preservation; 
D.  View structures, sites and areas which it has reason to believe are worthy of preservation; 
E.  Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures, sites and areas deemed worthy of preservation, and encourage and advise property owners and members of the community generally in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of property designated historic; 
F.  Consider methods other than those provided for in this chapter for encouraging and achieving historical or architectural preservation. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 6, 6-17-2013)  
17.54.050 - Criteria for historic designation. 
In considering a proposal for designation as a historic resource or historic district, the commission shall apply any or all of the following criteria: 
A.  Its character, interest or value as a significant part of the heritage of the city, the state or the nation; 
B.  Its location as a site of a significant historic event; 
C.  Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contribute to the culture and development of the city, the state or the nation; 
D.  Its exemplification of a particular architectural style or way of life; 
E.  Its exemplification of the best remaining architectural type in the city; 
F.  Its identification as the creation, design or work of a person or persons whose efforts has significantly influenced the heritage of the city, the state or the nation; 
G.  Its embodiment of elements demonstrating outstanding attention to artistic, architectural and/or engineering design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship; 
H.  Its relationship to any other historic resource if its preservation is essential to the integrity of the other historic resource; 
I.  Its unique location or singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of the city; 
J.  Its potential of yielding significant information of archeological interests; 
K.  Its integrity as a natural environment that strongly contributes to the well-being of the people of the city, the state, or the nation. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.060 - Procedures for historic designation. 
Upon an application filed with the commission, the commission shall recommend the designation of an historic resource to the city council. 
The procedure for designation of historic resources is as follows: 
A.  Any person or entity may file an application with the commission upon paying an application fee in an amount as designated from time to time by resolution of the city council; provided however, the application shall not be deemed complete unless the property owner consents to the proposed designation. 
B.  The application shall include the following data: 
1.  Assessor's parcel number of the site or legal description; 
2.  Description detailing the proposed resource's special aesthetic, cultural, architectural, artistic, or engineering interest or value of an historic nature; 
3.  Sketches, drawings, photographs, or other descriptive materials; 
4.  Statement of condition of structures; 
5.  The written consent of the property owner for the proposed designation; 
6.  Other material and information requested by the commission. 
C.  Each proposal shall be considered by the commission at a public hearing. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by the commission in the official newspaper of the city not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class and by registered mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to the owner(s) of the proposed historic resource and by first class mail to the owner(s) of property(ies) within three hundred (300) feet of the site as shown on the most recent assessor's roll. The commission may also give such additional notice as the commission may deem desirable. 
D.  Within thirty (30) days following the public hearing, the commission shall submit to the city council a report of the findings, summary of the hearing, and a recommendation to approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications the application for historic designation. 
E.  Upon receipt of the report from the commission, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing within thirty (30) days and shall render its decision within thirty (30) days following the close of said hearing. The recommendation of the commission, approved by at least four (4) affirmative votes, shall be approved unless reversed by the city council. 
F.  Prior to approval or approval with modification, the city council shall find: 
1.  That the proposed structure, natural feature, site or district has significance as a historic resources; and, 
2.  That the proposed designation may be made without imposing an undue hardship upon the owner(s) of the property(ies); and, 
3.  That the approval or approval with modification(s) of the application is consistent with the purpose and criteria of this chapter. 
G.  Following approval of the designation, the city council shall send to the owner(s) of the property(ies) so designated a letter outlining the basis for such designation, and the regulations resulting from such designation. The city council may also forward a copy of the letter to any other department or agency requesting it or that the city council considers affected by the designation. 
H.  Upon approval of a designation, the city clerk shall cause notice of such designation to be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the County of Merced against the parcel on which the historic resource is located. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983). 
(Ord. No. 2409, § 7, 6-17-2013)  
17.54.100 - Certificate for alteration. 
A.  No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out on an historic resource any material change through alteration, construction, relocation, or demotion without a certificate for alteration as approved by at least four affirmative votes o f the commission. 
B.  Any person who plans the demolition, construction, alteration, relocation or removal of an historic resource or part thereof shall first submit an application therefor along with a fee in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council to the commission. Copies of the plans for the proposed work shall accompany the application. As a minimum, the application and plans shall contain the following data: 
1.  A clear statement of the proposed work; 
2.  Plans describing the size, height and appearance of the proposed work and its relationship to adjacent structures; 
3.  A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures and the proposed work; 
4.  Reasons for demolition if demolition is proposed; 
5.  Other information deemed necessary by the commission to properly evaluate the proposal. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application for a certificate for alteration, the commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given by at least one publication in the official newspaper of the city at least ten calendar days prior to said hearing. 
D.  The commission in considering a certificate of alteration shall consider, among other things, the purpose of this chapter and the historic architectural value and significance of the historic resource, as well as present and prospective effects or hardships upon the owners and occupants of the affected properties. The commission shall take into consideration architectural features of the building or structure in question, other buildings within a historic district, and the position of such building or structure in relation to the street or public way and to other buildings and structures. The United States Secretary of the Interior's "Guidelines for Rehabilitation" shall provide base criteria for evaluating proposed alterations to an historic resource. 
E.  The commission may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. 
F.  Prior to approval, or approval with modifications, the commission shall find that: 
1.  The action proposed is consistent with the purposes of this chapter; and 
2.  The action proposed will not be detrimental to a structure or feature of significance as a historic resource; and 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that the action is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property; or 
4.  The applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate, undue, or substantial hardship; and 
5.  If the finding in subdivision 1 o f this section, and either finding 2, 3, or 4 cannot be made, then the certificate for alteration shall be denied. 
G.  A final determination, along with the written findings, shall be rendered by the commission within forty-five days of receipt of the application unless extended by mutual consent of the owner and the commission. 
H.  Action of the commission shall be deemed final, unless appealed. No certificate of alteration shall be issued until the time period for appeal has expired. Such appeal by the applicant, owner, or any person or entity dissatisfied with the action of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk within five days of the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval by the commission. The appeal shall set forth specifically where the petitioner believes the commission's findings to be in error, and shall be accompanied by such fees as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. On appeal, the city council may grant or deny the appeal, conditionally grant the appeal, or refer the matter to the commission for further consideration. 
I.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Where a historic resource has been damaged by fire, earthquake or other act of God to the extent that it cannot be repaired or restored with reasonable diligence, and where demolition of such structure, natural feature or site is being undertaken with prior approval of the city's chief building official; 
2.  Where hazardous conditions exist as determined by the chief building official and said hazardous conditions must be corrected immediately in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.110 - Termination of certificate of alteration. 
Any certificate of alteration which has been issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire six months from the date of issuance if the work authorized is not commenced within said time period. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.120 - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic resource that does not involve a change in design, material or appearance thereof, nor does this chapter prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such feature when the chief building official certifies to the commission that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe condition which cannot be rectified through the uses of the State Historical Building Code, as set forth in Sections 18950 and following of the California Health and Safety Code as the same exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.130 - Duty to keep in good repair. 
The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of an historic resource or district, or part thereof, shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such building(s) or structure(s), all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control by reason of designation or certificate for alteration, and all interior portions whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature. It shall be the duty of the chief building official to enforce this section. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
17.54.200 - Enforcement. 
In addition to the regulations of this chapter, other parts of the municipal code and other provisions of law which govern the approval or disapproval of applications for permits or licenses covered by this chapter, the chief building official shall have the authority to implement enforcement of the chapter by any of the following means: 
A.  Serve notice requiring the removal of any violation of this chapter upon the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of the historic resource; 
B.  Call upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforcement of this chapter, and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute any legal actions toward that end; 
C.  Call upon the police chief and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
1 7.54.300 - Penalties. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 1983).  
Chapter 17.58 - ROAD IMPROVEMENTS 
 
17.58.010 - Road construction application and plans. 
A.  Whenever a person is required to construct or reconstruct road improvements that have been or will be dedicated to the city, he or she shall first make application to the city engineer for a road construction permit, and submit to the city engineer for approval, construction plans and such specifications and other details as required to describe fully the proposed road construction. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by a qualified engineer registered in the state. 
B.  Construction plans for the road improvements shall conform to the latest adopted edition of city's "Standard. Designs of Common Engineering Structures Manual", and unless otherwise specified in the ordinance, development permit, map approval or other entitlement requiring the improvements, shall include the full road width, including curb and gutter. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.020 - Road improvement fees and credits. 
When an applicant applies for a building permit to improve property which abuts road improvements, the construction cost of which were paid by a previous applicant or the city, such applicant shall pay to the city, prior to the granting of such permit an amount calculated as "A" in the following formula: 
A = F × C × .50, where: 
1.  F equals the number of feet of applicant's property abutting on the road improvements. 
2.  C equals the average cost per foot as determined by the city engineer of construction cost of road improvements of similar size and character as of the date application is made for the building permit. 
3.  If additional improvements are made by the applicant to the existing road improvements, the applicant shall receive a credit against the amount owed to city calculated as follows: 
X = Y × Z × .50, where: 
1.  Y equals the number of feet of the existing road improvements which are to be further improved by the applicant. 
2.  Z equals the average construction cost per foot of improvements to be made by the applicant as determined by the city engineer based upon the cost of similar improvements as of the date application is made for the building permit. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.030 - Refunds to installing applicants. 
Amounts collected as provided in Section 17.58.020 shall be paid by the city to the applicant who paid the construction cost of the road improvements until the applicant has received an amount calculated as "R" in the following formula: 
R = T—(.50 × K × F), where: 
1.  T equals the total cost of installing the road improvements identified in Section 17.58.010. 
2.  F equals the number of feet of road improvements identified in Section 17.58.010 installed by the applicant. 
3.  K equals the cost per foot of installing the road improvements identified in Section 17.58.010. 
4.  Notwithstanding subsection A, if the road improvements were constructed on land which is neither owned by applicant at the time of construction, nor abutted land owned by applicant, then the amount to be refunded to applicant shall be calculated using the following formula: 
R = T—(K × F) 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.040 - Limitation on refunds. 
The city shall not make refunds to the installing applicant after the fifteenth anniversary of the date the road improvements are accepted by the city, and shall not make refunds unless the installing applicant files with the city clerk a written notification of the address to which any refunds are to be mailed. 
The city's obligation to make refunds shall cease if the installing applicant fails to make the notification required, and shall cease if any refund is mailed to the applicant at the address shown in the notification and either the refund check is not negotiated within ninety (90) days of mailing or is returned to the city and not claimed in person by the installing applicant within ninety (90) days of mailing. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.050 - Oversizing of road improvements. 
Road improvements identified in Section 17.58.010 which exceed the cost (as determined by the city engineer) of installing a "divided arterial street" shall be considered oversize and the city shall pay to the installing applicant the difference in cost between the average cost of installing a divided arterial street of similar length and character and the actual cost of the road improvements. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.060 - Finality of city engineer's determination. 
The determinations made by the city engineer pursuant to Sections 17.58.020, 17.58.030 or 17.58.050 shall be final. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.070 - Definition of "road improvements". 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "road improvements" shall include but not be limited to the following improvements: 
Pavement section, curb and gutter, sidewalk, street lighting, traffic signal systems, access ramps, park strip, turn lanes, street trees, pavement markings, signs, raised and non raised medians, channelization facilities, intersections, reconstruction, overlays, slums/chip seals, survey monuments, landscaping, irrigation systems and controls and such incidental work (i.e., relocation of interfering utility facilities, land acquisitions, etc.) as is needed to accomplish above improvements. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.080 - Definition of "divided arterial street". 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "divided arterial street" shall include the configuration shown in the latest edition of city's "Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structure Manual", including all road improvements normally contained therein. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
17.58.090 - Definition of "construction cost". 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "construction cost" shall include the actual estimated costs of constructing the road improvements plus an additional twenty percent (20%) for engineering, legal, accounting, insurance and other miscellaneous costs. 
(Ord. 1717 § 1 (part), 1988).  
Chapter 17.60 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose, authority and intent. 
Landscaping under this chapter is intended to: 
A.  Enhance the environmental value and physical appearance of development in the city. 
B.  Improve the environmental performance of development by: reducing heat, glare and noise; promoting the percolation of storm water, aid in improving air quality; and buffering potentially incompatible land uses from one another, and; 
C.  Promote the conservation of water and preservation of water quality by requiring drought tolerant plant material in landscaping and the retention of existing natural vegetation, thereby reducing the need for irrigation, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.020 - Applicability. 
Whenever landscaping or landscaping and irrigation plans are required by a condition of approval of a development project, the following landscape and irrigation system design and specifications shall apply. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.030 - Standards of landscape design/implementation. 
A.  Plan preparation. It is required that a licensed landscape architect or a licensed landscape contractor be employed in preparing the landscape and irrigation plans. 
B.  Plant materials. The selection of plant materials should include both evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs and attractive dust and erosion-preventing ground cover. It is required that at least ninety percent (90%) of the plants selected in non-turf areas be well-suited to the climate of the region, be drought tolerant, and require minimal water once established in the landscape. Up to ten percent (10%) of the plants may be of non-drought tolerant variety as long as they are grouped together and can be irrigated separately. Attention shall be given to the function of the plants, their appearance, height, spread, growth rate, moisture requirements, potential root damage, disease and permit susceptibility, climatic adaptability, soil type, slope, and degree of maintenance required. 
C.  Plant coverage. Landscaping shall be provided as specified in the conditions of approval of the development project. Turf shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of the total landscaped area. Exceptions may be granted on a project by project basis. Plants shall be properly spaced and sized that, when mature, they will fulfill their designated function. Shrubs shall be a minimum one (1) gallon in size and trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons. Although a reasonable number of growing seasons will be allowed for full plant coverage to develop, interim ground cover may be provided during this period. Interim cover of surfacing materials may consist of rocks, gravel, wood mulch or chips, or any other acceptable material. Mulches should be a minimum of three inches (3") thick when used as an interim measure in non-ground cover areas and a minimum of two inches (2") thick in ground covers. 
D.  Plant maintenance. Automated irrigation systems shall be provided to assure efficient water use with a minimum of labor and water waste. Irrigation controllers must have multiple cycle capabilities and rain sensing override switches. Plant material must be maintained in a healthy condition. Unhealthy plants shall be replaced. Planters shall be kept free of all weeds, debris and trash. 
E.  Planter construction. All planter areas shall provide positive drainage away from paved areas. They shall have either a minimum six inch (6") raised concrete or treated wooden curb erectly behind sidewalks and pavement areas, or shall be recessed two inches (2") below adjoining paved area with a minimum 4:1 slope away from paved edge to provide protection to the landscaping and control water runoff, silt, and erosion onto the pavement. All planters constructed adjacent to buildings or structures shall be so designed to avoid irrigation water intrusion into or on that adjacent building or structure. The size and location of planter areas shall be specified on the approved plot plan or conditions of approval. The minimum width of a shrub planter bed shall be forty (40) inches, twelve (12) inches for a ground cover planter, and sixty (60) inches where trees are planted, measured from the inside of curbing or acceptable permanent border. 
F.  Compacted soils. Prior to the planting of any materials the compacted soils surrounding a building site shall be returned to a friable condition. Friable condition shall mean returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of the newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.040 - Landscape plan specifications. 
A.  The landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the city in accordance with the standards of landscape design set forth in this chapter. 
B.  One (1) copy of all building elevations and site grading plans or one (1) copy of all building plans shall be submitted together with the landscape plan. The building elevation and site grading plans shall be in sufficient detail to permit determination of the location, width and height of all doors and windows and roof over hangs on all proposed buildings within or adjacent to proposed landscape areas. 
C.  The landscape plans shall be legible and drawn to a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet. Maximum sheet size on all drawings shall be 24? x 36?. 
D.  The landscape plans shall include property lines, important dimension lines, setback lines, walls and fences, driveways, adjacent street, outline of all structures and adjacent land uses. 
E.  The landscape plans shall indicate planting details, and may indicate pre-emergent soil treatment and materials. 
F.  The results of soil tests for horticultural suitability shall be submitted with the landscape plan. Soils shall be prepared and/or amended as appropriate. 
G.  Sheet plastic and other non-porous material shall not be placed under mulch. 
H.  The landscape plans shall include a plant list giving the common and botanical names of plants to be used, container size and quantities of each group of plants. This plant list shall be arranged in legend form with a key symbol assigned to each plant. Each plant shall be identified by a key symbol on the plan. The size of the plant, the quantity to be used shall follow in the legend, as the following example illustrates. 
No. 	Botanical Name 	Common Name 	Container Size 	Quantity 
1. 	Campanula isophylla 	Italian Bellflower 	Flat 	6 
2. 	Eucalyptus polyanthemos 	Silver dollar gum 	15 gal. 	10 
3. 	Pinus mugu mughus 	Mugho pine 	1 gal. 	14 
4. 	Ajuga reptans 	Carpet bulge 	Flat 	5 
 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.050 - Irrigation plan specifications. 
A.  Irrigation plans shall be submitted with the landscape plans for review and approval by the city to ensure adequate irrigation coverage and compliance with city requirements. The irrigation system shall be designed with water conservation in mind. Wind direction, surface drainage, soil type and application method shall be considered. 
B.  The irrigation plan shall indicate electrical power point of connection, the water system point of connection and size, water pressure available and maximum demand of the system in gallons per minute or gallons per hour if appropriate. Reclaimed water may also be used as an alternate irrigation water source if it is supplied through a dual distribution system that conforms to Merced County Health Department Standards. 
C.  Irrigation equipment specified must be identified by manufacturer's name and equipment identification number. 
D.  Performance date for irrigation heads and emitters including discharge rates, effective diameter and operating pressure shall be listed in the irrigation legend. 
E.  All locations of irrigation valves, controllers, hose bibs, quick coupler valves, sprinkler heads, backflow prevention devices, valves, filters, pressure regulators, emitters, rain switches and moister sensors must be indicated. 
F.  Irrigation details must be provided to clarify particular situations. Typical details should include backflow prevention devices, valves, irrigation heads, emitters, filters, pressure regulators, moisture sensors, rain switches, check valves, irrigation controllers and any required enclosures. Manufacturer's specification sheets may be substituted for details. 
G.  All irrigation lines must be sized. 
H.  Schedule 40 PVC pipe is required under all paved areas. All pipe under paved areas shall be placed in a minimum four-inch schedule 40 PVC pipe sleeve for protection and ease of replacement. Piping must be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches underground for nonpressure irrigation lines and eighteen (18) inches underground for constant pressure irrigation lines. Emitter distribution tubing may be located at grade. 
I.  Irrigation watering schedules for the entire year must be provided on irrigation drawings. These schedules will include an establishment (first twelve (12) months) and post establishment period. Post establishment schedules will be divided into four (4) quarters. Those quarters are winter, spring, summer, and fall. 
J.  Pop-up sprinklers in turf areas shall have minimum four inch pop-up height. Sprinkler coverage shall be one hundred (100) percent. Heads shall be placed at a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the diameter of throw (head to head) unless specific justification is provided for greater spacing. Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. Sprinklers and sprays shall not be used in areas less than eight (8) feet wide. Drip and bubblers that do not exceed one and one-half (1.5) gallons per minute per device shall be used. 
Rain switches are required on landscapes of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or larger and shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the landscape architect or the licensed landscape contractor. 
Irrigation systems shy avoid runoff, low head drainage, over spray, or similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. 
Serviceable check valves are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage. 
Irrigation controllers must be capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible calendar program. Controllers shall be set to operate when evaporation is at a minimum. Water application rates shall be less than .25 inches per cycle. A minimum of a one-hour period shall be allowed prior to the application of additional water. 
K.  Decorative water features shall use recirculating water systems. 
L.  Copies of pressure/flow calculations shall accompany the irrigation plans. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.060 - Maintenance. 
The landscaping and irrigation system shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape and irrigation plan. Maintenance includes removal of weeds, litter or other debris and replacement of dead plant materials. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
17.60.070 - Definitions. 
A.  "Backflow prevention device" shall mean a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
B.  "Check valve" shall mean a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads. 
C.  "Emitters" shall mean drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly from the system to the soil. 
D.  "Friable condition" shall mean returning the soil to an easily crumbled or loosely compacted condition down to a minimum depth per planting material requirement, whereby the root structure of newly planted water conserving plants will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
E.  "Landscaped area" shall mean the total area of the site not covered by buildings, non irrigated portions of parking lots, driveways, patios, plazas, sidewalks, hardcourts, swimming pools, spas and parkway areas. 
F.  "Mulch" shall mean any material such as leaves, bark, straw or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. 
G.  "Rain switch" shall mean a system which manually or automatically shuts off the irrigation system when it rains. 
H.  "Reclaimed water" shall mean treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation; not intended for human consumption. 
I.  "Turf" shall mean a single-bladed grass or sod. 
J.  "Water conserving plant" shall mean any plant which exhibits drought tolerant characteristics, that is to say, will, in designed location, survive with limited supplemental water. Cool season grass, hybrid tall type fescues and warm season grasses shall be considered water conserving. A suggested listing of these plants shall be made available by the city and may be added to at the discretion of the city representative upon the recommendation of landscape architects or licensed landscape contractors. 
(Ord. 1841 § 1 (part), 1993).  
Chapter 17.62 - PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEES 
 
17.62.010 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the City of Merced's ("city") General Plan and to mitigate the impacts caused by future development in Merced, certain public facilities must be or have been required to be constructed, and/or compensation measures must be or have been required to be taken to offset resources lost due to the future development. The city council has determined that public facilities impact fees are needed in order to finance these public facilities, and/or compensation measures, and to pay for each development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements, and/or the costs of the compensation measures. In establishing the fees, the city council has found the fees to be consistent with its General Plan and pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2 has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the Housing Element of the General Plan. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.020 - Periodic review. 
The City of Merced shall review the public facilities impact fees on an annual basis to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The city engineer shall be responsible for preparation of an annual report stating the amount of fees collected, the purposes for which the fees were collected, and the status of all projects proposed to be funded under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.030 - Impact fee calculation. 
The City of Merced has conducted a needs assessment for capital improvements within the city's specific urban development plan area for which fees are to be levied. The needs assessment, known as the public facilities financing plan (the "plan"), adopted in May 1998, revised in July 2003, and further revised in January 2006 and October 2012, has identified level of service standards, public facilities capital improvement needs, and has distinguished existing from future needs, and is approved. 
The data sources and methodology upon which fees are based are available for public inspection at the city clerk's office during regular business hours. The amount of the fees imposed have been based upon reasonable estimates of capital costs of public facilities expansions that will in probability be incurred by local government as the result of new development. 
The city council further finds: 
A.  The provision of new, expanded, or otherwise enhanced public facilities, for which a fee is charged, are reasonably related to the needs created by new development; 
B.  The fees imposed do not exceed the proportionate share of the costs incurred, or to be incurred, by the City of Merced in accommodating new development. The following factors have been considered in determining proportion share: 
1.  The need for public facilities capital improvements required to serve new development, based on a capital improvement program that shows deficiencies in capital facilities serving existing development, and the means, other than impact fees, by which any existing deficiencies will be eliminated within a reasonable period of time, and that shows additional demands anticipated to be placed on specified capital facilities by new development, 
2.  The cost of existing public facilities capital improvements. 
(Ord. 2232 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998). 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 12-3-2012)  
17.62.040 - Public facilities fee established. 
1.  A public facilities impact fee is hereby established on issuance of building permits for development in the City of Merced to pay for municipally owned public facilities, including, but not limited to, fire stations, police stations, community recreation facilities, traffic related improvements, and bikeways facilities. 
2.  The benefit and impact area on which the public facilities impact fee is imposed, the municipally owned public facilities to be financed, the estimated cost of these facilities, and the reasonable relationship between the fee and the various types of new developments are as set forth in the plan. 
3.  Effective as of January 19, 2013, the amount of the public facilities impact fee shall be as set forth in Table I below: 
TABLE I 
Per Dwelling 	Per 1,000 Square Feet of Space 
Residential 	Retail/Commercial 	Office/ 
Commercial 	Industrial 
Single- 
Family 	Multi- 
family 	Institutional 	Retail Under 50,000 sf 	Retail Over 50,000 sf 		
$4,469.00 	$3,088.00 	$3,069.00 	$8,974.00 	$6,771.00 	$5,876.00 	$1,681.00 
 
4.  Effective as of January 19, 2013, the amount of the public facilities impact fee shall be as set forth in Table I and shall thereafter be adjusted annually beginning January 1, 2014, in accordance with the Engineering Construction Cost Index as published by the Engineering News Record. 
(Ord. 2232 § 2, 2006: Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2000 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998). 
(Ord. No. 2340, § 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2377, § 1, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 2400, § 2, 12-3-2012)  
17.62.045 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2400, § 3, adopted Dec. 3, 2012, repealed § 17.62.045, which pertained to temporary reduction n public facilities impact fees for specific residential properties and derived from Ord. No. 2360, § 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2010.  
17.62.050 - Collection and expenditure of fees. 
A.  The revenues raised by payment of the public facilities impact fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used for the following purposes: 
1.  To pay for design and construction of designated public facilities and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related thereto; 
2.  To reimburse the city for designated public facilities constructed by the city with funds (other than grants or gifts) from other sources; 
3.  To reimburse developers who have designed and constructed designated public facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length or capacity; and 
4.  To pay for and/or reimburse costs of program development and ongoing administration of the public facilities fees program. 
B.  Within five (5) years of the date of collection, fees provided for under this chapter shall be expended, encumbered or committed for the construction of public facilities capital improvements. 
C.  A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment to the fee, or waiver of all or a portion of the fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than: (1) ten (10) days prior to the date set for city council consideration of the first development approval for the project, or (2) if no development approval by the city council is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the same time as the development approval or at a separate hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fees. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2000 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.060 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by development agreement, whenever a developer is required to construct a public facility described in the plan, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fees, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the new development. The timing and amount of the reimbursement or credit shall be determined in accordance with the administrative guidelines adopted pursuant to Section 17.62.080, and shall in no event be owed until sufficient public facilities impact fees have been collected for such purpose. 
(Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.070 - Refund of impact fees. 
Any fees that are not expended or encumbered within the period established in Section 17.62.050 shall be refunded to the fee payer or successor in title. The amount repaid shall include principal and accrued interest. Application for refund must be submitted to the city within one (1) year of the date on which the light to claim a refund arises. All refunds due and not claimed within one (1) year shall be retained in the trust fund and expended per Section 17.62.050. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.080 - Administrative guidelines. 
The city council shall, by resolution, adopt administrative guidelines to provide procedures for the calculation, reimbursement, credit or deferred payment of the public facilities impact fees. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.090 - Severability. 
In the event that any provision or application of this chapter is held to be invalid, the other provisions and applications hereof shall not be thereby affected. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1989 § 1 (part), 1998).  
17.62.100 - Calculation—Special determination. 
A.  The department of development services may determine that any use, whether or not set forth in Section 17.62.040, based upon a reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the proposed development and the type of facilities proposed, should pay a public facilities impact fee in lieu of the fee established in Section 17.62.040. 
B.  Upon such a determination, the department of development services shall, based upon criteria set forth in the plan, calculate a public facilities impact fee for the development. 
C.  In the event the developer does not agree with the determination, the developer may apply to the city council for a reduction or adjustment of the fee calculated by the department of development services. The application shall be made in writing and shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.62.050. 
(Ord. 2130 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 2007 § 1, 1998).  
Title 18 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 18.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.04.010 - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as "subdivision regulations of the city of Merced," or by its short title, "subdivision regulations." 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.1 (part)).  
18.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this title is to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act. The provisions of this title are intended to control those matters permitted by the Subdivision Map Act to be prescribed by local ordinance, and not to republish those provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which are mandatory. All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which are mandatory in nature are incorporated by reference in this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.1 (part)).  
18.04.030 - Planning commission—Powers and duties. 
A.  The Merced city planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is designated as the advisory agency with respect to subdivisions as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The planning commission shall have such powers and duties with respect to tentative maps, parcel maps, final maps, and lot line adjustments, and the procedure relating thereto, which are specified by this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.2).  
18.04.035 - Site approval committee. 
A.  The site approval committee, created by Section 20.68.030, is authorized to act on requests for extension of time for filing a final map. 
B.  The committee may refer any request to the planning commission for action if the committee feels that the request involves a significant policy decision. 
(Ord. 1853 § 4, 1993).  
18.04.040 - Compliance with chapter mandatory. 
It is unlawful for any person, as a principal agent, or otherwise to: 
A.  Divide real property in any manner that constitutes a subdivision, unless and until all the requirements of this title have been complied with; or 
B.  Sell, lease, or divide for purposes of financing, or contract or offer to sell, lease or divide for purposes of financing, any division of land that constitutes a subdivision, unless and until all the requirements of this title have been complied with. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.3).  
18.04.050 - Conflict of interest. 
When any provision of the Subdivision Map Act or of this title requires the execution of any certificate or affidavit or the performance of any act by a person in his official capacity who is also a subdivider or an agent or employee thereof, the certificate or affidavit shall be executed or the act shall be performed by some other person duly qualified therefor and designated so to act by the council. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.4).  
18.04.060 - Subdivision Map Act. 
The provisions of this title shall be in addition to and shall be considered as supplementing the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.5).  
18.04.070 - Filing fees. 
Filing fees shall be paid for the processing of tentative and final subdivision and parcel maps and for other procedures required or authorized by this title. The city council shall establish the filing fees by ordinance or resolution adopted from time to time. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.6).  
18.04.080 - Permits. 
No building permit, or other required permit, shall be issued unless the provisions of this title are fully complied with, and any permit issued in violation of the provisions of this title are null and void. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.7).  
Chapter 18.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.08.010 - Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all terms in this title which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act are used in this title as so defined, unless from the context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10 (part)).  
18.08.020 - Complaint. 
"Complaint" means the same as appeal except complaint may be filed by any interested person or by the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(k)).  
18.08.030 - Final map. 
"Final map" means a subdivision map other than a parcel map, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(g)).  
18.08.040 - Improvements. 
"Improvements" includes but is not limited to streets, lights, traffic devices, storm drain, sewer, utility, or other facilities. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(j)).  
18.08.050 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as a final or parcel map or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, financing or separate use. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(e)).  
18.08.060 - Owner. 
"Owner" means any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the real property sought to be divided to commence and maintain proceedings to divide the same under this title, and while used here in the masculine gender and singular number it means the feminine and neuter gender and plural number where required. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(b)).  
18.08.070 - Parcel map. 
"Parcel map" means a subdivision map other than a final map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(h)).  
18.08.080 - Person. 
"Person" means person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(i)).  
18.08.090 - Shall. 
"Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(a)).  
18.08.100 - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" means a subdivider as defined in the Subdivision Map Act as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(c)).  
18.08.110 - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" means a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map Act, as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(d)).  
18.08.120 - Tentative map. 
"Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around such subdivision. Such map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed field survey of the property but shall be of the form and contain the information required by this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.10(f)).  
Chapter 18.12 - DESIGN 
Sections: 
 
18.12.010 - Streets—General requirements. 
A.  Street design shall conform in principle to the streets shown on the circulation element of the general plan, specific plan, master plan of streets and in width and alignment to the streets shown on any precise plan adopted by the city council relating to streets, and shall conform to the requirements of this title. Streets not shown on a general or precise plan shall conform to city standards adopted by the city council. 
B.  The subdivider shall be required to dedicate all land necessary for street purposes or other public uses as shown on the general plan, specific plan, master plan of streets or any precise plan or to conform to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.20).  
18.12.020 - Streets—Conditions of design. 
The following general conditions of design shall apply to streets and highways: 
A.  Relationship to existing streets. The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate functionally to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision. 
B.  Centerlines. The centerlines of all streets wherever practicable shall be the continuations of the centerlines of existing streets, or shall be offset at least one hundred feet. 
C.  Intersections. Each street intersection or interception shall be as near to a right angle as is practicable. 
D.  Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets. No cul-de-sac or dead-end streets shall be longer than permitted by city standards. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundary of the property. 
E.  Street names. A subdivision plan shall conform to the following street designation pattern: 
1.  Streets which run in a general easterly and westerly direction may be designated as "street" or "drive." 
2.  Streets which run in a general northerly and southerly direction may be designated "avenue." 
3.  Cul-de-sacs shall be designated "court." 
4.  Loop streets shall have one name and may be designated "way" or "place." For purposes of this chapter, a loop street is defined as a street which forms a loop by having each end intersect on the same street and which does not intersect with any streets other than a cul-de-sac between its termini. 
5.  If cul-de-sac is a continuation of another street, it shall have the same name with the exception that it shall be designated "court." In the event the street in question has a cul-de-sac at each end, the one at the northerly or easterly terminus shall have the same name and the one at the other end shall have a different name. 
6.  If either end of a loop street is a continuation of another street, it may have the same name with a suffix typical of loop streets. If each end of a loop street is the continuation of another street, the loop street shall bear the name of the most northerly or easterly street of which it is a continuation. A loop street shall not intersect a single street more than once. 
F.  1.  Part-width streets. Part-width streets shall be permitted only on the periphery of a subdivision and only when the street design approved by the planning commission requires the street to be so located that a full dedication would require land not in the subdivider's ownership or control. 
2.  A part-width street may be permitted upon recommendation of the planning commission and subject to the approval of the city council. 
G.  Width of streets. Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than those set forth in the adopted standard drawings, master plan of streets, precise plan and general plan. Increased widths may be required when determined necessary by the planning commission in the public interest. 
(Ord. 1885 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(a)).  
18.12.030 - Alleys. 
A.  Alleys shall be prohibited except when approved or required by the planning commission for any one of the following reasons: 
1.  To widen an existing part-width alley which has been dedicated and improved in an adjacent subdivision; 
2.  To complete the continuity of existing alleys where the property to be subdivided is located adjacent to existing blocks containing alleys; 
3.  The special nature of the design or density of a residential subdivision where dwellings are to be grouped in such a manner as to require access from other than street frontage; 
4.  The relationship to existing or proposed adjacent commercial, industrial or high density residential development, or adjacent railroad, canal rights-of-way or other physical barrier; 
5.  The unusual size, shape or topographical character of the property to be subdivided. 
B.  Alleys shall be so laid out and aligned as to provide reasonable access for utilities and other services and shall meet city standards. 
(Ord. 1885 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(b)).  
18.12.040 - Blocks. 
A.  Acre or large lot subdivisions. Where a parcel is first subdivided into small farms or acre tracts, the blocks shall be of such size and shape and be so divided as to provide for the opening of major and collector streets and for the ultimate extension and opening of minor streets and alleys at such intervals as will permit a subsequent division of any parcel into lots of normal size. 
B.  Block widths. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit the plotting of two tiers of lots except where blocks are adjacent to major streets, freeways or expressways and lots are created with backup to such street and front onto a residential or collector street and access rights to such major street, freeway or expressway are waived by the subdivider. The planning commission may grant an exception to these provisions to permit through lots which are to be developed with uses facing both streets when it is determined that such exception is warranted by the circumstances of a particular subdivision and is in compliance with an existing zoning classification. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(c)).  
18.12.050 - Lots. 
A.  Side lines. The side lines of all lots wherever practicable shall be at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
B.  Division of lots. No lot shall be divided by a county, city, school or any other taxing district boundary line. 
C.  Lot widths and depths. The size and shape of each lot shall be in conformance to the zoning regulations effective in the area of the proposed subdivision. 
D.  Suitability of lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended to be sold, and shall meet the flood damage prevention requirement in Chapter 17.48. 
(Ord. 1482 § 1, 1983: Ord. 1368 § 6, 1981: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(d)).  
18.12.060 - Easements. 
A.  For utilities. The subdivider shall tent easements for public utility use along lot lines where necessary for the extension of any such utility and for the relocation of existing public utility facilities. 
B.  For planting. Easements of width shown in city standards for planting and utilities shall be required adjacent to each street right-of-way line where no planter strip will exist between sidewalk and curb, unless a larger width is deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
C.  Dedication. Dedication of easements and street right-of-way shall be for the purpose of installing and maintaining utilities, planting strips and for other public purposes as may be ordered or directed by the planning commission or minor subdivision committee. 
D.  Protection of easements. No person other than a public utility shall erect, construct or place any building or structure except fences or walls on any public utility easement. No person shall permit or allow vines or other climbing plant materials to become attached to public utility poles. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of real property to maintain any public utility easement area located thereon in such a manner that its condition will not interfere with the proper operation and maintenance of public utility facilities located thereon. Any public utility using such easement, its representatives, agents or employees, shall have the right to trim or top such trees or sibs growing within or overhanging the easement as may endanger or interfere with public utility facilities constructed therein and may have free access to said public facilities and every part thereof at all times for the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining said public utility facilities. 
E.  Design of easements. Easements shall be located and designed in subdivisions to provide for reasonable, practical and useful placement, replacement, enlargement, repair and maintenance of utility facilities. 
(Ord. 1885 § 3, 1994: Ord. 1358 § 1, 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(e)).  
18.12.070 - Utilities. 
A.  All utility distribution facilities and lines, including, but not limited to, gas, water, sewer, electrical, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be installed to each lot or parcel subdivided. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to insure that utilities are installed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. He shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies or other agencies for such installation, according to the specifications of the governing agency and the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(f)).  
18.12.080 - Along major streets. 
When a subdivision is developed adjacent to a freeway, expressway or major street as shown on the general plan, the planning commission may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a frontage road to provide ingress and egress to adjacent lots or to create backup lots which front upon an interior residential street and back up to such freeway, expressway or major street. When backup lots are created, the subdivider shall waive direct access rights from the lots to the freeway, expressway or major street and shall construct a masonry wall, fence or other suitable barrier as required by the planning commission between the subdivision and the adjacent freeway, expressway or major street. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(g)).  
18.12.090 - Water courses. 
The subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, dedicate a right-of-way for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse or channel, stream or creek that traverses the subdivision, or at the option of the city, provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface water and stormwater. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(h)).  
18.12.100 - Sewage disposal. 
Provision shall be made for adequate sewerage to be installed in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.21(i)).  
18.12.110 - Approval conditions. 
In approving tentative maps, the planning commission, minor subdivision committee or city council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety or welfare, in accordance with the purpose and intent of this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.22).  
18.12.120 - General plan. 
In all respects the subdivision will be considered in relation to the general plan and specific plans of the city, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.23).  
18.12.130 - Length of block. 
Blocks more than six hundred feet in length or cul-de-sacs over three hundred feet may be cause for disapproval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.24 (part)).  
18.12.140 - Pedestrian ways. 
Pedestrian ways at least ten feet wide may be required in blocks over four hundred forty feet long. Length shall be measured from the intersecting street centerline to the next intersecting street centerline or cul-de-sac radius point. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.24 (part)).  
Chapter 18.16 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.16.010 - Filing—Number. 
Thirty copies of a tentative map and statement of the proposed subdivision of any land shall be filed with the planning department at least twenty-one days prior to the meeting of the commission at which consideration is desired. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.30(a)).  
18.16.020 - Filing—Acceptance. 
A representative of the planning department authorized to receive such maps shall examine any such map upon presentation and shall not accept such map unless the same is in full compliance with the law and of this chapter as to form, the data, information and other matters required to be shown thereon or furnished therewith. The tentative map shall not be considered as filed until stamped, signed and dated by said representative. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.30(b)).  
18.16.030 - Distribution of copies. 
Within five days of the filing of a tentative map, the planning department shall transmit copies of such map and notice of the filing of the map to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. Copies of the tentative map shall also be sent to the city engineer, chief engineer of the Merced Irrigation District, district manager of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, district manager of the Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company, and such other department heads and agencies as deemed advisable, along with notification of the date and time for staff and interested party/agency review. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.30(c)).  
18.16.040 - Action by interested agency—Twenty days' notice. 
The governing board of any school district or other agency or department receiving a notice of the subdivision review meeting and of the filing of a tentative map or a copy of the tentative map may respond in writing to such notice or tentative map within twenty working days of the date on which such notice or tentative map was mailed by the planning department. In the event that the governing board of any school district or other agency or department fails to respond to a notice of filing or a tentative map within said period, such failure to respond shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district, agency, or department. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.30(d)).  
18.16.050 - Fee. 
The fee for examining a tentative map shall be as determined by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.31).  
18.16.060 - Form. 
Subdividers are encouraged to consult with the planning department staff for technical advice and procedure prior to the filing of a tentative map. Preliminary sketches of the area involved may be submitted and discussed. However, such a preliminary sketch is not be construed as a tentative map. Where only a portion of a larger area is to be subdivided at this time and the balance planned for future subdivision, the planning department may require a map showing the proposed street layout within the entire area. Such a map is not a tentative map but is to be used as a guide for the tentative map under consideration and future maps of that area. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.32(a)).  
18.16.070 - Size and scale. 
Tentative maps shall be twenty-four by thirty-six inches in size and to a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. 1358 § 2, 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.32 (b)).  
18.16.080 - Information required. 
Every tentative map shall be clearly and legibly reproduced. The following information shall be shown on, or accompanying, the map: 
1.  A key or location map on which is shown the general area including adjacent property, subdivisions and roads; 
2.  The tract name, date, north point, scale and sufficient legal description to define location and boundaries of the proposed subdivision; 
3.  Name and address of recorded owner or owners; 
4.  Name and address of the subdivider; 
5.  Name and business address of the person who prepared the map; 
6.  Acreage of proposed subdivision to the nearest tenth of an acre; 
7.  Contours at six-inch intervals to determine the general slope of the land and the high and low point thereof; 
8.  The locations, names, widths, approximate radii of curves and grades of all existing and proposed roads, streets, highways, alleys and ways in and adjacent to the proposed subdivision or subdivision to be offered for dedication; 
9.  Proposed protective covenants; 
10.  Location and description of all easements; 
11.  Locations and size of all existing and proposed public utilities; 
12.  Proposed method of sewage and stormwater disposal; 
13.  Location and character of all existing and proposed public open space in and adjacent to the subdivision and a statement of intention with regard to park land dedication or payment of a fee in lieu thereof; 
14.  Lot layout, approximate dimensions and area in square feet of each irregular lot and lot numbers; 
15.  City limit lines occurring within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
16.  Classification of lots as to intended land use, zone, and density; 
17.  Approximate bearings and distances to quarter-section bounds within the general vicinity of the subdivision; 
18.  Proposed public improvements; 
19.  Statement as to whether the subdivision is to be recorded in stages; 
20.  Existing use and ownership of land immediately adjacent to the subdivision; 
21.  Preliminary title report issued not more than sixty days prior to filing of the tentative map; 
22.  The outline of any existing buildings and indication of any to remain in place and their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines; 
23.  Location of all existing trees and indication of those proposed to remain in place, standing within the boundaries of the subdivision; 
24.  Location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow, the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses and indicate flood zone classification; 
25.  Elevations of sewers at proposed connection. 
(Ord. 1533 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1358 § 3, 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.32(c)).  
18.16.090 - Required statement. 
A statement shall be presented by the subdivider in written form accompanying the map and shall contain justification and reasons for any exceptions to provisions of this title, the standard drawings or for any amendments to or variation from the zoning law, which may be requested in conjunction with the subdivision proposed. 
(Ord. 1533 § 2, 1984: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.33).  
18.16.100 - Public hearing—Generally. 
The planning commission shall review the tentative map at a public hearing to determine whether it is in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title and upon that basis, within the time allowed in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1358 § 4, 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.34(a)).  
18.16.110 - Public hearing—Presence of subdivider. 
The subdivider or his representative should be present at the time set for the consideration of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.34(c)).  
18.16.120 - Time limit extensions. 
The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative maps as specified in this section may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or city council as the case may be. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.34(d)).  
18.16.130 - Information supplied upon final approval. 
When the approval or conditioned approval of the tentative map of any subdivision has become final, the subdivider shall furnish the construction plans and calculations for all public facilities and other information necessary or desired to the city engineer and shall receive his authorization prior to construction of any of the improvements or preparation of the final map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.34(e)).  
18.16.140 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  If the subdivider or any interested person is dissatisfied with any action of the planning commission with respect to the tentative map, or the kinds, nature and extent of the improvements required by the planning commission, he may, within ten days after such action is taken by the planning commission, appeal in writing to the city council for a public hearing thereon. The city council shall hear the appeal, upon notice being given in accordance with the provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Government Code and to the appellant and the planning commission, within thirty days, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. At the time fixed for the hearing, the city council shall proceed to hear the testimony of the appellant or any witnesses in his behalf. It may also hear the testimony of other competent persons respecting the character of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is to be located; the kinds, nature and extent of improvements; the quality of kinds of development to which the area is best adapted; and any other phase of the matter with respect to which it may desire to inquire into. Upon conclusion of the hearing the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings based upon the testimony and documents produced before it. It may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  If the applicant or any interested person is dissatisfied with any action of an administrative official or advisory body, excepting the planning commission, he may, within ten days after such action is taken, appeal in sting to the planning commission for a public hearing thereon. The planning commission shall hear the appeal, upon notice being given in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.72 and to the appellant and administrative official or advisory body, within thirty days, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. At the time fixed for the hearing the planning commission shall proceed to hear the testimony of the appellant or any witnesses in his behalf. It may also hear the testimony of other competent persons. Upon conclusion of the hearing the planning commission shall, within ten days, declare its findings based upon the testimony and documents produced before it. It may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the administrative official or advisory body and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1853 § 5, 1993: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.34(b)).  
Chapter 18.18 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.18.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, all other provisions of this title shall apply. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by Title 20 of this code or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.040 - Definitions. 
A.  A "vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential subdivision, as defined in Section 18.08.120 of this code, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words vesting tentative map at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 18.18.060 of this chapter, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the planning department for the filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1(part), 1986).  
18.18.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to in this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 18.18.080 of this chapter. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of one year; 
2.  Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for the phase is recorded; 
3.  The initial time period set forth in subsection C1 of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application is filed; 
4.  A subdivider may apply to the site approval committee for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection C1 of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the planning commission within ten days; 
5.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections C1 through 4 of this section, the rights referred to in this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 1853 § 7, 1993: Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the map shall, notwithstanding Section 18.18.090 of this chapter, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 18.18.090C of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
18.18.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Sections 18.18.090 and 18.18.100 of this chapter and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 1986).  
Chapter 18.20 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.20.010 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to convey for purposes of sale or financing, or to lease any parcel in a minor subdivision, unless and until an approved parcel map or other document approved by the city, i.e., instrument of waiver (certificate of compliance), lot line adjustment, merger or reversion, evidencing such minor subdivision is filed with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.40(a)).  
18.20.020 - Minor subdivision—Committee established. 
Any division of land which does not require a tentative and final map is a minor subdivision. All minor subdivisions shall require a parcel map. Maps of proposed minor subdivisions shall be reviewed by the minor subdivision committee, which is hereby established. 
(Ord. 1358 § 5 (part), 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.40(b)(part)).  
18.20.030 - Minor subdivision committee—Membership. 
The minor subdivision committee shall consist of the chair of the planning commission, who may appoint a member of the planning commission as an alternate, the director of development services, and the city engineer, or their representatives. In the event any of the above named positions is vacant more than thirty (30) days, the city manager may designate an employee to serve on this committee during the vacancy. The committee shall meet on call of the director of development services, who shall act as secretary of the committee and shall keep records of its activities, which records shall be a public record and shall be made available to the entire membership of the planning commission. The chair of the planning commission shall be chair of this committee. all tentative parcel and parcel maps shall be submitted in a number and form determined by the minor subdivision committee, and shall contain such information as is prescribed by the committee in its established procedures. 
(Ord. 1358 § 5 (part), 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.40(b)(part)). 
(Ord. No. 2343, § 25, 10-19-2009)  
18.20.040 - Minor subdivision committee—Authority. 
The minor subdivision committee shall have authority to impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the public safety, welfare and convenience, and may waive such provisions of this chapter relating to improvement and design as it deems reasonable under the circumstances. The procedures of the committee shall be approved by resolutions of the planning commission and shall apply uniformly to all applications for parcel maps. 
(Ord. 1358 § 5 (part), 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.40(b)(part)).  
18.20.050 - Minor subdivision committee—Alternative actions. 
The minor subdivision committee may: 
A.  Refer any parcel map to the planning commission for action if the committee feels that the request involves major policy decisions which should be made by the planning commission and city council. 
B.  Require a tentative and final subdivision map in substitute for a parcel map when the particular circumstances of proposal so warrant. 
C.  Waive the requirement for a parcel map in those instances where the map would merely correct a minor technical or inadvertent error, or administrative oversight, or where the parcel to be divided meets all requirements of Section 66428 of the Government Code and the ordinance codified in this title and no improvements or dedications will be required. The subdivision shall in any instance meet the required findings of Section 66428 of the Government Code and shall conform to all subdivision regulations otherwise applicable, and the applicant shall be required to furnish a legal description of the property in question, sketch of the proposed subdivision, volume and page numbers of the deed, and whatever other information and materials that may be required by the subdivision committee. When such waiver is granted, the subdivider shall record the instrument of waiver, setting forth the legal descriptions of the parcels before and after subdivision and the basis for the waiver. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.41).  
18.20.060 - Dedications. 
A.  Dedications or offers of dedication may be made either by certificate on the parcel map or by separate instrument. If dedications or offers of dedication are made by separate instrument, such dedications or offers of dedication shall be recorded prior to or concurrently with the parcel map being filed for record. 
B.  The city clerk is authorized to accept dedications by certificate on parcel maps. 
C.  Whenever an offer of dedication appears on a parcel map, the city engineer shall submit the parcel map to the city clerk for acceptance, consistent with the applicable provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.42).  
18.20.070 - Tentative maps—Filing—Approval. 
The legal owner of record, or his authorized representative, desiring the reparceling of any lot or lots or parcels of land under the provisions of this chapter shall file five (5) copies of a tentative parcel map with the minor subdivision committee at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the meeting of the committee at which consideration is desired. The representative of the minor subdivision committee authorized to receive such maps shall examine any such map upon presentation and shall not accept such map unless the same is in full compliance with this chapter as to form, the date, information and other matters required to be shown thereon. The tentative map shall not be considered as filed until stamped, signed and dated by said representative. The representative of the minor subdivision committee shall distribute copies of the tentative parcel map to affected city departments, local utility companies serving the property, and other individuals or agencies as it is deemed advisable. The department, utility company, individual or agency receiving a copy of the tentative parcel map may respond regarding any concerns or requirements within fifteen (15) days from the date the map was mailed. If a reply is not received within the fifteen-day period it shall be assumed that the tentative parcel map conforms with the requirements of the particular department, utility company, individual or agency. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.43(a)).  
18.20.080 - Tentative maps—Form. 
Tentative parcel maps shall comply with the requirements of Sections 18.16.060 through 18.16.090. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.43(b)).  
18.20.090 - Tentative maps—General plan consistency. 
A tentative parcel map shall not be approved or conditionally approved by the minor subdivision committee unless the minor subdivision committee finds that the proposed parcel map, together with the provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.43(c)).  
18.20.100 - Tentative maps—Approval requirements. 
If the tentative parcel map complies with all of the requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act, the minor subdivision committee may approve the division, subject to the dedication of necessary rights-of-way for streets and easements, the installation of all improvements along the frontages of the property so divided, as required by the committee, and the installation of all necessary utilities and connections to each lot. All lot sizes shall conform to the provisions of the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.43(d)).  
18.20.110 - Tentative maps—Improvements. 
A.  If the minor subdivision committee approves the tentative parcel map it may require the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements for the construction of such off-site or on-site improvements shall be notified by certificate on the parcel map, on the instrument evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, or by separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or instrument of waiver of a parcel map being filed for record. The construction of such improvements shall be required prior to the subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of such parcel. The minor subdivision committee may require the fulfillment of such improvement requirements prior to recording the final parcel map or within a reasonable time following recording of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the minor subdivision committee that fulfillment of the improvement requirement is necessary for reasons of: 
1.  The public health and safety; or 
2.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
B.  If the improvements are required within such a time period, an improvement security shall be posted in one of the forms set forth in Section 18.24.150. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.43(c)).  
18.20.120 - Fees—Filing and inspection. 
The deposit for processing a minor subdivision parcel map and for inspecting of any improvements required in connection therewith shall be in the amount as is determined by the city engineer as being sufficient to cover the estimated cost of examination and inspection. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual cost to the city. Final inspection acceptance of the work shall be withheld until all monies due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the estimate, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.44).  
18.20.130 - Appeal. 
If the subdivider is dissatisfied with the action of the subdivision committee, the subdivider may file with the planning commission an appeal to the decision within fifteen days after receiving notification of the decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the commission within thirty days of the filing of the appeal and after due consideration the commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the minor subdivision. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.45).  
18.20.140 - Filing—Time limits. 
A.  The subdivider or his agency may file a parcel map with the city engineer for his examination and certification within twelve months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the minor subdivision committee may extend the time for filing a parcel map for a period or periods not exceeding two years, if it determines that conditions affecting the parcel map have not substantially changed. In any case where a parcel map has not been recorded within twelve months or such extended period of time as may be granted by the minor subdivision committee, approval of a new tentative parcel map shall be required. 
B.  A parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall substantially conform to the tentative parcel map and conditions thereto as approved by the minor subdivision committee. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(a)).  
18.20.150 - Tracing filed—Recorder's fee. 
A tracing of the parcel map shall be filed with the city engineer. In addition, the subdivider shall deposit with the city the recorder's fee for recording the parcel map, and other fees as may be established by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 1358 § 6, 1980: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(b)).  
18.20.160 - Form. 
A.  The parcel map shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 2, Article 3, of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  At least two reference point ties to the California State Plane Coordinate System (1983 NAdatum) shall be shown on the map, if available within one mile of the subdivision. If the distance is greater than one mile, a record tie to a section line or quarter-section line and from a section corner or quarter-section corner shall be shown on the map and the distance from a point on the outer line of a subdivision to a point on a section line or the angle between the tie line and the section line upon which the control point falls. 
(Ord. 1769 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.4b(c)).  
18.20.170 - Certificate of consent. 
The parcel map shall contain a certificate, which shall be signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recording of the parcel map. Such signatures shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.24.050(A) pertaining to final maps. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(d)).  
18.20.180 - Dedications. 
If dedications of streets, alleys, walkways, easements, public utility easements, or other public ways, or access rights are required by the minor subdivision committee as conditions of approval of a parcel map, such dedications shall either be shown on and offered by a certificate on the parcel map or made by separate instrument as determined by the city engineer. Such certificate, or instrument shall be signed by those parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.24.050(A) pertaining to final maps. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(e)).  
18.20.190 - Dedications—Acceptance recommendation. 
Offers of dedication as set forth in Section 18.20.200 shall be reviewed by the city engineer for compliance with the conditions of approval imposed by the minor subdivision committee. If all offers of dedication are in accordance with the requirements of the minor subdivision committee, the city engineer shall recommend the acceptance of such dedications by the authorized official of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(g)).  
18.20.200 - Certification by city engineer. 
Upon receipt of the parcel map, together with the recording fees, and any required improvement security, the city engineer shall examine the same to determine whether the map is technically correct and substantially conforms with the tentative parcel map and with all changes and requirements imposed as conditions of approval by the minor subdivision committee. The city engineer shall also refer the parcel map to the secretary of the minor subdivision committee for examination and determination if all of the lots and parcels created by said map conform with the requirements and the zoning regulations of the city. If the city engineer determines that the parcel map fully conforms with all of the requirements set forth in this chapter, he shall so certify on the map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(f)).  
18.20.210 - Recordation. 
Upon certification by the city engineer, the parcel map shall be transmitted to the city clerk, who shall cause the map to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.46(h)).  
18.20.220 - Division of existing buildings. 
Prior to the recordation of a parcel map which will result in the division of any existing building or buildings into separate units or parts, the applicant shall secure certification by the chief building official that any building or buildings to be divided will, after division, meet current code standards for new construction. As used in this section, the phrase "current code standards" refers to all standards in the current adopted editions of the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code and fire code of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.47).  
18.20.230 - Lot line adjustments. 
A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, may be approved by resolution of the minor subdivision committee, without the approval and filing of a parcel map. Applications for lot line adjustments shall be filed with the minor subdivision committee and shall be in the form and contain the information required by the minor subdivision committee. 
A lot line adjustment shall not be approved unless the diminished parcel and any structures or parking spaces located thereon will comply with area, width, frontage, and yard requirements of the zone in which the parcel is located. The lot line adjustment shall not be complete until a deed is recorded in the office of the county recorder and monuments have been placed at the new lot lines and a record of survey recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.48).  
18.20.240 - Improvement construction—Enforcement. 
Whenever improvements which are required to be constructed as a condition of approval of a parcel map have not been so constructed within the period of time allowed, the city shall have the authority to cause the improvements to be constructed according to any procedure allowed by law. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.49).  
18.20.250 - Work performance—Time extension. 
Upon receipt of an application from the person required to construct the improvements and an agreement by the person that he will comply with the requirements if allowed additional time, the minor subdivision committee may grant an extension of time, for a period or periods not exceeding a total of one year, within which to complete the improvements. 
(Ord. 1853 § 8, 1993: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.50).  
Chapter 18.24 - FINAL MAP 
Sections: 
 
18.24.010 - Filing—Time limits. 
The subdivider or his agent may file a final map within twenty-four months after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the site approval committee may extend the time for filing a final map for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years, if it determines that conditions affecting the subdivision have not substantially changed. In any case where a final map has not been filed within such extended period of time as may be granted by the site approval committee, approval of a new tentative map shall be required. 
(Ord. 1853 § 9, 1993: Ord. 1591 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1423 § 1, 1981: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.70(a)).  
18.24.020 - Filing—Fees. 
A tracing of the final map shall be filed with the city engineer. The subdivider shall deposit with the city the county recorder's fee for recording the final map and shall pay to the city the fees for checking the map. The subdivider shall also pay at that time all other fees required by law to be paid in connection with the approval of a subdivision. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.70(b)).  
18.24.030 - Filing—Traverse sheets. 
At the time of the filing of final map with the city engineer, the subdivider shall also file traverse sheets showing traverse closures and the computation of all distances, angles, and course shown on the final map. The traverse of the boundaries of the tract and of lots and blocks shall close within a limit or error of one in ten thousand. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.70(c)).  
18.24.040 - Filing—Title company report. 
The final map shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a duly authorized title company naming the persons whose consent is necessary to the preparation and recordation of the map and to the dedication of the streets, alleys, and other public places shown on the map and certifying that as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons therein named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to the subdivision. At the time of recording the approved map, there shall be filed with the county recorder a guarantee executed by a duly authorized title company for the benefit and protection of the city showing that persons (naming them) consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication the streets, alleys and other public places shown thereon are all the persons necessary to pass clear title to the subdivision and to the dedication shown thereon. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.70(d)).  
18.24.050 - Form—Legibility and size. 
A.  The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film, except that affidavits, certificates and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with black opaque ink. The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that good legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches leaving an entirely blue margin on one inch. 
B.  When the final map consists of more than two sheets, a key map showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on sheet one. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear the scale, note point, legend, sheet number and number of sheets comprising the map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.71(a)).  
18.24.060 - Form—Title. 
The final map shall contain a title consisting of the name of the tract and subtitle or general description of all the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded. In no case shall the title be the same, or so nearly the same as to cause confusion as a name of any existing city, town, tract or subdivision of land of which a map has been previously recorded. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.71(b)).  
18.24.070 - Form—Distances and bearing. 
Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots shall be given as total dimensions, corner to corner, and shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. Lots containing one acre or more shall show total acreage to the nearest hundredth. Bearing the length of straight lines, and radii and arc length for all curves as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and tangent points shall be shown. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.71(c)).  
18.24.080 - Form—Boundary references and monuments. 
A.  The final map shall show clearly any stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision name and properties shown. 
B.  Whenever the city engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley; adjacent to or in the proposed subdivision, the data shall be shown in the final map indicating all monuments found and making reference to a field book or map. 
C.  If the points were reset by ties, the course and detail of relocation data used shall be stated. 
D.  The map shall show the location and description of all monuments found or placed in making the survey of the subdivision with proper reference sufficient for relocation. 
E.  At least two points shown on the map shall be tied to the California State Plane Coordinate System (1983 Datum) providing sufficient data is available and may be occupied within one mile of the subdivision. If sufficient data is not available within one mile, the subdivision shall be tied to a section corner, quarter section corner, lot or block corner of an original survey or any other point acceptable to the city engineer. Said tie shall also show the relationship of the bearings in the subdivision to the section line, or lot line, and may be calculated from records. 
(Ord. 1769 § 2, 1990: Ord. 1358 § 7, 1980: Card. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.71(d)).  
18.24.090 - Form—Additional information. 
In addition, the final map shall be prepared in full compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  High Water Line. The line of high water shall be shown in any case where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel or any body of water. 
B.  Flood Areas. The boundaries of any, areas within the proposed subdivision which are subject to inundation by water shall be shown. 
C.  Boundary of Subdivision. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a blue border one-eighth inch in width applied to the reverse side of the tracings. The border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data. 
D.  Right-of-way Dimensions. The centerlines and side lines of all streets, the total width of all streets, the widths each side of the centerline, the widths of any portion of a street being dedicated, and the widths of existing dedications, and the widths of all railroad, irrigation district or other rights-of-way shall be shown. 
E.  Easements. The map shall show the side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. Such easements must be clearly labeled and identified and if already of record, the record references given. If any easement is not definitely located on record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drain, sewers and other purposes shall be denoted by fine broken lines. The width of the easement and the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificate of dedication. 
F.  Acreage. The total acreage of the subdivision to the nearest one hundredth of an acre shall be shown on the face of the final map. 
G.  Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and shall be consecutive with no omissions or duplications. If deemed necessary by the planning department, omissions may be made when only a portion of the subdivision is to be recorded and the remainder of the subdivision is to be completed as part of a subsequent subdivision. 
H.  Other Data. The map shall also show all other data that is or may be required by law. 
I.  Disposition of Lots. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots intended for sale or reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. 
J.  Reversion to Acreage. Maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously so designated under the title "The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage." 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.71(e)).  
18.24.100 - Improvement plans and profiles. 
All improvements shall be installed to grades approved by the city engineer. Plans, profiles and specifications of proposed improvements shall be furnished to and meet the approval of the city engineer prior to the time of submitting the final map to the city council. These plans and profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements which shall be according to the standards established by the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.72).  
18.24.110 - Inspection fee. 
Prior to approval of plans, profiles and specifications of proposed improvements, the subdivider shall post with the city an engineering and inspection fee deposit as required. Upon completion of the work, the finance officer shall determine the actual cost incurred by the city in support of the work. Final acceptance by the city shall be withheld until all moneys due the city are paid. In the event the deposit exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city, the difference shall be refunded to the subdivider. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.73(a)).  
18.24.120 - City council approval. 
A.  At its first regular meeting following the transmittal of the final map to the city clerk, the council shall consider the map, the plan of subdivision, and the offers of dedication. The council may reject any or all offers of dedication. In the event that all improvements required or conditions imposed upon approval under the terms of this title or by law are not completed before the filing of the final map, the council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider for posting improvement security as provided in Section 18.24.140. In such case, when the agreement has been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency, and when the improvement security has been approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city attorney and city engineer as to sufficiency, the council may consider the final map. 
B.  The council shall approve the map if it is determined to be in conformity with the provisions of law and of this chapter. The council shall disapprove the map if it is determined not to be in conformity with the provisions of law and of this title and shall advise the subdivider of its disapproval, and the reason or reasons thereof. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.73(b)).  
18.24.130 - Action by city clerk. 
The city clerk upon receipt of the necessary fees, and after the signatures and seals have been affixed and upon the approval of the final map by the council shall transmit the map to the county recorder who shall file the same. No map shall have any force or effect until the same has been approved by the council, and no title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall pass until recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.73(c)).  
18.24.140 - Improvement agreement—Work deadlines. 
A.  Prior to the approval by the council of the final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city, specifying the period within which he shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and providing that if he shall fail to complete the work within such period, the city may complete the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. 
B.  The agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer, and reimbursement of the city by the subdivider for the cost of the inspection and testing. 
C.  The agreement may also provide: 
1.  For the construction of the improvements in units; 
2.  For extension of time under conditions therein specified; 
3.  For partial release of the improvement securities upon acceptance by the city council of the work as it progresses; 
4.  For the financing and construction of any or all of such improvements under an appropriate special assessment act proceeding. 
D.  The subdivider shall agree, in writing, to initiate, and so far as may be in his power, to consummate such proceedings, within such time as may be prescribed by the council. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.75(a)).  
18.24.150 - Improvement agreement—Filing of securities. 
A.  The subdivider shall also file with the agreement in Section 18.24.140, two improvement securities, each to be in an amount based upon the total estimated cost of the improvement as determined by the city engineer. One improvement security shall secure faithful performance of the agreement and shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. The second improvement security shall secure the obligations set forth in subsection (b) of Section 66499.2 of the Government Code, for payment of the contractor, his subcontractors and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for the improvements, and shall be in an amount equal to fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements. The improvement securities shall be in one of the following forms: 
1.  A cash deposit or deposits; 
2.  A bond or bonds issued by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
3.  A savings and loan certificate and share; 
4.  An instrument or instruments of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulations by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payments and agreeing that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument; 
5.  Any other form of improvement security authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, including the deposit, with a responsible escrow agent or trust company approved by the council, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money. 
B.  The required security shall be in an amount determined by the city engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements, engineering, inspection, fees and incidental expenses. The required improvement security shall be approved by the city attorney and city engineer as to sufficiency and by the city attorney as to form. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.75(b)).  
18.24.160 - Improvement agreement—Forfeiture of securities. 
In the event the subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title and the city has to complete same, or if the subdivider fails to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering, fees and incidental expenses, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or shall appropriate from any cash deposits, savings and loan certificates and shares, or instruments of credit, funds for reimbursement. In any case, if the amount of the surety bond, savings and loan certificate and shares, instrument of credit, or cash deposit exceeds all cost and expenses incurred by the city it shall release the remainder of such bond, savings and loan certificate and share of cash deposit. If the amount of the surety bond, savings and loan certificate and share, instrument of credit, or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.75(c)).  
18.24.170 - Improvement agreement—Release of securities. 
Improvement securities may be released or reduced, in whole or in part, only in the time and manner prescribed in Section 66499.7 of the Government Code, as it now exists or is hereafter amended, and only after certification by the city engineer that the work covered has been satisfactorily completed. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.75(d)).  
18.24.180 - Improvement agreement—Guarantee and warranty. 
In addition to the improvement securities specified in Section 18.24.150, the subdivider shall file with the subdivision agreement an amount equal to fifteen percent of the estimated cost of improvements to guarantee and warrant subdivision improvements for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished. The city engineer is authorized to release the security upon expiration of the guarantee and warranty period if it is determined that subdivision improvements so guaranteed and warranted remain satisfactory. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.75(e)).  
18.24.190 - Preliminary soil report. 
Prior to the submission of the final map, the subdivider shall file with the city engineer a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision for which a final map is required containing data as required by the city engineer. The preliminary soil report may be waived if the city engineer determines that, due to his knowledge of the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.76).  
18.24.200 - Preliminary soil report—Investigation. 
If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critical expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil investigation shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The report shall be filed with the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.77).  
18.24.210 - Preliminary soil report—Investigation approval. 
The city engineer shall approve the soil investigation if he determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. Appeal from such determination shall be to the city council. The building permit shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the approved recommended corrective action in the construction of each dwelling. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.78).  
18.24.220 - Division of existing buildings. 
Prior to the recordation of a subdivision map which will result in the division of any existing building or buildings into separate units or parts, the subdivider shall secure certification by the chief building official that any building or buildings to be divided will, after division, meet current code standards for new construction. As used in this section, the phrase "current code standards" refers to all standards in the current adopted editions of the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code and fire code or other applicable code of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.79).  
Chapter 18.28 - OTHER MAPS 
Sections: 
 
18.28.010 - Reversions and exclusions. 
A.  Reversions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Article 1, of the Map Act and this title. 
B.  Exclusions shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 6, Article 2, of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.80).  
18.28.020 - Resubdivision. 
In the event an existing subdivision is resubdivided such that the street alignment, lot design or drainage is changed, then the area constitutes a new subdivision and the procedures for filling a tentative and final map as outlined in this title apply. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.81).  
Chapter 18.32 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
18.32.010 - Standard specifications. 
All improvements shall conform to the requirements contained in that certain document, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated "Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structures—2007 Edition." Said document is adopted by reference as the standard specifications of the city of Merced. 
Copies of the standard specifications shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and city engineer. 
(Ord. 2305 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2266 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2250 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2236 § 1, 2006: Ord. 2175 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2102 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2085 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2082 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2078 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2046 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1894 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1843 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1840 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1792 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1662 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1548 § 1, 1984: Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.90).  
18.32.020 - Generally. 
The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the standards specified in this title and in the standard specification referred to in Section 18.32.010, the master plan of streets, and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 5.91 (part)).  
18.32.030 - Streets and alleys. 
All streets and alleys shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications referred to in Section 18.32.010. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(a)).  
18.32.040 - Drainage facilities. 
Drainage facilities shall be installed as deemed necessary by the city engineer to provide for the removal of surface water. Drainage facilities shall be of a character and design approved by the city engineer and in accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications referred to in Section 18.32.010, in order to insure proper grading and erosion control including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(b)).  
18.32.050 - Curbs and gutters. 
Curbs and gutters shall be installed to grades, cross-section, layout and location approval by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(c)).  
18.32.060 - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed along all streets and may be required in other locations where sidewalks are deemed necessary by city standard. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(d)).  
18.32.070 - Sewage disposal. 
Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city system shall be installed to serve each lot. Sewers shall be installed to grades, location, design and sizes approved by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(e)).  
18.32.080 - Water. 
Water mains connecting with the existing city system shall be installed to serve each lot. Water mains shall be installed to grades, location, design and sizes approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(f)).  
18.32.090 - Street lights. 
Street lighting standards, underground cables or conduit and conductors and all materials and appurtenances necessary shall be installed of a design and location approved by the city engineer. There shall be at least one (1) electrolier at each intersection. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(g)).  
18.32.100 - Railroad crossings. 
Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the California State Public Utilities Commission for the establishment and improvement of such crossing. The cost of such railroad crossing improvement shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(h)).  
18.32.110 - Traffic-control devices. 
Traffic-control devices shall be provided as directed by the city engineer. The subdivider may be required to deposit a traffic impact fee as established by city council resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.91(i)).  
18.32.120 - Drainage facilities—Additional fees. 
Whenever the city, by ordinance, has adopted a drainage plan for a particular drainage area pursuant to Section 66483 of the Government Code of the state, each subdivider of a subdivision, any part of which is located within the boundaries of such a drainage area and the tentative map of which is filed after the effective date of this section, shall pay to the city at the time of approval of the final map, as a condition of such approval, such fees as may be required by such ordinance. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.92).  
18.32.140 - Monuments—Generally. 
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set monuments to conform with the standards described in Article 9 of the Map Act and as required by this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.94(a)).  
18.32.150 - Monuments—Permanent. 
Permanent monuments as required by the standard specifications of the city shall be set at each corner and angle point in the exterior boundaries except where such monuments already exist in the proper positions. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the final map is recorded. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.94(b)).  
18.32.160 - Monuments—Interior. 
Interior monuments shall be set as required by the standard specifications of the city. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded, if the requirements of Article 9 of the Map Act have been met. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.94(c)).  
18.32.170 - Fahrens Creek bikeway, Cottonwood Creek bikeway and Black Rascal Creek bikeway. 
A.  The Fahrens Creek bikeway consists of a minimum twenty-five-foot-wide right-of-way with an eight-foot-wide main bike path with landscaping on both sides, a portion of which stretches north along Fahrens Creek approximately seven thousand six hundred linear feet from Yosemite Avenue (extended) to Cardella Road (extended). The above described portion of the bikeway includes three main bike path bridges (eight feet wide) and one undercrossing where it intersects the extension of Lehigh Drive (collector street). Additional access to the main bike path is provided by eight connector bike paths (approximately one thousand four hundred linear feet), including two connector bike path bridges (six feet wide). 
B.  The Cottonwood Creek bikeway consists of a minimum twenty-five-foot-wide right-of-way with an eight-foot-wide main bike path with landscaping on both sides, a portion of which stretches east along Cottonwood Creek approximately thirteen thousand two hundred linear feet from the intersection of Cottonwood Creek and Fahrens Creek to Gardner Avenue (Parsons Avenue extended). The above described portion of the bikeway includes one main bike path bridge (eight feet wide) and two undercrossings where it intersects the extensions of Dunn Road (collector street) and Paulson Road (collector street). Additional access to the main bike path is provided by fifteen connector bike paths (approximately one thousand seven hundred fifty linear feet), including seven connector bike path bridges (six feet wide). 
C.  The Black Rascal Creek bikeway consists of a minimum twenty-five-foot-wide right-of-way with an eight-foot-wide main bike path with landscaping on both sides, a portion of which stretches east along Black Rascal Creek approximately five hundred linear feet near the northwest corner of Rahilly Park from the existing terminus of the bikeway at Rods Court, and from Parsons Avenue to McKee Road. 
D.  The subdivider and/or developer shall install and dedicate the above mentioned improvements, including landscaping, in accordance with adopted city standards. Upon completion of the improvements to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall reimburse the subdivider and/or developer as follows: 
1.  Eight dollars per linear foot of main bike path; 
2.  Seven dollars per linear foot of connector bike path; 
3.  Forty thousand dollars or actual cost, whichever is lower, per main bike path bridge; 
4.  Twenty-five thousand dollars or actual cost, whichever is lower, per connector bike path bridge; 
5.  Seventy-five thousand dollars or actual cost, whichever is lower, per collector street undercrossing; 
6.  Fifty cents per square foot of landscaping. 
E.  The subdivider and/or developer shall install and dedicate the Parsons Avenue undercrossing in accordance with adopted city standards. Upon completion to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall reimburse the subdivider and/or developer for actual costs of construction, not to exceed two hundred and twenty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 1764 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1674 § 1, 1987).  
Chapter 18.36 - DEVIATIONS 
Sections: 
 
18.36.010 - Conditions for granting deviance. 
The planning commission may vary the regulations relating to the subdivision of land by granting a deviation; provided it is shown by the subdivider that: 
A.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property such as topography, fixed rights-of-way, unique location of easements, etc.; or 
B.  Because of the unique nature of a particular subdivision concept, design innovations are proposed which meet the functional standards of the zoning and subdivision regulations without strict adherence to the requirements of this title; or 
C.  In the case of a parcel map, the applicant is being denied the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or zone in which the property is located; or 
D.  The granting of the deviation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity or zone in which the property is located and will not nullify the intent and purpose of the general plan or these regulations. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.100(a)).  
18.36.020 - Condition when deviance unnecessary. 
Where it is determined by the planning commission that the design of a proposed subdivision is in compliance with a development plan which has been adopted by the city council in conjunction with a planned development zone, the planning commission may approve such subdivision map without formally granting deviations for design factors which are not in strict compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.100(b)).  
18.36.030 - Conditions of special requirements. 
In granting a deviation, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so deviated from. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.100(c)).  
18.36.040 - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by the decisions of the planning commission with respect to the granting or denial of an exception pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the council in accordance with the procedure contained in the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1342 § 2 (part), 1980: prior code § 25.101).  
Chapter 18.40 - PARK DEDICATION 
Sections: 
 
18.40.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state. The park and recreation facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this chapter are in accordance with the recreation element of the general plan of the city and as such recreational element may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.020 - Requirements. 
At the time of approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the director of recreation and parks shall determine pursuant to this chapter the land required for dedication or in-lieu fee payment. As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1643 § 1, 1987: Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.030 - General standard. 
It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that five acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within this city be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreation purposes. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.040 - Formula for dedication of land. 
Where a park or recreation facility has been designated in the parks and open space master plan, an element of the general plan of the city, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following formulas: 
The formula for determining acreage to be dedicated has been established pursuant to Section 66477(b) of the Government Code: 
Dwelling Type 	Zoning District 	Assumed Density 	Standard: Acres/DU's 
Single-family 	R-1 	3.15 persons/DU 	5 acres/317 DU's 
Duplex, low density apts. 	R-2 	2.51 persons/DU 	5 acres/398 DU's 
Mobile homes 	R & R-MH 	1.97 persons/DU 	5 acres/508 DU's 
Medium and high density apts. 	R-3 & R-4 	1.88 persons/DU 	5 acres/532 DU's 5 acres/1,000 
 
Dedication of the land shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 18.40.110. 
For the purposes of this section, the number of new dwelling units shall be based upon the number of parcels indicated on the map when in an area zoned for one dwelling unit per parcel. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for more than one dwelling unit per parcel, the number of new dwelling units in the area so zoned shall be the number proposed or the actual number for which building permits are issued, whichever is greater. In the case of a condominium project, the number of new dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units. The term "new dwelling unit" does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is filed. 
The subdivider shall, without credit, (1) provide full street improvements and utility connections including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic-control devices, street trees, and sidewalks to dedicated land which is dedicated pursuant to this section, (2) provide for fencing along the property line of that portion of the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land, (3) provide improved drainage through the site, and (4) provide other minimal improvements which the city council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational purposes. 
The land to be dedicated and the improvements to be made pursuant to this section shall be approved by the director of recreation and parks. 
(Ord. 1643 § 2, 1987: Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.050 - Formula for fees in lieu of land dedication. 
A.  General Formula. If there is no park or recreation facility designated in the parks and open space master plan, to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the value of the land, plus twenty percent toward costs of off-site improvements, prescribed for dedication in Section 18.40.040, and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.40.070, such fee to be used for a local park which bears a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future residents of the area being subdivided. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "off-site improvements" are defined as those improvements which would have been required if land had been dedicated using the provisions of Section 18.40.040. 
B.  Fees in Lieu of Land—Fifty Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value, plus twenty percent toward costs of off-site improvements, of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in Section 18.40.040, and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.40.070. 
However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in subdivisions of fifty parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes such dedication voluntarily and the land is acceptable to the city council. 
C.  Use of Money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring necessary land and developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1(part), 1984).  
18.40.060 - Criteria for requiring both dedication and fee. 
In subdivisions of over fifty parcels, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following formula: 
A.  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed on the parks and open space master plan as the site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provision of Section 18.40.070 shall be paid for the value of any additional land, plus twenty percent toward costs of off-site improvements, that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.40.040. 
B.  When a major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provision of Section 18.40.070 shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land, plus twenty percent toward costs of off-street improvements, which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.40.040, such fees to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreation facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreation facilities in the area serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.070 - Amount of fee in lieu of land dedication. 
When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, value of the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication pursuant to Section 18.40.040, plus twenty percent toward costs of off-site improvements, such as extension of utility lines. The fee shall be determined by the following formula: 
1.2 DU's 	× 	Pop 
DU 	× 	 5 acres  
1,000 people 	× 	 FMV  
Buildable acre 	= 	in-lieu fee 
 
Where 
DU's 	= 	Number of dwelling units as defined in Section 18.40.040 
Pop 
DU 	= 	Population per dwelling unit 
FMV 	= 	Fair market value, as determined in Section 18.40-080 
Buildable 
acre 	= 	typical acre of the subdivision, with a slope less than 10 percent, and located in other than an area on which building is excluded because of flooding, easements or other restrictions 
 
Fees to be collected pursuant to this section shall be approved by the director of recreation and parks. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1(part), 1984).  
18.40.080 - Determination of fair market value. 
A.  An average annual fair market value shall be determined for each park service area by the city based upon a written report prepared by the director of recreation and parks in conjunction with an appraiser acceptable to the city. The report shall be based upon sales activity of all properties zoned for residential use within each park service area and will establish an average fair market value for that park service area. These average figures will be applied to all projects within each zone until the fee is next reviewed. 
B.  If the subdivider objects to the determined fair market value, he/she may appeal to the city council who shall hear the appeal under the same rules and obligations current for local board of equalization hearings, except that the burden of proof shall lie with the subdivider. 
(Ord. 1643 § 3, 1987: 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.090 - Determination of land or fee. 
Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
A.  The natural features, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
B.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
C.  Feasibility of dedication; 
D.  Compatibility of dedication with the master park and recreation plan; and 
E.  The location of existing and proposed park sites and trailways. 
The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1643 § 4, 1987: Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.100 - Credit for private open space. 
No credit shall be given for private open space in the subdivision except as hereinafter provided. Where private open space usable for active recreational purposes is provided in a proposed planned development or real estate development as defined in Sections 11003 and 11003.1 of the Business and Professions Code, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent, shall be eligible to receive credit against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
A.  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
B.  The private park and recreation facilities shall be owned by a homes association composed of all property owners in the subdivision and being an incorporated nonprofit organization capable of dissolution only by a one hundred percent affirmative vote of the membership, operated under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner in the neighborhood is automatically a member, and each lot is subject to a charge for proportionate share of expenses for maintaining the facilities. 
C.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreation purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; and 
D.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and 
E.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreation element of the general plan; and 
F.  That the open space for which credit is given is generally a minimum of three acres and provides all of the local park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreation improvements that will meet the specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area: 
1.  Recreational open spaces, which are generally defined as parks areas for active recreation pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball, and football and have at least one acre of maintained turf with less than five percent slope, 
2.  Court areas, which are generally defined as tennis courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts, or similar hard-surfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games, 
3.  Recreational swimming areas, which are defined generally as fenced areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving, or both, including decks, lawned area, bathhouses, or other facilities developed and used exclusively for swimming and diving and consisting of no less than fifteen square feet of water surface for each three percent of the population of the subdivision, 
4.  Recreation buildings and facilities designed and primarily used for the recreational needs of the residents of the development. 
The determination of the city council as to whether credit shall be given and the amount of credit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.110 - Procedure. 
At the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map, the director of recreation and parks shall determine pursuant to Section 18.40.040 the land required for dedication. If the city requires in-lieu fee payment by the subdivider, the city will set the amount of land upon which the in-lieu fee will be based at the time of final map approval. 
At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land as required by the director of recreation and parks. Where the director of recreation and parks has determined that fees shall be paid in lieu of or in addition to the dedication of land, the director of recreation and parks shall set the in-lieu fees based on the land dedication requirements as established at the time of tentative map approval using current land values at the time of final map approval with the formula set in Section 18.40.070 and using the process for determining fair market value as set forth in Section 18.40.080. The subdivider shall pay said fees in accordance with the following: 
A.  The entire fee shall be due and payable prior to approval of the final subdivision or parcel map; or 
B.  The subdivider may elect to defer payment of all or any part of such fee, and to pay the same on a lot-by-lot basis. 
In such event, the fee computed for each lot or parcel shall be payable at the time of issuance of the building permit for said lot or parcel, and shall be computed using the formula and fair market value in effect at the time. 
Open space covenants for private park or recreation facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 1643 § 5, 1987: Ord. 1625 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.120 - Disposition of fees. 
Fees determined pursuant to Section 18.40.070 shall be paid to the city finance officer and shall be deposited into a special fund. Moneys in the fund, including accrued interest, shall be expended solely for the acquisition or development of parkland, or improvements related thereto. 
Collected fees shall be appropriated by the city for a specific project to serve the residents of the subdivision in a budgetary year within five years upon receipt of payment or within five years after the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. 
If such fees are not so committed, these fees, less an administrative charge, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. 
The city finance officer shall report to the city council at least annually on income, expenditures, and status of the special fund. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.130 - Exceptions. 
Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that a condition shall be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels, a fee shall be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit in accordance with Chapter 17.38. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to commercial or industrial subdivision; nor do they apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.140 - Subdivider-provided park and recreation improvements. 
The value of park and recreation improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land shall be credited against the fees or dedication of land required by this chapter. The city council reserves the right to approve such improvements prior to agreeing to accept the dedication of land and to require in-lieu fee payments should the land and improvements be unacceptable. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.150 - Agency to accept land and fees. 
Land or fees required under this chapter shall be conveyed or paid directly to the city. The city shall develop a schedule pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code as amended by Chapter 1467 of the Statutes of 1982, specifying how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.160 - Access. 
All land offered for dedication to local park or recreational purposes shall have access to at least one existing or proposed public street. This requirement may be waived by the city council if the city council determines that public street access is unnecessary for the maintenance of the park area or use thereof by the residents. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
18.40.170 - Sale of dedicated land. 
If circumstances arise which indicate that another site would be more suitable for local park or recreational purposes serving the subdivision and the neighborhood (such as receipt of a gift of additional parkland or change in school location), any dedicated land may be sold upon the approval of the city council with the resultant funds being used for the purchase of a more suitable site. 
(Ord. 1526 § 1 (part), 1984).  
Chapter 18.44 - SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATION 
Sections: 
 
18.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of thus chapter is to provide a method for financing interim school facilities necessitated by new residential developments causing conditions of overcrowding. 
(Ord. 1235 § l (part), 1978: prior code § 22B.1).  
18.44.020 - Regulations. 
The city council may, from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1235 § l (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.2).  
18.44.030 - General plan. 
The city general plan provides for the location of public schools. Where facilities are to be constructed from fees or land required to be dedicated hereunder, or both, they shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 1280 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.3).  
18.44.040 - Definitions. 
A.  "Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of an attendance area's school or schools, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school or schools, within the attendance area, as determined by the governing body of the school district. 
B.  "Decision making body" means the city council or their designee. 
C.  "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof, or a mobile home, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or more persons living together as a domestic unit. 
D.  "Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" includes, but is not limited to, concepts such as: 
1.  The use of relocatable structures, student transportation, and school boundary realignments; 
2.  The use of available bond or state loan revenues to the extent authorized by law; 
3.  The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from other appropriate sources, as determined by the governing body of affected school districts; 
4.  Agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential developments in the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used. 
E.  "Residential development" means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobile homes, of one or more units, or a division of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential units. Residential development includes, but is not limited to, a preliminary or final development plan, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, a building permit, or any other discretionary permit for new residential use. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code §§ 22B.4—22B.8).  
18.44.050 - Findings—Type of evidence. 
The governing body of a school district may make a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that: 
A.  Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs, including the reason for such conditions existing; 
B.  All reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated; 
C.  No feasible method for reducing such conditions exist. Upon making these findings, the school district must provide the city with written notice of its findings as provided in Section 18.44.070. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1978: prior code § 22B.9).  
18.44.060 - Findings—Requirements. 
Any notice of findings sent by a school district to the city shall specify: 
A.  Findings of facts and a summary of the evidence upon which the findings in Section 18.44.060 were based; 
B.  The mitigation measures and methods, including those listed in Section 18.44.040, considered by the school district in any determination made concerning them by the district; 
C.  The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; 
D.  Such other information as may be required by a council regulation. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.10).  
18.44.070 - Findings—Concurrence by resolution. 
After receipt of any notice of findings complying with the requirements of Section 18.44.070, the council, if it concurs with such school district findings, shall do so by resolution. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.11).  
18.44.080 - Conditions for development when findings show overcrowding. 
Within an attendance area, where the council has concurred in a school district's notice of findings that conditions of overcrowding exist, no decision-making body shall approve an application for a residential development within such area, unless such decision-making body makes one of the following findings: 
A.  That pursuant to this chapter, provisions have been made for payment of fees, dedication of land, or both, or some other provisions have been agreed upon by the applicant for a residential development in the school district to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area; or 
B.  That there are specific, overriding physical, economic, social, or environmental factors, which, in the judgment of the decision-making body, would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land or other alternate provision required by Sections 18.44.100 through 18.44.130. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.12).  
18.44.090 - Fee payment and land dedication. 
In an attendance area where the council has concurred as provided in Sections 18.44.060 through 18.44.090 that overcrowding exists, the applicant of a proposed residential development, as a condition of approval, or as a condition for the obtaining of a building permit, shall pay fees, make an equivalent arrangement in lieu thereof, dedicate land, or do a combination thereof, unless excepted as provided in Section 18.44.080(B), as determined by the decision-making body during the hearings and other proceedings on specific residential development applications falling within their respective jurisdictions. Prior to the imposition of the fees, or the dedication of land, or both, it shall be necessary for the decision-making body acting on the application to make the following determination: that the facilities to be constructed, purchased, leased, or rented from such fees or the land to be dedicated, or both, are consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.13).  
18.44.100 - Fee payment in small residential developments. 
Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels, or less, or other developments containing fifty units, or less. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.14).  
18.44.110 - Restrictions of requirements. 
Any requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter shall bear reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim, elementary, or high school facilities, and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for the schools caused by the development. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.15).  
18.44.120 - Fee and land dedication—Determination of standards. 
The standards for the amount of fees or dedicated land required shall be recommended by the governing board of each school district where a determination has been made pursuant to Section 18.44.070 that conditions of overcrowding exist. Such standards and facts supporting them shall be transmitted to the city council. If the city council concurs with such standards, they shall, until revised, be used by decision-making bodies in situations where dedications of land, or fees, or both, are required as a condition to the approval of a residential development. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city council from establishing and using standards other than those established by the school district in the event that the council does not concur in those transmitted by the district. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.16)  
18.44.130 - Fee amount in lieu of land dedication. 
The amount of fee in lieu of land dedication shall be determined by multiplying "A," as derived from Section 18.44.140, by "C," the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 18.44.140. Fair market value shall be determined as of the time of the issuance of the building permit in accordance with the development approved in that permit, in accordance with the following: 
A.  The city shall determine the fair market value of the property; 
B.  If the developer objects to the city's determination, the city shall select a qualified appraiser to appraise the property at the developer's expense; 
C.  If the city is dissatisfied with the appraisal, it may hire an appraiser at its expense to appraise the property, and fair market value shall be based on the average of the three appraisals provided in this section. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.17).  
18.44.140 - Amount of land dedication. 
The amount of land to be dedicated shall be based upon the following formula: 
A = S.P.S. × D.F. × D.U., where: 
A is the area in acres required to be dedicated or to be approved for fee payment in lieu of dedication. 
S.P.S. is the fraction of an acre required for one student, as determined by relevant law or the school district(s). 
D.F. is the density factor obtained from this chapter as applicable to the proposed development. 
D.U. is the number of dwelling units in the residential development. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.18).  
18.44.150 - Fee—Payment. 
If the payment of a fee is required, such payment shall be made at the time the building permit is approved and issued. Fee shall be held in trust by the city until transferred to the affected school district or districts. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.19).  
18.44.160 - Refunds. 
A.  If a final subdivision map, a parcel map, or conditional use permit is vacated or voided, and the city still retains the land, and if the applicant so requests, the council shall order such land returned. 
B.  If a residential development approval is vacated or voided, and if the city still retains the fees collected therefor, and if the applicant so requests, the council shall order the fees returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.21).  
18.44.170 - Land dedication—Procedure. 
When land is to be dedicated, it shall be offered for dedication in substantially the same manner as prescribed in this title. Land shall be deeded directly to the school district or districts under procedures adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.20).  
18.44.180 - School district schedule. 
Following concurrence by the council pursuant to Section 18.44.080, the city clerk shall notify each school district affected. The governing body of the school district shall then submit a schedule specifying how it will use the fees or land, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for the modifications. 
(Ord. 1235 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.22).  
18.44.190 - Land and fees use. 
All fees or land, or both, collected pursuant to this chapter and transferred to a school district, shall be used only by the district for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom and related facilities. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.23).  
18.44.200 - Separate agreements for overlapping school districts. 
If two separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the division of revenues from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1235 § l (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.24).  
18.44.210 - School district account—Report. 
Any school district receiving funds or land pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and disposition of land received, and shall file a report with the council on the balance and account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. The report shall be filed by August 1st of each year, and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the council. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.25).  
18.44.220 - Cessation of land and fee requirements. 
When it is determined by the city council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an attendance area, decision-making bodies shall cease imposition of any requirements under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1235 § 1 (part), 1980: prior code § 22B.26).  
Title 19 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
Chapters:  
Division I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 19.04 - PURPOSE 
Sections: 
 
19.04.010 - Purpose. 
This title and any other policy and procedural guidelines which have been or may be adopted by the city council are intended to provide guidelines for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act in the city, and to state guidelines adopted for that purpose. In the event that guidelines adopted by the city, by ordinance or resolution, are not adequate to provide guidance in any matter of policy or procedure covering environmental review, reference is made to the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 appearing in California Administrative Code, Title 14, Division 6, Chapter 3, § 15000, et seq. 
(Ord. 1136 § 22, 1975: prior code § 2.84).  
Chapter 19.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
19.08.010 - Generally. 
Whenever the following words are used in this title, unless otherwise defined, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this chapter. These definitions are intended to clarify, but not to replace or negate the definitions used in California Environmental Quality Act and the Guidelines of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Ord. 1136 § 1, 1975: prior code § 2.67).  
19.08.020 - Applicant. 
"Applicant" means a person who proposes to carry out a project which needs a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement to use or financial assistance from one or more public agencies when that person applies for governmental approval or assistance. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.1).  
19.08.030 - Approval of a project. 
"Approval of a project," to be carried out by the city occurs on the date when public expenditures are authorized for acquisition of property. If no property acquisition is to be involved, approval occurs on the first date public funds for the project are authorized. Approval of a city budget designating funds for a project does not constitute approval of a project, within the meaning of this chapter. In connection with private activities, approval occurs upon the earliest commitment to issue or the issuance by the public agency of a discretionary contract, grant, subsidy, loan, or other form of financial assistance, lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use of the project. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.2).  
19.08.040 - California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means California Public Resources Code Sections 21000, et seq. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.4).  
19.08.050 - Categorical exemption. 
"Categorical exemption" means an exception from the requirements of CEQA for a class of projects based on a finding by the Secretary for Resources that the class of projects does not have a significant effect on the environment. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.3).  
19.08.060 - City. 
"City" means the city of Merced. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.5).  
19.08.070 - Cumulative impacts. 
"Cumulative impacts" refers to two or more individual effects which, when considered together, are considerable or which compound or increase other environmental impacts. The individual effects may be changes resulting from a single project or a number of separate projects. 
(Ord. 1195 § 6, 1977: prior code § 12.67.29).  
19.08.080 - Discretionary project. 
"Discretionary project" means a project which requires the exercise of judgment, deliberation or decision on the part of the public agency or body in the process of approving or disapproving a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the public agency or body has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.6).  
19.08.090 - Emergency. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public services. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.7).  
19.08.100 - Environment. 
"Environment" means the physical conditions which exist within the area which will be affected by a proposed project including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise and objects of historic or aesthetic significance. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.8).  
19.08.110 - Environmental documents. 
"Environmental documents" means draft and final EIR's, initial studies, negative declarations, notices of completion, notices of determination and environmental clearance reports. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.9).  
19.08.120 - Environmental impact report (EIR). 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in CEQA and may mean either a draft or final EIR. An environmental impact report is an informational document which, when fully prepared in accordance with CEQA and this title, will inform public decision-makers and the general public of the environmental effects of projects they propose to carry out or approve. The information in an EIR constitutes evidence that a public agency shall consider along with any other information which may be presented to the agency. Economic information may be included in the EIR. 
(Ord. 1236 § 1, 1978: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.10).  
19.08.130 - Draft EIR. 
"Draft EIR" means an EIR containing the information required by the city council, as set forth in an ordinance or resolution adopted by that body. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.11).  
19.08.140 - Final EIR. 
"Final EIR" means the EIR containing the information contained in the draft EIR, comments, either verbatim or in summary, received in the reviewing process, a list of persons commenting, and the response of the lead agency to the comments received. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.12).  
19.08.150 - Environmental impact statement (EIS). 
"Environmental impact statement (EIS)" means an environmental impact document prepared pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The federal government uses the term "EIS" in the place of the term "EIR," which is used in the CEQA. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.13).  
19.08.160 - Feasible. 
"Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors. 
(Ord. 1195 § 1, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.14).  
19.08.170 - Initial study. 
"Initial study" means a preliminary analysis based on an environmental review checklist by the lead agency pursuant to Section 19.16.010 to determine whether an EIR or a negative declaration must be prepared. The purposes, contents, and uses of an initial study are defined in California Administrative Code, Title 14, Division 6, Chapter 3, Section 15000, et seq., otherwise known as, Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. 
(Ord. 1844 § 6, 1993: Ord. 1195 § 2, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.15).  
19.08.180 - Jurisdiction by law. 
A.  "Jurisdiction by law" means the authority of any public agency: 
1.  To grant a permit for or provide funding for the project in question; or 
2.  To exercise authority over resources which may be affected by the project. 
B.  A city or county will have jurisdiction by law with respect to a project when the city or county is the site of the project, the area in which the major environmental effects will occur, and/or the area in which those citizens most directly concerned by any such environmental effects are present. 
C.  Where an agency having jurisdiction by law must exercise discretionary authority over a project in order for the project to proceed, it is also a responsible agency. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.16).  
19.08.190 - Lead agency. 
"Lead agency" means the public agency which has the principal responsibility for preparing environmental documents and for carrying out or approving a project which may have a significant effect on the environment. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.17).  
19.08.200 - Local agency. 
"Local agency" means any public agency other than a state agency, board or commission. Local agency includes but is not limited to cities, counties, charter cities and counties, districts, school districts, special districts, redevelopment agencies and any board, commission, or organizational subdivision of a local agency so designated by ordinance or resolution of the governing legislative body of the local agency. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.18).  
19.08.210 - Ministerial projects. 
"Ministerial projects" means those activities which are undertaken or approved by a governmental decision which a public officer or public agency makes upon a given state of facts in a prescribed manner in obedience to the mandate of legal authority. Which projects, the officer or agency must act upon the given facts without regard to his own judgment or opinion concerning the propriety or wisdom of the act, although the statute, ordinance or regulation may require, in some degree, a construction of its language by the officer. The following acts are ministerial in nature: 
A.  Issuance of building permits; 
B.  Issuance of business licenses; 
C.  Approval of final subdivision maps; 
D.  Approval of individual utility service connections and disconnections, except the following: 
1.  Sewer service agreements to parcels one acre or greater in size and/or to more than four dwelling units or equivalent, 
2.  Industrial sewer permit applications, and 
3.  Water and sewer service to areas not consistent with the general plan maps and policies. 
(Ord. 1195 § 3, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.19).  
19.08.220 - Negative declaration. 
"Negative declaration" means a statement by the lead agency briefly presenting the reasons why the project, although not otherwise exempt, would not have a significant effect on the environment and therefore does not require an EIR. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.20).  
19.08.230 - Notice of completion. 
"Notice of completion" means a brief notice filed with the Secretary for Resources by a lead agency as soon as it has completed a draft EIR and is prepared to send out copies for review. The form of the notice shall be as designated by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 11136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.21).  
19.08.240 - Notice of determination. 
"Notice of determination" means a brief notice to be filed by a public agency after it approves or determines to carry out a project which is subject to the requirements of CEQA. The form of the notice shall be as designated by ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.22).  
19.08.250 - Notice of exemption. 
"Notice of exemption" means a brief notice which may be filed by a public agency when it has approved or determined to carry out a project, and it has determined that it is ministerial, categorically exempt or an emergency project. The notice may also be filed by an applicant where such a determination has been made by a public agency, which must approve the project. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.23).  
19.08.260 - Notice of preparation. 
"Notice of preparation" means a brief notice sent by a lead agency by certified mail, or other means sufficient to give actual notice, to notify the responsible agencies that the lead agency plans to prepare an EIR for the project. The purpose of the notice is to solicit guidance from the responsible agencies as to the scope and content of the environmental information to be included in the EIR. 
(Ord. 1236 § 2, 1978: prior code § 2.67.30).  
19.08.270 - Person. 
"Person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, district, county, city and county, city, town, the state and any of the agencies or political subdivisions of such entities. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.24).  
19.08.280 - Project. 
A.  "Project" means the whole of an action, which has a potential for resulting in a physical change in the environment, directly or ultimately, that is any of the following: 
1.  An activity directly undertaken by any public agency including, but not limited to, public works construction and related activities, clearing or grading of land, improvements to existing public structures, enactment and amendment of zoning ordinances, and the adoption and amendment of local general plans or elements thereof pursuant to Government Code Sections 65100 through 65700. 
2.  An activity undertaken by a person which is supported in whole or in part through public agency contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of assistance from one or more public agencies. 
3.  An activity involving the issuance to a person of a lease, permit, license, certificate or other entitlement for use by one or more public agencies. 
B.  Project does not include: 
1.  Anything specifically exempted by state law; 
2.  Proposals for legislation to be enacted by the State Legislature other than requests by state agencies for authorization or funding for projects independently from the Budget Act; 
3.  Continuing administrative or maintenance activities, such as purchases for supplies, personnel-rated actions, emergency repairs to public service facilities, general policy and procedure making except as they are applied to specific instances covered above, feasibility or planning studies; 
4.  The submittal of proposals to a vote of the people of the state or of a particular community. 
C.  Project refers to the activity which is being approved and which may be subject to several discretionary approvals by governmental agencies. Project does not mean each governmental approval. 
(Ord. 1195 § 4, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.25).  
19.08.290 - Public agency. 
"Public agency" includes any state agency, board or commission and any local or regional agency, as defined in these guidelines. It does not include the courts of the state, nor does it include agencies of the federal government. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.26).  
19.08.300 - Responsible agency. 
"Responsible agency" means a public agency which proposes to undertake or approve a project, but is not the lead agency for the project. It includes all public agencies other than the lead agency which have approval power over the project. 
(Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.27).  
19.08.310 - Significant effect on the environment. 
"Significant effect on the environment" means a substantial, or potentially substantial, adverse change in any of the physical conditions within the area affected by the activity, including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noise, and objects of historical or aesthetic interest. 
(Ord. 1195 § 5, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.67.28).  
Chapter 19.12 - EXEMPTIONS 
Sections: 
 
19.12.010 - Generally. 
No permit, license or other entitlement of use with regard to a proposed project, with the exception of those matters specified in this chapter, shall be issued or approved, nor shall the city undertake any public project, nor shall the city lease any city property, if the proposed project may have a significant effect on the environment, until an environmental impact report has been made and approved or until it is determined, in the manner set forth in this title, that such environmental impact report is not required. 
(Prior code § 2.66).  
19.12.020 - Categorical exemptions, ministerial and emergency projects. 
A.  Categorical exemptions, ministerial projects, and those emergency projects described in this section are exempt from the requirements of this title. 
B.  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, designate the categorical exemptions to which this section applies. If no such designation is made by the city council, the categorical exemptions shall be those classes of projects determined from time to time by the Secretary for Resources of the state to be exempt pursuant to Public Resources Codes, Section 21084, identified in the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as published from time to time in the Administrative Code. 
C.  The emergency projects exempted by this section are: 
1.  Projects undertaken, carried out, or approved by a public agency to maintain, repair, restore, demolish, or replace property or facilities damaged or destroyed as a result of a disaster in a disaster-stricken area in which a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the governor pursuant to Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 8550) of Division 1, Title 2 of the Government Code; 
2.  Emergency repairs to public service facilities necessary to maintain service; 
3.  Specific actions necessary to prevent or mitigate an emergency. 
(Ord. 1195 § 7, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 3, 1975: prior code § 2.68).  
19.12.030 - Notice. 
When a project is determined to be exempt pursuant to Section 19.12.020, and the city approves or determines to carry out the project, a notice of exemption may be filed by the city or by the applicant. The notice shall include: 
1.  A brief description of the project; 
2.  A finding that the project is exempt, including a citation to the section of the state guidelines under which it is found to be exempt; and 
3.  A brief statement of reasons to support the finding. 
The notice shall be filed with the county clerk. If the notice is filed by the applicant, it shall be accompanied by a certified document issued by the city, stating that the project has been found exempt. 
(Ord. 1844 § 7, 1993: Ord. 1136 § 4, 1975: prior code § 2.68.1).  
19.12.040 - Statement of overriding considerations. 
If the city decides to approve a project for which serious adverse environmental consequences have been identified in an EIR, the city shall make a statement identifying the other interests that warrant approval in the opinion of a majority of the members of the city council. This statement of overriding considerations shall be included in the record of the project approval and in the notice of determination. 
(Ord. 1195 § 17, 1977: prior code § 2.83).  
Division II. - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT  
Chapter 19.16 - PRELIMINARY PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
19.16.010 - Environmental review checklist—Initial study. 
The planning director shall determine if a project is exempted by this chapter from the requirements of CEQA. Any applicant applying for a permit, license, lease or other entitlement of use not exempted, shall file with the planning director an environmental review checklist in such form as may be prescribed by the city council, together with such additional information as may be required by the planning director; and the planning director in each instance shall conduct an initial study to determine if the project may have a significant effect on the environment. If any aspects of the project, either individually or cumulatively, may cause a significant effect on the environment, regardless of whether the overall effect of the project is adverse or beneficial, then an EIR must be prepared. All phases of project planning, implementation and operation must be considered in the initial study of the project. 
(Ord. 1195 § 8, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 5, 1975: prior code § 2.69).  
19.16.020 - Environmental clearance report. 
Following the initial study, the planning, director shall prepare an environmental clearance report, which shall state the planning, director's determination whether the proposed project requires the preparation of an environmental impact report or the preparation of a negative declaration. 
(Ord. 1136 § 6, 1975: prior code § 2.69.1).  
19.16.030 - Environmental clearance report—Circulation. 
The planning director shall refer all complete environmental clearance reports to the head of any other department of city government which the planning director determines will be affected directly or indirectly by the project or who requests notice of such environmental clearance report for review and comment. The environmental clearance report may be referred to other public agencies or officials when, in the judgment of the planning director, such reference is appropriate. 
(Prior code § 2.70).  
19.16.040 - Environmental clearance report—Posting. 
A copy of each environmental clearance report, with any comments pertaining, to it, shall be posted in the public reception area of the planning department at 561 West l8th Street, Merced, California. If a negative declaration has been issued, one copy of the same shall be filed with the city clerk, and one copy shall be posted upon the bulletin board of the city hall, adjacent to the entrance to the council chambers. 
(Ord. 1195 § 11 (part), 1977: Ord. 1136 § 9 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.72(a)).  
19.16.050 - Negative declaration. 
A.  A negative declaration shall be prepared for a project which could have potentially a significant effect on the environment, but which the planning director finds on the basis of an initial study will not have a significant effect on the environment. Before completing a negative declaration, the planning director shall consult with all responsible agencies pursuant to Section 19.16.030. 
B.  A negative declaration shall include: 
1.  A brief description of the project as proposed, including a commonly used name for the project, if any; 
2.  The location of the project and the name of the project proponent; 
3.  A finding that the project will not have a significant effect on the environment; 
4.  An attached copy of the initial study documenting reasons to support the finding; 
5.  Mitigation measures, if any, included in the project to avoid potentially significant effects. 
(Ord. 1195 § 9, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 7 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.70.1).  
19.16.060 - Negative declaration—Appeal. 
The appeal procedure from a negative declaration shall be as follows: 
A.  All appeals must be in writing and shall set forth specifically those portions of the negative declaration or the initial study which the appellant challenges and shall detail reasons for such challenge. 
B.  All appeals must be filed with the city clerk no later than five p.m. on the tenth day following the date of posting the negative declaration. 
C.  The city clerk shall place any such appeal on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled city council meeting after the final day for filing an appeal. 
D.  After hearing the appeal, the city council shall determine whether an environmental impact report is or is not required with regard to the project in question. The determination shall constitute the final administrative action on the negative declaration. 
(Ord. 1195 § 10, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 7 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.70.2).  
19.16.070 - Negative declaration—Notice. 
Notice of the preparation of a negative declaration shall be provided to the public within a reasonable period of time after issuance of the negative declaration. Notice shall be given to all organizations and individuals who have previously requested such notice and shall also be published in the newspaper at least ten days prior to the project's consideration. 
(Ord. 1195 § 11 (part), 1977: Ord. 1136 § 9 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.72(b)).  
19.16.080 - Fees. 
At the time of filing with the planning director of an environmental checklist, the applicant must pay to the city, as a fee, the estimated costs, as determined by the planning director, of the preparation of the initial study, the environmental clearance report, and, if applicable, the negative declaration. If an EIR is required for a project, the applicant shall pay to the city, prior to the city proceeding to prepare such EIR, the estimated costs as determined by the planning director, which will be incurred by the city in preparation and review of the draft EIR and the final EIR. Such fees shall not be refundable except to, the extent, in the sole discretion of the planning director, they exceed the actual cost incurred by the city in preparation of the environmental documents. Upon the completion of the documents, if, in the opinion of the planning director, the costs incurred by the city have exceeded the estimated costs paid by the applicant, the applicant must pay to the city as an additional fee, the additional amount within ten days of billing therefor. No environmental clearance report or negative declaration shall be issued, and no environmental impact report shall be certified until all of the fees have been paid. 
(Ord. 1136 § 8, 1975: prior code § 2.71).  
Chapter 19.20 - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT 
Sections: 
 
19.20.010 - Preparation—When. 
A.  If the planning director finds after an initial study that the project may have a significant effect on the environment, the city must prepare or cause to be prepared an environmental impact report (EIR). 
B.  An EIR should be prepared whenever it can be fairly argued on the basis of substantial evidence that the project may have a significant effect on the environment. 
C.  An EIR should be prepared when there is serious public controversy concerning the environmental effect of a project. 
(Ord. 1195 § 12, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 10, 1975: prior code 2.73).  
19.20.020 - Preparation—Generally. 
Only one EIR shall be required in connection with any one project or underlying activity. The city shall prepare the EIR and any other environmental documents by its own efforts or by contract. The planning director may require the applicant to supply data and information, and may require that the data and information be in the form of a proposed draft EIR. Any proposed draft EIR shall be subject to independent analysis and evaluation by the city. A draft EIR issued for public review must reflect the independent judgment of the city. 
(Ord. 1195 § 13, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 11, 1975: prior code 2.74).  
19.20.030 - State mandated project. 
If a state agency requires a local agency to perform a project, the EIR prepared by the local agency may be limited to consideration of those factors and alternatives which do not conflict with the order of the state agency. 
(Ord. 1136 § 12 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.74.1).  
19.20.040 - Inclusion in project report. 
The EIR may be prepared as a separate document or as part of a project report. If prepared as part of a project report, the EIR must still contain in one separate and distinguishable section the elements required in an EIR, including, such elements as may be specified by the city council by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. 1136 § 12 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.74.2).  
19.20.050 - Redevelopment activities. 
All public and private activities or undertakings pursuant to or in furtherance of a redevelopment plan constitute a single project, which shall be deemed approved at the time of adoption of the redevelopment plan by the city council. The EIR in connection with the redevelopment plan shall be submitted in accordance with Section 33352 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Ord. 1136 § 12 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.74.3).  
19.20.060 - Early consultation. 
Before completing a draft EIR, the city shall consult with all responsible agencies. The city should also consult directly with any person or organization believed to be concerned with the environmental effects of the project. 
(Ord. 1136 § 12 (part), 1975: prior code § 2.74.4).  
19.20.070 - Subsequent EIR. 
A.  Where an EIR or negative declaration has been prepared, no additional EIR need be prepared unless: 
1.  Subsequent changes are proposed in the project which will require major revisions of the EIR, due to involvement of new environmental impacts not considered in a previous EIR on the project; or 
2.  Substantial changes occur with respect to circumstances under which the project is undertaken, such as a substantial deterioration in air quality where the project will be located, which will require major revisions in the EIR due to the involvement of new environmental impacts not covered in a previous EIR; or 
3.  New information of substantial importance to the project becomes available, and 
a.  The information was not known or could not have been known at the time the EIR was certified as complete or the negative declaration was adopted, and 
b.  The new information shows any of the following: 
i.  The project will have one or more significant effects not previously discussed in the EIR, 
ii.  Significant effects previously examined will be more severe than shown in the EIR, 
iii.  Mitigation measures or alternatives previously found not to be feasible would in fact be feasible and would substantially reduce one or more significant effects of the project, or 
iv.  Mitigation measures or alternatives which were not previously considered in the EIR would substantially lessen one or more significant effects on the environment. 
B.  If the EIR or negative declaration has been completed but the project has not yet been approved, the city shall prepare or cause to be prepared the subsequent EIR before approving the project. 
(Ord. 1236 § 3, 1979: prior code § 2.74.5).  
19.20.080 - Federal projects. 
A.  In regard to any proposed federal project in the city which may have a significant effect on the environment and on which the city officially comments, the city officials responsible for such comments shall include in their comments a discussion of the matters specified for inclusion in an EIR. 
B.  In cases where this title requires the preparation of an EIR by the city and an EIS has been or will be prepared for the same project pursuant to the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and implementing regulations thereto, all or any part of such statement may be submitted in lieu of all or any part of an EIR required by this title, provided that the EIS or the part thereof so used complies with the requirements of this chapter. In cases where the federal EIS is used, discussion of mitigation measures and growth inducing impact must be added or supplemented if the EIS does not include an adequate discussion of these elements. 
(Ord. 1136 § 13, 1975: prior code § 2.75).  
19.20.090 - Draft EIR—Notice of completion. 
Upon completion of a draft EIR, a notice of completion shall be filed with the Secretary for Resources of the state. The notice shall include a brief description of the project, its proposed location, and address where copies of the draft EIR are available, and the period during which comments will be received. The notice of completion will provide the basis for information published by the Secretary for Resources in the EIR monitor. Where the EIR will be reviewed through the state review process handled by the state clearing house, the cover form required by the state clearing house may be used in lieu of the notice of completion, and no notice of completion need be sent to the Secretary for Resources. Public notice of the draft EIR shall also be provided at the same time as the notice of completion and in the same manner as provided for in Section 19.16.070. The city shall use the state clearing house to distribute EIRs and other environmental documents to state agencies for review. 
(Ord. 1195 § 12, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 14, 1975: prior code § 2.76).  
19.20.100 - Draft EIR—Hearing. 
The draft EIR, together with any comments from other public agencies or interested parties shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notice shall state: 
A.  The time and date of the hearing; 
B.  The place and hour at which the draft EIR may be examined by the public prior to the hearing; and 
C.  The place at which copies of the draft EIR may be obtained. 
(Ord. 1171 § 1, 1976: Ord. 1136 § 15, 1975: prior code § 2.77).  
19.20.110 - Final EIR. 
After review by the planning commission, the city shall prepare a final EIR. The final EIR shall include: 
A.  The draft EIR or a revision of the draft; 
B.  Comments and recommendations received concerning the draft EIR, either verbatim or in summary; 
C.  A list of persons, organizations and public agencies commenting on the draft EIR; 
D.  The responses of the city to significant environmental points raised in the review and consultation process; and 
E.  Any other information which the planning director may require to be included. 
(Ord. 1171 § 2, 1976: Ord. 1136 § 16, 1975: prior code § 2.78).  
19.20.120 - Final EIR—Hearing—Certification. 
In those instances where the planning commission takes final action on projects, the final EIR shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a public hearing. In those instances where the city council takes final action on projects, the final EIR shall be reviewed by the city council at a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the time and date of the hearing, and the place at which, and hours during which, the EIR may be examined by the public prior to the hearing. When satisfied that the final EIR has been completed in compliance with CEQA and the state guidelines, and that the reviewing body has reviewed and considered the information contained in the EIR, the reviewing body shall so certify prior to the approval or disapproval of the project. The certification constitutes the final administration action on the EIR. 
(Ord. 1195 § 15, 1977: Ord. 1171 § 3, 1976: Ord. 1136 § 17, 1975: prior code § 2.79).  
Chapter 19.24 - FINAL ACTION 
Sections: 
 
19.24.010 - Council review before action on appeal. 
If planning commission action concerning a project is appealed to the city council after planning commission certification of a final EIR, the city council shall review and consider the contents of the final EIR before acting on the appeal. 
(Ord. 1171 § 4, 1976: Ord. 1136 § 18, 1975: prior code § 2.80).  
19.24.020 - Project approval—Limitation of actions. 
The city, if acting as the lead agency for a development project, must approve or disapprove a development project within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of certification of the final EIR, or sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of a negative declaration or determination that a project is exempt. These time limit provisions do not preclude a project applicant and a public agency from agreeing to an extension of the time to approve or disapprove a development project. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the planning commission or city council in certifying the final EIR, or by any action which the city might take concerning the project following certification of the final EIR, must file an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days following the filing of notice of determination with the county clerk. 
(Ord. 1955 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1171 § 5, 1976: Ord. 1136 § 19, 1975: prior code § 2.81).  
19.24.030 - Notice of determination. 
After taking action concerning a project for which an environmental review has been completed, the city shall file notice of determination with the county clerk. If the project requires discretionary approval from a state agency, the notice shall also be filed with the Secretary for Resources. The notice shall include: 
A.  An identification of the project by its common name where possible, 
B.  The decision of the city to approve or disapprove the project, 
C.  The determination of the city whether it will in its approved form have a significant impact on the environment, 
D.  A brief statement of the mitigation measures which were adopted by the city to reduce the impacts of the approved project, 
E.  A statement that an EIR or negative declaration has been prepared and certified pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, and 
F.  A statement of overriding considerations if an EIR has been prepared. 
(Ord. 1195 § 16, 1977: Ord. 1136 § 20, 1975: prior code § 2.82).  
Chapter 19.28 - MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
19.28.010 - Purpose. 
In 1988, the Legislature added to CEQA a requirement contained in Public Resources Code Section 21081.6 that a public agency, in approving feasible mitigation measures contained in EIR's and mitigated negative declarations, must also adopt a mitigation monitoring or reporting program. Such a program is to be designed to ensure compliance with the adopted changes to a project or the conditions of approval of a project which were required by the public agency in order to reduce or avoid significant environmental effects. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to set forth the procedures and requirements to be followed in this city with regard to the preparation and adoption of, and compliance with, mitigation monitoring or reporting programs for proposed projects when those programs are necessary to meet the requirements of CEQA. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.020 - Definitions. 
For this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Applicant" means the person listed as the applicant on an application for a project and includes the record owner of the real property that is the subject of the project at the time of the application for the project. "Applicant" also includes successive record owners or other persons who obtain an interest in the subject real property, or a portion thereof, after submission of the application for the project but prior to the issuance of a program completion certificate certifying completion of all requirements of a program. 
B.  "Approving body" means the Merced city council, the planning commission, the site plan approval committee, or any other City of Merced entity having discretionary authority under the Merced Municipal Code to approve a project. 
C.  "Mitigation monitoring and reporting program" or "Program" means a program adopted by the approving body pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21081.6 and this chapter to ensure compliance with adopted or required changes to mitigate or avoid significant environmental effects. 
D.  "Environmental coordinator" means the City of Merced community development director or his designee. 
E.  "Program completion certificate" means a certificate issued by the environmental coordinator to certify completion of all or a designated phase of an adopted mitigation monitoring or reporting program. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.030 - Environmental coordinator responsibilities. 
The environmental coordinator shall prepare and ensure compliance with adopted mitigation monitoring or reporting programs. The environmental coordinator is authorized to promulgate and enforce regulations consistent with the purposes, intent, and express terms of this chapter as she or he deems necessary. No regulation promulgated by the environmental coordinator, or amendments thereto, shall be enforced or become effective until thirty (30) calendar days following the date on which the proposed regulations are filed with the clerk of the City of Merced. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.040 - Mitigation monitoring or reporting program compliance requirement. 
For each project for which a mitigation monitoring or reporting program is required by this chapter and adopted by the approving body, full compliance with the adopted program for the project shall be a condition of approval of the project, and the applicant shall obtain a program completion certificate within the time requirements set forth in the adopted program. No project or phase of a project shall be considered to be in compliance with its adopted program until the required program completion certificate(s) have been issued for that projector phase of a project. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.050 - Processing of mitigation monitoring or reporting programs. 
A.  Preparation. The environmental coordinator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a proposed mitigation monitoring or reporting program for any project for which mitigation measures are listed in an environmental document adopted by the approving body. 
B.  The proposed program shall contain the following elements: 
1.  A statement that the requirements of the adopted program shall run with the real property that is the subject of the project and that successive owners, heirs, and assigns of this real property are bound to comply with all of the requirements of the adopted program. 
2.  A statement that prior to any lease, sale, transfer, or conveyance of any portion of the real property that is the subject of the project, the applicant shall provide a copy of the adopted program to the prospective lessee, buyer, transferee, or one to whom the conveyance is made. 
3.  A statement which specifies the responsibilities of the applicant and the environmental coordinator, or his or her designee, as well as whether professional expertise is required for completion or evaluation of any part of the program. 
4.  The time requirements, schedule, phases or tasks that will, upon completion, result in issuance of a program completion certificate from the environmental coordinator. 
5.  A statement of the civil remedies and criminal penalties permitted by this chapter for non-compliance with an adopted mitigation monitoring and reporting program. 
6.  A copy of the proposed program shall be included in the draft EIR or draft mitigated negative declaration and shall be subject to public review and comment. 
C.  Where a project is approved with mitigation measures that have been modified during the hearing process from those originally recommended in the environmental document, the proposed mitigation monitoring and reporting program shall be modified to maintain consistency with the project as approved. The proposed program may also be modified at the discretion of the approving body. 
D.  Adoption. When making, findings required by Public Resources Code Section 21081 or adopting a mitigated negative declaration, the approving body shall adopt a mitigation monitoring or reporting program as proposed or modified pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance or regulation to the contrary, approval of the project shall not be final until the adoption of a mitigation monitoring or reporting program if one is required under CEQA and this chapter. 
F.  Upon adoption, the applicant shall subscribe to the adopted program as legally necessary for the adopted program to be recorded with the county recorder. After the execution of the adopted program, the city clerk may forward the adopted program to the county recorder for recordation. 
G.  In conjunction with the adoption of a mitigation monitoring or reporting program for a project the approving body may require that a bond or similar security be posted by the applicant to assure performance of all mitigation measures, including any construction, alteration, repair, or other work required by the program. The bond or similar security shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, the amount established by the approving body and shall be deposited with the city prior to commencement of any work on the real property that is the subject of the project. 
H.  Compliance. Whenever a mitigation monitoring or reporting program is adopted for a project, the applicant for that project shall comply with the adopted program. In general, compliance shall include the following: 
1.  The applicant shall report in writing to the environmental coordinator the progress achieved toward compliance with the mitigation measures in accordance with the schedule set forth in the adopted program. 
2.  Unless a different time period is specified in the adopted program, within ten (10) business days of the receipt of a report of progress the environmental coordinator shall verify that the project is in compliance with the adopted program. Any non-compliance shall be documented and reported in writing to the applicant within ten (10) business days of the discovery. 
3.  The applicant shall, within ten (10) business days of receipt of a notice of non-compliance, correct any non-compliance and, provide written notice to the environmental coordinator of the correction. The ten (10) day limit may be extended an additional five (5) business days by the environmental coordinator upon a showing of good cause. 
(Ord. 2049 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.060 - Program completion certificate. 
A.  Upon the determination of the environmental coordinator that compliance with the terms of the mitigation monitoring or reporting program adopted by the approving body for a project or phase thereof has been achieved, and that there has been full payment of all fees for the project, the environmental coordinator shall issue and, for all adopted programs that have been recorded, the city clerk shall cause the recordation of a program completion certificate for that project or phase. 
(Ord. 2049 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.070 - Fees. 
A.  The fee for a mitigation monitoring or reporting program shall be the amount determined by the environmental coordinator to be the actual direct and indirect costs incurred by the city for that mitigation monitoring or reporting program. 
B.  Until compliance with a specific mitigation monitoring or reporting program is finally achieved and a program completion certificate issued, fees shall be estimated by the environmental coordinator. 
1.  After adoption of a program by the approving body, adjustments to the initial estimated fee shall be made by the environmental coordinator as necessary to accurately reflect the direct and indirect costs incurred by city for that program. 
2.  Approval of a project for which a program is required pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on payment of the initial estimated fee and all other fees required by this chapter. Adjustments to the initial fee shall be paid by the applicant not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice of any adjustments to the initial fee. 
3.  If after compliance with the adopted program but prior to issuance of a program completion certificate, the environmental coordinator determines that the estimated fee paid exceeds the actual direct and indirect costs incurred by the city of Merced for that program, then the difference shall be refunded to the applicant. If after compliance with the adopted program but prior to issuance of a program completion certificate, the environmental coordinator determines that the estimated fee paid is less than these costs, the applicant shall remit the difference to the city within thirty (30) days of his or her receipt of notice that the estimated fee is insufficient to reimburse the city for its costs. 
C.  The environmental coordinator, when so authorized by the city council on a case-by-case basis, may enter into a written agreement to allow the payment of a mitigation monitoring or reporting program fee to be paid in installments provided: 
1.  The applicant is a public agency; 
2.  The project is to serve a public purpose; 
3.  The public agency is without sufficient funds to pay the fee in one lump sum; and 
4.  The payment period does not exceed one year. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.080 - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any of the regulatory requirements adopted by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter, or regulations adopted by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter, is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.090 - Civil and administrative remedies. 
In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 19.28.080, the city may carry out or seek such other remedies as permitted by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
A.  Injunctive relief; 
B.  A stop work order subject to the following: 
1.  Whenever the environmental coordinator finds that there is non-compliance with an adopted program he or she may issue a stop work order which shall prohibit further work on the project that is the subject of the adopted program. 
2.  In the event the environmental coordinator issues a stop work order, notice of this order shall be delivered to the address of the project and to the address of the applicant, if different. The notice shall contain the following: 
(a)  The findings justifying the stop work order; 
(b)  The time and date when the stop work order commences; 
(c)  The time, date, and place at which the applicant may appear to contest the findings in the notice, which shall not be later than twenty-four (24) hours following the time and date when the stop work order commences. 
3.  Authority to recommence work after issuance of a stop work order may be granted by the environmental coordinator upon the establishment of such terms, conditions and requirements as are consistent with the requirements of the adopted program. 
C.  Revocation of any special permit granted concurrently with the approval of a program subject to the following: 
1.  The planning commission on its own motion may, and if directed by the city council shall, hold a public hearing for the purpose of revoking any special permit such as a variance, special development permit, or conditional use permit which has been granted concurrently with approval of a program. Notice shall be given with as provided in Chapter 20.72. 
2.  The hearing shall be held in accordance with the following: 
(a)  All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation. The secretary of the planning commission or designee shall administer oaths and retain relevant records and all exhibits and documents presented at said hearing. 
(b)  All persons shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and testimony on all relevant issues. The chairperson may impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard, and on the nature and length of the testimony. The chairperson may call witnesses and introduce papers on his or her own volition. 
(c)  The planning commission shall make a full record of the hearing. 
(d)  Decisions of the planning commission shall be based upon evidence presented during the public hearing. The planning commission shall not rely upon any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials prepared in connection with the particular case unless made a part of the record. 
3.  The planning commission may revoke the special permit if it finds that any of the following grounds exist: 
(a)  Non-compliance by the permittee with any of the terms, conditions, or requirements of this chapter; 
(b)  Non-compliance by the permittee with the terms, conditions, or requirements of any regulation promulgated by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter; 
(c)  Non-compliance with any of the terms, conditions, or requirements of the mitigation monitoring or reporting program approved in conjunction with the grant of the permittee's special permit; 
(d)  Non-compliance with any stop work order issued by the environmental coordinator with regard to the permittee's project. 
D.  Abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the following: 
1.  Any project which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, any regulations adopted by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter, or any term, condition, or requirement of a program approved for that project shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. A hearing to abate such a public nuisance may be ordered by resolution of the city council upon a showing by the environmental coordinator that there is such non-compliance. 
2.  Written notice of the hearing to abate the public nuisance shall be given to the applicant and anyone known to be in possession of the real property that is the subject of the project. The notice shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. In instances when the environmental coordinator cannot ascertain the address of the applicant or the person in possession of the subject real property, written notice shall be posted upon the subject property not later than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing and published in a newspaper of general circulation published within Merced County. Those receiving notice and any other interested person shall be provided an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. 
3.  The hearing to abate the public nuisance shall be held before the city council and at the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine whether there is non-compliance with a provision of this chapter or a regulation adopted by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter, or any term, condition, or requirement of the approved program. If there is such non-compliance, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate to abate the public nuisance including, but not limited to, ordering the appropriate city officials to undertake the steps necessary to abate the public nuisance. 
4.  Upon demand by the city, the cost of the abatement shall be paid by the applicant or the person in possession of the subject real property. If the cost of the abatement is not paid upon demand by the city, a hearing shall be held to consider whether to order the cost of the abatement specially assessed against the real property that is the subject of the project. Written notice of the hearing to consider whether to order the cost of the abatement specially assessed against the subject real property shall be given to the applicant and anyone known to the city council to be in possession of the subject real property. The notice shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. In instances when the environmental coordinator cannot ascertain the address of the applicant or the person in possession of the subject real property, written notice of the hearing to consider whether to order the cost of the abatement specially assessed against the subject real property shall be posted upon the subject real property not later than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition to posting, notice of the hearing shall be published once not later than five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published within Merced County. Those receiving notice and any other interested person shall be provided an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. 
5.  The hearing to consider whether to order the cost of the abatement specially assessed against the subject real property shall be held before the city council. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine the cost of abatement and whether to order that cost specially assessed against the subject real property. If the cost of abatement is ordered to be specially assessed against the subject real property, then the assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as are provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of city taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
6.  If the city council orders the cost of the abatement to be specially assessed against the subject real property, the council also may cause a notice of abatement lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, set forth the date upon which abatement of the nuisance was ordered by the city council and the date the abatement was complete, and include a legal description of the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the abatement cost. 
7.  Nothing in this section prohibits the summary abatement of a nuisance upon order of the city council or upon order of any other city officer authorized by law to summarily abate nuisances if the city council or officer determines that the nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
19.28.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Upon payment of the appeal fee established by resolution of the city council and the filing of an appeal, an applicant may appeal the imposition of the fees established pursuant to Section 19.28.070, a determination by the environmental coordinator denying issuance of a program completion certificate pursuant to Section 19.28.060, a stop work order issued by the environmental coordinator pursuant to this chapter, or a revocation by the planning commission pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The appeal fee and appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the city within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice of the imposed fees, the determination of the environmental coordinator denying issuance of a program completion certificate, the date of issuance of a stop work order, or the date of a revocation undertaken pursuant to this order. The appeal shall be in writing to the Merced city council and shall include a statement of the reasons for the appeal. 
C.  Upon receipt of the appeal fee and the appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council. The city council shall be authorized to deny the introduction of evidence not previously considered by the environmental coordinator and decide the matter after oral argument presented during the hearing, or to admit evidence not previously considered by the environmental coordinator, or conduct a de novo hearing. The decision by the city council granting or denying the appeal shall be final and shall be accompanied by findings of fact. 
1.  In deciding an appeal of a fee imposed pursuant to Section 19.28.070 the city council shall be authorized to establish a different fee as the amount of actual direct and indirect costs incurred by the city for a particular program. 
2.  In deciding an appeal from the determination of the environmental coordinator denying issuance of a program completion certificate the city council shall issue a program completion certificate if it determines that compliance with all of the terms of the adopted program has been achieved, or shall deny issuance of a program completion certificate if it determines that compliance with all of the terms of the adopted program has not been achieved. 
3.  In deciding an appeal from the issuance of a stop work order, the city council shall affirm the stop work order if it finds that there has been non-compliance with the adopted program. If the city council finds that there has been compliance with the terms of the adopted program then the city council shall discharge the stop work order. 
4.  In deciding an appeal from a revocation undertaken pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall deny the appeal if it finds any of the grounds set forth in Section 19.28.090(C)(3) of this chapter exist. If the city council finds that none of the grounds set forth in Section 19.28.090(C)(3) exist, then it shall reinstate the special permit as if the revocation had not occurred. 
(Ord. 1805 § 1 (part), 1992).  
Title 20 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2465, § 2, Exhibits A and B, adopted Sept. 19, 2016, amended Title 20 in its entirety, Chapters 20.02—20.98, and in effect repealed and reenacted said title as set out herein. An original color document with photographs of the Zoning Ordinance is available for download on the city's website at https://www.cityofmerced.org/depts/cd/planning/zoning_ordinance_update.asp. Former Title 20 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Ordinance List and the Code Comparative table for historical derivations. 
 
PART 1 - ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY  
Chapter 20.02 - PURPOSE 
Sections : 
 
20.02.010 - Title and authority. 
A.  Title 20 of the Merced Municipal Code shall be known and officially cited as the "Merced City Zoning Ordinance" and referred to in this title as "the Zoning Ordinance." 
B.  The zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section 65850 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.02.020 - Purpose of the zoning ordinance. 
A.  General. The zoning ordinance is adopted to implement the Merced general plan and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Merced community. 
B.  Specific. The zoning ordinance is intended to: 
1.  Promote orderly and beneficial development that supports a high quality of life in Merced. 
2.  Utilize land resources efficiently. 
3.  Provide public infrastructure and services in a cost-effective manner. 
4.  Protect the character and stability of residential areas. 
5.  Promote good connections between existing and planned urban areas. 
6.  Expand transportation choices for residents, including walking, biking, and riding transit. 
7.  Protect the economic vitality of commercial areas by promoting commercial development that contributes to a high quality design environment. 
8.  Stimulate economic growth, investment, and quality jobs for Merced residents. 
9.  Increase housing choices for residents. 
10.  Provide high quality parks, recreational uses, and other public amenities. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.02.030 - Relationship to the general plan. 
The zoning ordinance implements the goals and policies of the Merced general plan by regulating the uses of land and structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.02.040 - Responsible for administration. 
The zoning ordinance shall be administered by the Merced City Council, the planning commission, the site plan review committee, and the director of development services or their designees as established in Chapter 20.64 (Administrative Responsibility). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.02.050 - Applicability of the zoning ordinance. 
A.  Applicability to Property. The zoning ordinance applies to all land, uses, and structures within the Merced city limits and to property for which applications for annexation and/or subdivisions have been submitted to the City of Merced. 
B.  Governmental Agencies. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this title only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the City of Merced. 
C.  Compliance with Regulations. No land shall be used and no structures built, occupied, modified, moved, or destroyed except in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
D.  Conflicting Regulations. Where conflict occurs with other city regulations or with state or federal laws, higher law shall control over lower law unless local variation is permitted. Where conflicting laws are of equal stature, the more restrictive provision shall control unless otherwise specified in the zoning ordinance or in state or federal law. 
E.  Relation to Prior Ordinances. The provisions of this title supersede all prior zoning ordinances codified in Title 20 of the Merced Municipal Code and any amendments. No provision of this title shall validate any land use or structure established, constructed or maintained in violation of the prior zoning ordinance, unless such validation is specifically authorized by this title and is in conformance with all other regulations. 
F.  Enforcement. The zoning ordinance shall be enforced in the manner determined to be the most appropriate, which may include, but not be limited to, the procedures as established in Merced Municipal Code Title 1 (General Provisions) as well as any other procedures available in state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.04 - INTERPRETATION 
 
20.04.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes rules and procedures for interpreting the zoning ordinance to ensure that it is applied and enforced in a consistent manner. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.04.020 - Authority. 
The director of development services, planning manager, planning division staff, city attorney, and his/her designees are delegated the authority by the city council to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.04.030 - Rules of interpretation. 
A.  General Rules. The following general rules apply to the interpretation and application of the zoning ordinance. 
1.  The specific controls over the general. 
2.  Where there is a conflict between text and any figure, illustration, graphic, heading, map, table, or caption, the text governs. 
3.  The words "shall," "will," "is to," and "are to" are mandatory. "Should" means a regulation that is not mandatory, but must be either fulfilled or the applicant must demonstrate an alternative that fulfills the intent of the regulation. "May" is permissive. 
4.  The following conjunctions are interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" means that all items or provisions so connected apply. 
b.  "Or" means that all items or provisions so connected apply singularly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either . . . or" means that one (1) of the items or provisions so connected apply singularly, but not in combination. 
5.  All officials, bodies, agencies, ordinances, policies, and regulations referred to in the zoning ordinance are those of Merced unless otherwise noted. 
B.  Calendar Days. Numbers of days specified in the zoning ordinance are construed as continuous calendar days unless otherwise noted. Where the last of a number of days falls on a holiday or weekend, time limits specified in the zoning ordinance are extended to the following working day. 
C.  Land Use Regulation Tables. Land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts) establish permitted land uses within each zoning district. Notations within these tables shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Permitted Uses. A "P" means that a use is permitted by right in the respective zoning district and is not subject to discretionary review and approval. 
2.  Conditionally Permitted Uses. A "C" means that a use requires approval of a conditional use permit. An "M" means that a use requires approval of a minor use permit. 
3.  Site Plan Review Required. A "SP" means that a use requires approval of a site plan review permit. 
4.  Uses Not Allowed. An "X" in a cell means that a use is not allowed in the respective zoning district. 
D.  Unlisted Land Uses. If a proposed land use is not specifically listed in the zoning ordinance, the use is not permitted except as follows: 
1.  The director of development services may determine that an unlisted proposed use is equivalent to a permitted use (or requires a site plan permit, conditional use permit, minor use permit, or other such permit) if all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The use is no greater in density or intensity than other uses in the applicable zoning district. 
b.  The use is compatible with permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the applicable zoning district. 
c.  The use will meet the purpose of the applicable zoning district. 
d.  The use is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan. 
e.  The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
f.  The use is similar to one (1) or more other uses allowed in that zone. 
2.  A proposed use unlisted in the land use regulation table for a zoning district shall not be permitted if that land use is listed as a permitted use in one (1) or more other zoning districts. In such a case, the absence of the use in the land use regulation table shall be interpreted as a prohibition of the use in the respective zoning district, unless the director of development services deems otherwise under the provisions of Section 20.04.030(D)(1) above. 
3.  When the director of development services determines that a proposed use is equivalent to a listed use, the proposed use shall be treated in the same manner as the listed use with respect to development standards, permits required, and all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
E.  Uses Prohibited by State or Federal Law. No use that is prohibited, unlawful, violates or is inconsistent with federal or state law, or any provision in this zoning ordinance, shall be allowed or permitted in any zoning district within the City of Merced. 
F.  Zoning Map Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
5.  In unsubdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a parcel, the location of the boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown upon the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale on the map. 
6.  In case further uncertainty exists, the director of development services shall determine the exact location of the boundaries. The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission that upon written application by a property owner or upon its own motion, shall determine the exact location of the boundaries. 
G.  Parcels Containing Two (2) or More Zoning Districts. 
1.  For parcels containing two (2) or more zoning districts ("split zoning"), the location of the zoning district boundary shall be determined by the director of development services. 
2.  For parcels containing two (2) or more zoning districts, the applicable regulations for each zoning district shall apply within the zoning district boundaries as identified on the zoning map. 
3.  When a zoning district boundary interferes with existing structures or setbacks, the director may approve a minor adjustment of the boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.04.040 - Procedures for interpretation/determinations. 
A.  Request for Interpretation. The director of development services or his/her designee shall respond in writing to written requests for interpretation of the zoning ordinance if, in the opinion of the director, the requested interpretation would substantially clarify an ambiguity which interferes with the effective administration of the zoning ordinance. When the director makes such a determination, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  The request shall be in writing and shall state which provision is to be interpreted and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the latest planning and development fee schedule. 
2.  The request shall provide any information that the director requires to assist in its review. 
3.  The director shall respond to an interpretation request within thirty (30) days of receiving the request. 
B.  Form and Content of Interpretation. Official interpretations prepared by the director shall be in writing, and shall quote the provisions of the regulations that are being interpreted. The interpretation shall describe the circumstance that caused the need for the interpretation. 
C.  Official Record of Interpretations. An official record of interpretations shall be kept and updated regularly by the development services department. The record of interpretations shall be indexed by the number of the section that is the subject of the interpretation and made available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
D.  Director of Development Services Referral to Planning Commission. The director may refer any request for interpretation of the zoning ordinance to the planning commission for review and interpretation. 
E.  Appeals. Any official interpretation prepared by the director may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission's interpretation may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.06 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
 
20.06.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies the zoning districts that apply to land within the Merced city limits and establishes the official Merced zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.06.020 - Zoning districts. 
A.  Base Zoning Districts. Merced is divided into zoning districts that implement the general plan land use map as shown in Table 20.06-1. 
TABLE 20.06-1 BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 
Zoning 
District 
Symbol 	Name of Zoning District 	General Plan 
Land Use Designations 
Residential Zoning Districts 
R-R 	Rural Residential 	Rural Residential (RR) 
R-1 	Low Density Residential 	Low Density Residential (LD) 
R-2 	Low Medium Density Residential 	Low Medium Density Residential (LMD) 
R-3 	Medium Density Residential 	High Medium Density Residential 
(HMD) 
R-4 	High Density Residential 	High Density Residential (HD) 
R-MH 	Mobile Home Residential 	Mobile Home Park Residential (RMH) 
Commercial Zoning Districts 
C-C 	Regional/Central Commercial 	Regional/Community Commercial (RC) 
C-G 	General Commercial 	General Commercial (CG) 
C-T 	Thoroughfare Commercial 	Thoroughfare Commercial (CT) 
C-N 	Neighborhood Commercial 	Neighborhood Commercial (CN) 
C-SC 	Shopping Center Commercial 	
C-O 	Office Commercial 	Commercial/Professional Office (CO) 
B-P 	Business Park 	Business Park (BP) 
Industrial Zoning Districts 
I-L 	Light Industrial 	Industrial (IND) 
I-H 	Heavy Industrial 	
Downtown Zoning Districts 
D-COR 	Downtown Core 	Regional/Community Commercial (RC) 
D-O 	Downtown Office 	
D-CM 	Downtown Commercial 	
Urban Village Zoning Districts 
R-IV 	Inner Village Residential 	Village Residential (VR) 
R-OV 	Outer Village Residential 	
C-V 	Village Commercial 	Neighborhood Commercial (CN) or Regional/Community Commercial (RC) 
P-OS 	Parks and Open Space 	Open Space-Park/Recreation (OS-PK); Public/Government (P/G); and School (SCH) 
P-F 	Public Facility 	
P-PK 	Public Parking District 	
A-G 	Agriculture 	Agricultural (AR) 
Other Zones 
U-T 	Urban Transition 	N/A 
P-D 	Planned Development 	N/A 
 
B.  Overlay Zones. The zoning ordinance and zoning map include the overlay zones shown in Table 20.06-2. Overlay zones impose additional regulations on properties beyond what is required by the underlying base zoning district. See Chapter 20.22 for regulations that apply to overlay zones. 
Table 20.06-2 Overlay Zones 
Zoning District Symbol 	Name of Overlay Zones 
/HSR 	High Speed Rail 
/AE 	Airport Environ 
/UR 	Urban Residential 
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.06.030 - Zoning map. 
A.  Adoption. The city council hereby adopts the Merced zoning map ("zoning map"), which establishes the boundaries of all base zoning districts and overlay zones provided for in the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Incorporation by Reference. The zoning map, including all legends, symbols, notations, references, and other information shown on the map, is incorporated by reference and made a part of the zoning ordinance. 
C.  Location. The zoning map is kept, maintained, and updated by the development services department, and is available for viewing by the public at the department and on the official City of Merced website. The digital version of the zoning map for the City of Merced is maintained online by the Merced County Association of Governments. 
D.  Replacement of Official Zoning Map. In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (insert date of previous map adoption) of the City of Merced, California." 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
PART 2 - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS  
Chapter 20.08 - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.08.010 - Purpose of the residential zoning districts. 
A.  Rural Residential (R-R). The R-R zoning district provides an area for single-family dwellings on large lots in a semi-rural environment. The R-R zoning district serves as a buffer between the city's urbanized areas and agricultural land and other environmentally sensitive or resource areas. 
B.  Low Density Residential (R-1). The R-1 zoning district is intended to stabilize, protect, and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable environment for detached single-family dwellings and other land uses typically compatible with a low-density residential setting. The R-1 zoning district is divided into four (4) subzones (R-1-20, R-1-10, R-1-6, and R-1-5) allowing for a range of minimum lot sizes. 
C.  Low Medium Density Residential (R-2). The R-2 zoning district is intended to stabilize, protect, and encourage the establishment and maintenance of a suitable environment for single-family dwellings, duplex homes, limited multi-family dwellings, and other land uses typically compatible with a low to medium-density residential setting. 
D.  Medium Density Residential (R-3). The R-3 zoning district provides an area for a full range of residential uses, including single-family dwellings, duplex homes, multi-family dwellings, single room occupancy housing, and other land uses typically compatible with a medium density residential setting. The R-3 zoning district is divided into two (2) subzones (R-3-1.5 and R-3-2) allowing for a range of permitted residential densities. 
E.  High Density Residential (R-4). The R-4 zoning district provides an area for the highest density residential uses in Merced. Permitted uses include single-family dwellings, duplex homes, multi-family dwellings, single room occupancy housing, and other land uses typically compatible with a high-density residential setting in close proximity to shopping, transportation, and other facilities. 
F.  Mobile Home Park (R-MH). The R-MH zoning district provides an area for mobile home parks with regulations and standards intended to maintain a suitable environment for mobile home park residents. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.08.020 - Land use regulations for residential zoning districts. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 20.08-1 identifies land uses permitted in residential zoning districts. 
Table 20.08-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Residential Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District [1] 	Additional 
Regulations 
P  Permitted Use 	R-R 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-MH 	
M Minor Use Permit Required 							
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 							
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 							
X  Use Not Allowed 							
Residential Uses 
Duplex Homes 	X 	M[2] 	P 	P 	P 	X 	
Fraternities and Sororities 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	Sec. 20.44.060 
Group/Transitional/Supportive Housing 	P [3] 	P [3] 	P [3] 	P [3] 	P [3] 	P [3] 	
Mobile Home Parks 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	SP 	
Multiple-Family Dwellings 	X 	X 	C [4] 	P 	P 	X 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small (1-6 persons) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Residential Care Facilities, Large (More than 6) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	
Secondary Dwelling Units ("Second Units") 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	Chapter 20.42 
Single-Family Dwellings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	M 	Sec. 20.46.020 
Single-Room Occupancy 	X 	X 	X 	SP 	SP 	X 	Sec. 20.44.120 
Community Uses 
Colleges and Trade Schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Community Gardens 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Sec. 20.44.050 
Cultural Institutions 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	
Day Care Centers 	X 	X 	X 	M 	M 	M 	
Day Care, Adult (1-12 persons) 	X 	X 	C[5] 	C[5] 	C[5] 	X 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Small (1-8 children) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Large (9-14 children) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Foster Family Homes, Small (6 persons or fewer) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Foster Family Homes, Large (7+ persons) 	C 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	
Golf Courses 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Nursing and Convalescent Homes 	C 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Schools, Public or Private 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	
Commercial Uses 
Bed and Breakfast 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Sec. 20.44.030 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	M [6] 	
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	M [6] 	
Home Occupation, Major 	SP[9] 	SP [9] 	SP [9] 	SP [9] 	SP [9] 	SP[9] 	Chapter 20.48 
Home Occupation, Minor 	P[9] 	P[9] 	P[9] 	P[9] 	P[9] 	P[9] 	Chapter 20.48 
Mobile Home Sales 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	M 	
Personal Services 	X 	X 	X 	SP[6] 	SP[6] 	SP[6] 	
Retail, General (Limited) 	M[7] 	X 	X 	M [8] 	M [8] 	M [6] 	
Temporary Subdivision Sales Offices 
(Max. 2 Years) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Agriculture and Natural Resources Uses 
Animal Raising and Production 	SP[10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	X 	X 	Chapter 6.04 
Crop Cultivation 	SP[10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	C [10] 	
Transportation, Communications, and Utilities Uses 
Utilities, Major 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	
Utilities, Minor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 	
 
Notes: 
[1] A site plan review permit may be required per Chapter 20.32 (Interface Regulations) regardless of the uses shown in Table 20.08-1. 
[2] Corner lots only. See Subsection B below. 
[3] Only permitted for rooming and boarding houses as an accessory use. The maximum persons allowed are: R-1, R-R, & R-MH (1 person); R-2 (2 persons); and R-3 and R-4 (no limit). 
[4] Permitted only on lots fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. feet or greater with five (5) or more units and at least three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit. 
[5] For day care home facilities for adults, a conditional use permit would allow up to twelve (12) adults in care. 
[6] Permitted only as an ancillary use to serve residents, not to exceed more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
[7] Permitted only for onsite retail for agricultural products. 
[8] Permitted only when ancillary to a multi-family use and intended to serve residents only. No exterior display or advertising is permitted. Retail use must be located within the same building as residences. 
[9] A minor use permit is required for a cottage food industry home occupation. 
[10] Agricultural uses are temporary, transitional uses in the city and should not remain on a permanent basis. The appropriate length of time for the use will be defined in the conditional use permit based on the types of crops, surrounding uses, etc. Hog-raising and onsite sale of products, including wholesale, are prohibited. See Chapter 6.04 (Animal Control) for additional regulations. 
B.  Duplex Homes in the R-1-6 Zoning District. Duplex homes are permitted in the R-1-6 zoning district when the following standards are met: 
1.  The lot is eight thousand (8,000) square feet or greater. 
2.  The lot is a corner lot with distinct frontages on two (2) intersecting streets. 
3.  Off-street parking for each unit is provided consistent with Chapter 20.38 (Off-Street Parking). 
4.  Driveways are a minimum twenty (20) feet in length. 
5.  The lot does not have frontage along a designated collector or higher order street as defined in the general plan, or has a circular driveway or other driveway configuration that enables vehicles to enter and exit the site in the same direction and not back out into the street. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.08.030 - Development standards for residential zoning districts. 
A.  Basic Standards. Tables 20.08-2 and 20.08-3 identify development standards that apply in residential zoning districts. 
B.  Variation in Lot Dimensions for R-1-6 Subdivisions. The planning commission may approve reduced lot widths for an R-1-6 subdivision when the following conditions are met: 
1.  The subdivision creates at least ten (10) lots. 
2.  Excluding corner lots, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the remaining lots are at least five (5) feet above the minimum required width. 
3.  Excluding corner lots, no more than forty (40) percent of the remaining lots may be less than the minimum required width. 
4.  No lot shall have a depth less than the minimum required depth or a width less than fifteen (15) feet below the minimum required width. 
5.  No corner lot may be less than the minimum required width or area. 
6.  No more than two (2) lots below the minimum required width may be adjacent to one (1) another. 
C.  Residential Design Standards. All residential structures shall comply with the design standards established in Chapter 20.46 (Residential Design Standards). See Figure 20.08-1. 
Figure 20.08-1 — Residential Development Standards
 
Table 20.08-2 Development Standards for Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts 
	Figure 
Label 	Zoning District 
		R-R 	R-1-20 	R-1-10 	R-1-6 	R-1-5 
Lot and Density Standards (Minimums) 
Lot Area 		1 acre [4] 	20,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 
Lot Width [2] 						
 Interior Lots 		125 ft. 	85 ft. 	70 ft. 	60 ft. 	50 ft. 
 Corner Lots 		125 ft. 	85 ft. 	70 ft. 	65 ft. 	55 ft. 
Lot Depth [3] 		None 	125 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	80 ft. 
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 		1 acre [4] 	20,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 
Primary Structure Standards 
Setbacks (min.) 						
 Exterior Yards, Front 	? 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	15 ft. [1] 
 Exterior Yards, Side (Corner 
 Lots only) [5] 	? 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 Exterior Yards, Cul-De-Sacs 		30 ft. 	30 ft. [1] 	15 ft. [1] 	15 ft.[1] 	15 ft.[1] 
 One Interior Yard 	? ? 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 All Other Interior Yards 	? ? 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 	7 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Height (max.) 	? 					
 Feet 		35 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 
Other Standards 
Accessory Structure Standards 		See Chapter 20.28 
Driveway Length (min.) 		20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 
Lot Coverage (max.) 		25% 	30% 	40% 	45% 	50% 
Off-Street Parking 		See Chapter 20.38 
Projections Into Required Yards 		See Chapter 20.26 
Separation Between Structures (min.) 		As required by the California Building Code 
 
Notes: 
[1] Twenty-foot minimum for garages. 
[2] Lots located on curved streets, turnarounds, or cul-de-sac bulbs shall meet the minimum lot width requirement at the established front setback line. 
[3] Cul-de-sac lots located on the cul-de-sac bulbs shall meet the minimum lot depth requirement measured at the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, but at no point shall be less than eight (80) feet in depth. 
[4] May be reduced to one-third ( 1/3 ) acre if city sewer and water serves the property. 
[5] On corner lots, if the yard abuts the exterior front yard of an adjacent lot, then it shall be considered an exterior front yard. Otherwise, it shall be considered an exterior side yard. 
Table 20.08-3 Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential Zoning Districts 
	Figure
Label	Zoning District 
		R-2 	R-3-2 	R-3-1.5 	R-4 	R-MH 
Lot and Density Standards (Minimums) 
Lot Area 		6,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	7,500 sq. ft. 	7,500 sq. ft. 	10 acres 
Lot Width 						
 Interior Lots 		60 ft. 	60 ft. 	60 ft. 	70 ft. 	200 ft. 
 Corner Lots 		65 ft. 	65 ft. 	65 ft. 	70 ft. 	200 ft. 
Lot Depth 		100 ft. 	- 	- 	- 	200 ft. 
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 		3,000 sq. ft. 	2,000 sq. ft. 	1,500 sq. ft. 	1,000 sq. ft. 	[1] 
Primary Building Standards 
Setbacks (min.) 						
 Exterior Yards, Front 	? 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Exterior Yards, Side (Corner Lots Only) 	? 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 One Interior Yard 	?? 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 All Other Interior Yards 	?? 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	6 ft. [2] 	10 ft. 
Height (max.) 	? 					
 Feet 		35 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	40 ft. 	35 ft. 
Other Standards 
Accessory Structure Standards 		See Chapter 20.28 
Driveway Length (min.) 		20 ft. 	- 	- 	- 	- 
Lot Coverage (max.) 		50% 	55% 	55% 	65% 	65% 
Off-Street Parking 		See Chapter 20.38 
Projections Into Required Yards 		See Chapter 20.26 
Separation Between Structures (min.) 		15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] The maximum residential density in the R-MH zoning district is ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
[2] Rear yard minimum 10 (10) feet for structures over twenty-five (25) feet in height, an additional one (1) foot per each additional five (5) feet in height. 
D.  R-1-5 Subdivisions. Homes for R-1-5 subdivisions shall comply with the following design standards: 
1.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the front elevations along a street shall have a minimum 25-foot garage setback. 
2.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the garages along a street with the standard 20-foot setback shall have recessed doors (recessed at least one (1) foot). 
3.  No three-car garages shall be allowed on five thousand (5,000) square-foot lots, except on lots with alley access or lots exceeding sixty (60) feet in width. 
4.  All subdivisions shall provide a variety of dwelling elevations appropriate for the scale of the project. Elevations shall be approved by the planning division. At a minimum, the same elevations shall not be repeated for adjacent houses. Varied front setbacks and heights are encouraged as ways of achieving variety. 
5.  Windows, doors, and garage doors (except recessed garage doors) on the front elevation shall have raised trim in order to provide visual interest and relief. 
6.  Plans for two-story structures immediately adjacent to a developed R-1 area shall receive special attention by the planning division. Planning Division staff shall consider the relationship of second-story windows, doors, and balconies with the privacy of neighbors, and may require that these features be redesigned or omitted from second-story rear walls. 
E.  Exceptions on Required Front Setback. In any residential zoning district, the required front setback may be modified with a minor use permit if at least fifty (50) percent of the homes are already constructed on the same block with front setbacks that are different from the front setback requirement in Table 20.08-2 (Setback and Height Standards for Residential Zoning Districts). In such cases, the modified setbacks shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The front setback shall not exceed the average of existing front setbacks on the same block. 
2.  The front setback shall not exceed the average of existing front setbacks of the two (2) immediately adjoining lots. 
3.  For corner lots, the front setback shall not exceed the front setback of the immediately adjoining lot. 
4.  The front setback for all lots shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet and a maximum of fifty (50) feet. 
F.  Parking. 
1.  Within the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, required off-street parking spaces may not be located within any required exterior setback area. 
2.  Within the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts, off street parking spaces may be located within required exterior setback areas if the total off-street parking requirement exceeds four (4) spaces. 
3.  When the required off-street parking for a single-family or duplex home in any residential zoning district is provided outside of a covered garage or carport, each parking space shall be located and designed so that it may later be covered by a garage or carport structure. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.08.040 - Additional dwelling units on R-1 lots. 
A.  General. Up to three (3) single-family dwelling units are permitted on an R-1 lot provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The minimum lot size is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for R-1-5; eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet for R-1-6; thirty thousand (30,000) net square feet for R-1-10; and sixty thousand (60,000) net square feet for R-1-20. 
2.  The minimum lot area per dwelling unit is five thousand (5,000) square feet for R-1-5; six thousand (6,000) square feet for R-1-6; ten thousand (10,000) square feet for R-1-10; and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for R-1-20. 
3.  A minimum separation of twenty (20) feet is provided between dwelling units located behind each other. 
4.  For dwelling units located side by side on one (1) lot: 
a.  The lot has a width of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
b.  A minimum separation of ten (10) feet is provided between dwelling units. 
B.  Deep R-1 Lots. R-1 lots that are over one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth with an existing dwelling unit may add an additional dwelling unit, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The existing dwelling unit existed prior to the adoption of this title. 
2.  The existing dwelling unit is located at least seventy-five (75) feet back from the front lot line. 
3.  The additional dwelling unit is located on the front half of the lot. 
4.  A minimum separation of twenty (20) feet is provided between the two (2) dwelling units. 
C.  Rear Dwellings. 
1.  No structure to the rear of a principal structure on the same lot shall be used for residential purposes unless it conforms to all the lot area, setback, open space, and off-street parking requirements of this title. 
2.  Vehicle access to rear dwellings shall be provided from a public street or alley. The minimum driveway width shall be ten (10) feet for driveways serving two (2) units, and twenty-two (22) feet for driveways serving three (3) or more units. 
D.  Dwelling Units Over Garages. Dwelling units occupying an upper story above a garage may be set back three (3) feet from a rear lot line that abuts an alley. The ground floor garage shall be set back five (5) feet from the rear lot line. All other setback and open space requirements must be observed. 
E.  Guest Houses. Guest houses shall be located on the rear half of a lot. No kitchen or kitchen facilities shall be permitted and no plumbing shall be allowed except for space heating, air conditioning, and the discharge of wastes from a toilet or bathroom. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.08.050 - Rural residential zoning district. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes supplemental standards and procedures for properties within the rural residential zoning district. The intent of this section is to maintain the existing rural character of these properties and to allow for continued agricultural uses and operations in addition to residential uses. 
B.  Agricultural Uses 
1.  Crop, orchard, and vineyard operations are permitted as a primary land use in the rural residential zoning district if a dwelling unit is also located on the property. 
2.  The keeping of livestock and poultry shall be a permitted use in the rural residential zoning district subject to the requirements of Merced Municipal Code Section 6.04.081 (Exception to Livestock and Poultry Regulations). 
C.  Infrastructure Improvements. Through a special project permit process as outlined in Section 20.68.060, the city council may waive or defer for a specified amount of time requirements for properties in the rural residential zoning district only to install city sewer, city water, curb, sidewalk, streetlights, and other infrastructure improvements consistent with adopted city policies and regulation.  
Chapter 20.10 - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.10.010 - Purpose of the commercial zoning districts. 
A.  Neighborhood Commercial (C-N). The C-N zoning district provides areas for shopping centers and other commercial uses that serve the day-to-day needs of residential neighborhoods. The C-N districts shall have a minimum area of three (3) acres and shall be located only where analysis of the residential population demonstrates that the facilities are justified. 
B.  Shopping Center Commercial (C-SC). The C-SC zoning district provides areas for grocery stores, supermarkets, and other retail establishments selling groceries to serve local residents as well as the larger regional market. The C-SC districts shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres. 
C.  Regional/Central Commercial (C-C). The C-C zoning district provides areas for a diversity of commercial and residential land uses in the central business district and regional centers. These uses help to support a vibrant retail destination, provide jobs for residents, and accommodate commercial and service uses to meet the needs of community and regional businesses and residents. 
D.  Office Commercial (C-O). The C-O zoning district provides a location for a broad range of office uses including professional offices, business offices, medical offices, and regional or "back" offices. The C-O zoning district can also accommodate limited "accessory" restaurant, retail, and service uses that cater to the needs of on-site employees and visitors. 
E.  Thoroughfare Commercial (C-T). The C-T zoning district provides areas for auto-oriented commercial uses that accommodate the needs of people traveling on highways and local motorists. The C-T zoning district also accommodates large recreational facilities and heavy commercial uses that benefit from proximity to the highway. 
F.  General Commercial (C-G). The C-G zoning district provides areas for heavy commercial and light industrial uses that may impact neighboring uses and often require large parcels and benefit from separation from retail uses. The C-G districts are to be established in areas of four (4) acres or larger. 
G.  Business Park (B-P). The B-P zoning district provides a location for employment-intensive uses within an attractive campus-like setting. The B-P zoning district shall primarily allow "back" offices, research and development businesses but also limited commercial retail uses to serve employees in the area. The B-P zoning district shall have a minimum area of five (5) acres. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016) 
_____ 
20.10.020 - Land use regulations for commercial zoning districts. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Table 20.10-1 identifies land uses permitted in commercial zoning districts. 
Table 20.10-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Commercial Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District [1] 
P  Permitted Use 	C-O 	C-N 	C-C 	C-SC 	C-T 	C-G 	B-P 	Additional
Regulations 
M Minor Use Permit Required 								
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 								
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 								
X  Use Not Allowed 								
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Group/Transitional/Supportive Housing 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Live/Work Units 	C 	C 	P [2] 	X 	X 	X 	X 	Sec. 20.44.080 
Multiple-Family Dwellings 	C 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small (6 or Less) 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Residential Care Facilities, Large (More than 6 residents) 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Single-Room Occupancy 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	X 	X 	X 	Sec. 20.44.120 
COMMUNITY USES 
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Community Garden 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP [19] 	X 	SP 	X 	Sec. 20.44.050 
Colleges and Trade Schools 	C 	C 	C 	SP [9] 	X 	C 	C 	
Convalescent or Nursing Homes 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Cultural Institutions 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Day Care Centers (Children & Adults) 	M 	M 	M 	X 	X 	X 	SP 	
Emergency Shelters 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 	P 	X 	Sec. 20.44.150 
Government Offices 	P 	P 	P 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Hospitals and Surgery Centers 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 	
Instructional Services 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 	SP 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 	C 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 	
Public Safety Facilities 	SP 	SP 	P 	C 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Rehabilitation Centers 	P 	P [6] 	P [10] 	X 	X 	C 	C 	
Social Assistance Services 	C 	C 	C 	X 	SP 	P 	X 	
COMMERCIAL USES 
Alcoholic Beverage Sales [7] 	X 	P [7][8] 	P [7] 	C [7][8] 	P [7] 	P [7] 	SP [7] 	Sec. 20.44.010 
Bail Bond Businesses 	C 	X 	C [10] 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Bars and Nightclubs 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Banks, Retail 	P 	P 	P 	P [9] 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Bed and Breakfast 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 	C 	X 	Sec. 20.44.030 
Building Supplies/Home Improvement 	X 	X 	C 	X 	SP 	P 	SP 	
Business Support Services 	X 	C 	M 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Cardrooms [5] 	X 	X 	C [5] 	X 	C [5] 	C [5] 	X 	Chapter 9.08 
Cemeteries and Mausoleums 	X 	X 	C 	X 	C 	P 	X 	
Check Cashing/Payday Loan Establishments 	C 	X 	C [10] 	X 	C 	C 	C 	Sec.20.44.040 
Commercial Cannabis Businesses 	Refer to Table 20.44-1 in Section 20.44.170 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor (Except Below) 	X 	SP 	SP 	SP [9] 	P 	SP 	C 	
Multi-Screen (6 or More) Movie Theaters 	X 	C 	P 	X 	C 	X 	C 	
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 	X 	X 	X 	SP [9] 	P 	C 	C 	
Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales 	C 	C 	SP 	SP [9] 	P 	P 	SP 	
Equipment Sales and Rental 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Farmer's Market 	C 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 	Sec. 20.50.030B 
Flea Market 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	P 	C 	
Gas and Service Stations/Car Washes 	X 	C 	SP 	SP [9] 	P 	P 	SP 	Sec. 20.44.070 
Hotels and Motels 	X 	X 	P 	X 	P 	C 	C 	
Hookah Lounges 	X 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Kennels 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	P 	C 	
Maintenance and Repair Services 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Massage Establishments 	C [16] 	C [16] 	C [16] 	X 	C [16] 	C [16] 	X 	Chapter 5.44 
Massage Therapy—Sole Practitioner 	P [17] 	P [17] 	P [17] 	X 	C [16] 	C [16] 	X 	Chapter 5.44 
Mobile Food Vendors 	C 	C 	C [10] 	X 	SP [11] 	SP 	C 	Sec. 5.54 & 20.44.020 
Mobile Home Sales 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Office, Professional 	P 	P 	P 	SP [9] 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Pawn Shops 	X 	X 	C [10] 	X 	X 	P 	X 	
Personal Services 	SP 	P 	P 	P [9] 	SP 	SP 	SP [12] 	
Retail, General 	SP [12] 	P 	P 	SP [9] 	P 	SP 	SP 	
Restaurants 	C [13] 	P [8] 	P 	SP [9] 	P 	M 	SP [12] [13] 	
Tattoo Parlors 	X 	SP 	M 	X 	M 	M 	SP 	
Tobacco Retailers [18] 	X 	P [18] 	P [18] 	P [18] 	P [18] 	P [18] 	SP [18] 	Sec. 20.44.160 
Vehicle Parts and Accessories Sales 	X 	P 	P 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Vehicle Rentals 	X 	X 	M 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	P 	C 	
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Minor 	X 	SP 	P 	X 	P 	P 	C 	
Vehicle Sales 	X 	X 	P [10] [14] 	X 	P 	P 	C 	
INDUSTRIAL USES 
Manufacturing and Processing, General 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	M 	C 	
Manufacturing and Processing, Light 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	SP 	
Research and Development 	C 	X 	C 	X 	SP 	SP 	P 	
Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution 	X 	X 	SP [15] 	X 	P 	P 	SP 	
Wrecking & Salvage Establishments 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	Sec. 20.44.140 
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION, AND UTILITY USES 
Airports 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Freight Terminals 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Heliports 	C 	X 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Parking Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P [9] 	P 	P 	P 	
Public/Mini Storage 	X 	X 	X 	X 	M 	M 	SP 	
Recycling Collection Facilities 		Sec. 20.44.090 
Reverse Vending Machines 	P 	P 	P 	M [9] 	P 	P 	P 	
Small Collection Facilities 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP [9] 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Large Collection Facilities 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Utilities, Major 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	
Utilities, Minor 	P 	P 	P 	P [9] 	P 	P 	P 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 
 
Notes: 
[1] A site plan review permit may be required per Chapter 20.32 (Interface Regulations) regardless of the uses shown in Table 20.10-1. 
[2] Residential use on the ground floor is prohibited unless it is located on the back of the property where it is not visible or approved with a conditional use permit. 
[3] Prohibited as a single use. Permitted as part of a residential mixed-use project. 
[4] Use shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. 
[5] 24 hour operations limited to C-T and C-C zones per Chapter 9.08 (Gaming). 
[6] Rehabilitation centers for drug, methadone, and alcohol are prohibited. 
[7] A conditional use permit is required for establishments smaller than 20,000 square feet. 
[8] A conditional use permit is required for alcoholic beverage sales for on-site consumption. 
[9] Permitted only as part of a shopping center or other retail establishment with a minimum of 20,000 square feet of floor area devoted to the sale of groceries. 
[10] Prohibited in the city center area between 19th and 16th Streets and O Street and Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, including properties fronting on either side of each of the above streets, except vehicle sales showrooms can be allowed. 
[11] Includes refreshment stands. 
[12] Permitted only as an ancillary use to serve employees, not to occupy more than 5,000 square feet. 
[13] Conditional use permit required unless the use is ancillary to a principal permitted use. For restaurants, Conditional Use Permit is required unless the uses are conducted in and entered from within the building with no outside advertising. 
[14] A site plan review permit is required for used vehicle sales. 
[15] Temporary warehousing and storage only is allowed per the requirements of Section 20.10.030(D). 
[16] Provided that a massage establishment permit has not been revoked at that location within 12 months of the application for a conditional use permit and a massage establishment permit is obtained pursuant to Chapter 5.44. 
[17] Must have valid certificate from State of California as a massage therapist or massage practitioner pursuant to the Massage Therapy Act (Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.). 
[18] Prohibited within 1,000 feet of schools and other uses per Sec. 20.44.160, unless building over 20,000 square feet. 
[19] Allowed only as a temporary use until a shopping center is developed. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2480, § 4, 12-4-2017; Ord. No. 2486, § 1, 3-19-2018) 
_____ 
20.10.030 - Development standards and guidelines for commercial zoning districts. 
A.  General Standards. Table 20.10-2 identifies development standards that apply to all parcels and structures located in commercial zoning districts. See Figure 20.10-1. 
B.  Outdoor Operation of Uses. 
1.  The outdoor operation of a land use in the C-C and C-N zoning districts shall require approval of a site plan review permit. Outdoor dining in accordance with Chapter 12.36 (Restaurant Encroachment Permits), outdoor recreation, commercial parking lots, and other similar permitted uses that necessitate outdoor operation are exempt from this requirement. 
2.  The storage of vehicles, equipment, and materials in the C-T and C-G zoning district shall be either located entirely within a completely enclosed building; or entirely enclosed by a screen fence or hedge not less than six (6) feet high. This requirement shall not apply to retail nurseries or vehicle sales and rental uses. 
3.  All land uses shall be located entirely within a completely enclosed building in the B-P zoning district. 
C.  Location of Parking and Loading Facilities. Parking and loading facilities in a commercial zoning district shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from an exterior property line when located across the street from a residential zoning district. 
D.  Temporary Warehousing and Storage Uses in the Downtown C-C Zoning District. The following uses require a site plan review permit pursuant to Chapter 20.68.050 of this code in the downtown C-C zoning district: 
1.  Temporary warehouse and storage uses, but only within existing buildings or structures on properties with environmental issues, restrictions, or limitations identified by local, state, or federal agencies, subject to conditions in Section 20.10.030(D)(2) of this chapter. While warehouse and storage uses are generally prohibited and discouraged in the C-C district, it is recognized by the city that environmental issues, restrictions, or limitations identified by local, state, or federal agencies may limit or prohibit the uses, otherwise permitted or conditionally permitted in this district. The city further recognizes the substantial public and private investment made to both public and private properties in the downtown C-C district and the need for property owners to have a source of funds to meet property expenses as well as to ensure that the public and private investments are protected by preventing these properties from falling into disrepair and becoming blighted. Temporary warehouse and storage use does not include traditional mini-storage where multiple tenants or customers rent or lease storage space from the property owner or mini-storage operator. 
2.  The following conditions shall be applied to the site plan review permit for temporary warehouse and storage uses in the downtown C-C district: 
a.  When a site plan review permit is granted for any property within the downtown C-C district with environmental issues, restrictions, or limitations identified by local, state, or federal agencies, the use of the property shall have no more than the minimum number of employees for the minimal amount of time required for business operation in order to minimize human exposure. 
b.  The site plan review permit shall be valid and last only until remediation of the environmental issue, restriction, or limitation is complete and the environmental issue, restriction, or limitation is officially "closed" by the local, state, or federal agency. The site plan review permit shall be reviewed at least every three (3) years to determine if the need still exists for the restriction. If the need no longer exists, the property shall be brought into compliance with downtown C-C district within ninety (90) days after notice to the property owner. 
c.  The site plan review permit shall require that commercial activities occur that are observable through any window facing Main Street at the street and sidewalk level. It is the intent of this condition not to allow window displays of stacked boxes or merchandise. Examples of commercial activities encouraged hereunder shall include, but are not limited to, window display of art, goods, merchandise for sale at a different location by the warehouse or storage user, and public service notices and announcements, with such display shielding warehoused merchandise from any window facing Main Street. 
d.  The site plan review permit shall require that proper maintenance and upkeep of the appearance of the building and the property occur during the duration of the site plan review permit including, but not limited to, weed abatement, graffiti abatement, and such other conditions as the site plan review committee determines is appropriate. 
Table 20.10-2 Development Standards for Commercial Zones 
	Figure
Label	Standard by Zone 
		C-O 	C-N 	C-C 	C-SC 	C-T 	C-G 	B-P 
LOT AND INTENSITY STANDARDS (MINIMUMS) 
Parcel Area 		7,500 sq. ft. 	7,500 sq. ft. 	7,500 sq. ft. 	35,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	20,000 sq. ft. 
PRIMARY BUILDING STANDARDS 
Setbacks (min.) 								
 Exterior 	? 	10 ft. 	20 ft. [2] 	0 ft. [2] 	20 ft. [2] 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	25 ft.[2] 
 Interior 	? 	5 ft. 	0 ft. [1] 	0 ft. [1] 	0 ft. [1] 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	20 ft.[1] 
Height (max.) [3] 	? 							
 Feet 		40 ft.[3] 	35 ft.[3] 	60 ft.[3] 	35 ft.[3] 	40 ft.[3] 	40 ft.[3] 	40 ft.[3] 
OTHER STANDARDS 
Accessory Structure Standards 		See Chapter 20.28 
Separation Between Structures 		As required by the California Building Code 
Off-Street Parking 		See Chapter 20.38 
 
Notes: 
[1] Minimum of twenty (20) feet required when abutting a residential zoning district. 
[2] Minimum of thirty-five (35) feet required when across from a residential zoning district. 
[3] Only applies when directly adjacent to residential zones. Exceptions to the height limitations in those cases may be granted by the site plan review committee. 
Figure 20.10-1 Commercial Development Standards
 
E.  Development Guidelines for the C-C (Regional Centers Only) and B-P Zoning Districts. The city shall consider the following guidelines when reviewing development project applications in the C-C (for regional centers only, outside of the downtown C-C district) and B-P Zoning Districts: 
1.  Site Design. 
a.  All buildings should relate visually to one another and appear to be part of a unified design theme. 
b.  Larger buildings should be broken down into a group of buildings clustered into traditional building compounds or campus configurations. 
c.  When multiple structures are proposed as part of a single project, the structures shall be designed to appear as part of an integrated complex within a unified site design and architectural characteristics. 
d.  Building entries should be located so that they are easily identifiable. Each project should provide a well-defined entry sequence for pedestrian and vehicular uses from the street to the building. 
2.  Building Design. 
a.  Buildings shall feature quality design and architectural interest that enhances the aesthetics of the site and general vicinity. 
b.  New development should include a variety of building types and designs in addition to the concrete tilt-up type construction which is often used. 
c.  Buildings should appear to be of a pedestrian scale. Pedestrian scale building design can be achieved through outdoor patios; awnings, overhangs, and trellises; changes in building massing; changes in building materials and colors; defined building facades with an identifiable base, middle, and top; and other similar features. 
3.  Landscaping. 
a.  Development projects shall provide adequate, sustainable, drought-tolerant landscaping to enhance the appearance of buildings and provide an attractive environment for employees and the general public. 
b.  Landscaping should provide an aesthetically pleasing transition between the building and adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian paths. Landscaping should soften the visual impact of buildings when viewed from the street, parking areas, or adjacent properties. 
c.  Landscaping shall be provided along street frontage to provide visual interest, support a unifying character to the street, incorporate on-site storm drainage facilities, and enhance the appearance of individual developments. Landscape elements should be coordinated with adjacent properties to provide a compatible visual character. 
4.  Parking. 
a.  In order to reduce public views of parking areas, a significant amount of a development's parking area should be located beside or behind the building that it serves. 
b.  Surface parking areas should be divided into smaller units to decrease visual impacts associated with large expanses of pavement and vehicles. 
c.  Parking areas shall include designated pedestrian access to building entrances. 
d.  Visual screening shall be provided for parking areas that can be viewed from adjacent development sites or from public streets. Screening may be in the form of trees and shrubs and/or landscaped berms. 
5.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  Sidewalks and pathways shall be provided to accommodate pedestrian circulation from parking areas to buildings, between buildings, and to plazas, open spaces, and other outdoor amenities. This pedestrian network should enhance a campus-like appearance of the development site and functional awnings should be added to protect pedestrians from the rain when walking along building frontages of businesses which about each other. 
b.  Pedestrian systems should be physically separated from vehicular circulation as much as possible. Areas where the two (2) systems cross or are physically adjacent should be minimized to reduce traffic hazards and make the pedestrian system more efficient, pleasant, and visually attractive. 
c.  Intersections where pedestrian routes cross vehicular circulation shall be clearly marked for visual identification by both motorists and pedestrians. 
6.  Service Areas. 
a.  Loading and service dock areas should be located to the rear or sides of buildings and away from main building entrances and other high visibility areas. 
b.  Loading and service docks, truck areas, and outdoor storage areas, shall be screened from public view. 
c.  Service areas should be visually unobtrusive and integrated with each building's architecture and site design. 
7.  Utilities and Backflow Preventers. 
a.  Utility cabinets and meters shall be contained within the building or otherwise fully screened. 
b.  Backflow prevention devices shall be fully screened from public view through the use of landscaping, berms, low walls, or other screening techniques. 
8.  Waste Storage. 
a.  Trash bins shall be located within a trash enclosure at all times and screened from public view. Gates shall remain closed and secured except during pick-up. 
b.  Trash enclosures should be located away from main entry driveways if feasible. 
c.  Trash enclosures shall be constructed of durable materials with color, texture, and architectural detailing that is consistent with the overall site and building design. 
d.  No materials, supplies, equipment, service vehicles, finished or semi-finished products, raw materials, or articles of similar nature shall be stored or permitted to remain outside of buildings or be visible from adjacent properties or adjoining streets. 
9.  Signs and Lighting. 
a.  All signs and exterior lighting shall be designed to support a unified design theme within a development area. 
b.  Multiple-tenant buildings and complexes shall develop a master sign program that supports a unified design theme within a development area. The master sign program, to be approved by the planning commission, site plan review committee, or through an administrative conditional use permit for signs, shall establish requirements for consistent use of sign materials, location, size, height, color, and lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.12 - INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.12.010 - Purpose of the industrial zoning districts. 
A.  Light Industrial (I-L). The I-L zoning district provides areas for manufacturing, wholesale, and storage activities that meet city standards to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas and that maintain and strengthen the economic base of the city. I-L districts shall have a minimum size of five (5) acres. 
B.  Heavy Industrial (I-H). The I-H zoning district provides areas for a full range of industrial land uses, including operations that necessitate the storage of hazardous or unsightly materials, and encourages sound industrial development by providing and protecting an environment exclusively to insure the protection of surrounding areas. I-H districts shall have a minimum size of ten (10) acres. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.12.020 - Land use regulations for industrial zoning districts. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Table 20.12-1 identifies land uses permitted in industrial zoning districts. 
Table 20.12-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Industrial Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District [1] 	
P  Permitted Use 	I-L 	I-H 	Additional Regulations 
M Minor Use Permit Required 			
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 			
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 			
X  Use Not Allowed 			
Residential Uses 
Caretaker's Home 	SP 	X 	
Community Uses 
Colleges and Trade Schools 	C 	X 	
Instructional Services 	C [2] 	X 	
Public Safety Facilities 	SP 	C 	
Commercial Uses 
Adult Entertainment Businesses 	SP 	SP 	Chapters 5.58 and 20.60 
Building Supplies/Home Improvement Stores 	SP 	X 	
Business Support Services 	SP 	X 	
Equipment Sales and Rental 	SP 	X 	
Gas and Service Stations/Car Washes 	SP [5] 	SP [5] 	Section 20.44.070 
Horticultural Nurseries, Retail 	C 	X 	
Horticultural Nurseries, Wholesale 	SP 	X 	
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries 	Refer to Table 20.44-1 in § 20.44.170 for permitted land uses for all commercial cannabis business activities. 
Mobile Food Vendors 	C 	C 	Chapter 5.54 & 20.44.020 
Restaurants 	C [4] 	C [4] 	
Retail (Products Manufactured On-site Only ) 	SP [3] 	SP [3] 	
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance 	SP [5] 	SP [5] 	
Industrial Uses 
Construction and Material Yards 	SP 	SP 	
Manufacturing and Processing, Light 	SP 	SP 	
Manufacturing and Processing, General 	SP 	SP 	
Manufacturing and Processing, Heavy 	X 	SP [6] 	Section 20.12.020.B 
Research and Development 	SP 	SP 	
Wrecking and Salvage Establishments 	X 	C 	Section 20.44.140 
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 
Freight Terminals 	X 	SP 	
Public/Mini Storage 	SP 	X 	
Recycling Collection Facilities, Small 	SP 	X 	Section 20.44.090 
Recycling Collection Facilities, Large 	SP 	SP 	Section 20.44.090 
Recycling Processing Facilities 	SP 	SP 	Section 20.44.090 
Utilities, Major 	C 	SP 	
Utilities, Minor 	SP 	SP 	
Warehousing, Wholesaling and Distribution 	SP 	SP 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 
 
Notes: 
[1] A site plan review permit may be required per Chapter 20.32 (Interface Regulations) regardless of the uses shown in Table 20.12-1. 
[2] Limited to fitness, gymnastics, and other similar recreational sports and health facilities. 
[3] Permitted only as an ancillary showroom use for goods manufactured onsite, not to occupy more than ten (10) percent of the total building floor area unless a site plan review permit is obtained for additional floor area. 
[4] May be permitted only as an ancillary use to serve employees, not to occupy more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with no outside advertising, unless a conditional use permit is obtained. 
[5] Limited to fleet operations only. 
[6] All manufacturing of materials listed in the Section 20.12.020.B is prohibited unless the planning commission determines otherwise through a conditional use permit. 
_____
B.  Prohibited Uses. The manufacturing of the following materials are prohibited unless the planning commission determines otherwise through a conditional use permit process. 
1.  Asphalt, cement, charcoal, and fuel briquettes. 
2.  Aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black and bone black, creosote, hydrogen and oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrates of an explosive nature, potash, pyroxylin, rayon yarn, and hydrochloric, nitric phosphoric, picric, and sulphuric acids. 
3.  Coal, coke, and tar products, including use in other manufacturing; explosives, fertilizers, gelatin, animal glue, and size. 
4.  Turpentine, matches, and other than water-based paint. 
5.  Rubber and soaps, including fat rendering. 
6.  Flour mill. 
7.  Processing of nitrating of cotton or other materials; magnesium foundry; reduction, refining, smelting and alloying of metal or metal ores; refining petroleum products, such as gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, lubricating oil, distillation of wood or bones; storage, curing or tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins. 
8.  Stockyards or slaughterhouses, except for poultry, animal feed or sales yard, fertilizer yard; slag piles. 
9.  Storage of fireworks or explosives, except where incidental to a permitted use. 
10.  Any other use which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general character as the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2480, § 4, 12-4-2017)  
20.12.030 - Development standards for industrial zoning districts. 
A.  General Standards. Table 20.12-2 identifies development standards that apply to all parcels and structures located in industrial and manufacturing zoning districts. See Figure 20.12-1. 
Figure 20.12-1 Industrial Development Standards
 
Table 20.12-2 Development Standards for Industrial Zoning Districts 
	Figure
Label	Standard by Zone 
		I-L 	I-H 
Parcel Area (min.) 		20,000 	1 Acre 
Yards (min.) 
 Exterior 	? 	15 ft. [1] 	15 ft. [1] 
 Interior 	? 	20 ft. [2] 	None 
Height (max.) [3] 	? 	None, except for adjacent to residential zones or within Airport Compatibility Plan area 	None, except for adjacent to residential zones or within Airport Compatibility Plan area 
 
Notes: 
[1] When a parcel is located on a block with forty (40) percent of the parcels occupied by structures with exterior yards of less than fifteen (15) feet, the minimum setback shall be equal to the average exterior setback of structures on the block. 
[2] Interior yards less than twenty (20) feet are permitted for building in compliance with the Fire Code with approval of a site plan review permit. 
[3] The maximum height of industrial structures when directly adjacent to residential zones will be established with the site plan review permit/interface process, based on impacts to the adjacent residential uses. Industrial structures shall also comply with the Merced County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan. 
B.  Industrial Buffer Yards. 
1.  Industrial Buffer Yard Defined. An industrial buffer yard is an area of plantings and walls that shields neighboring residential properties from negative impacts created by industrial land uses. 
a.  When Required. An industrial buffer yard is required for any development within an industrial zone that is adjacent to a residential zone. 
b.  Buffer Yard Standards. 
(1)  Industrial buffer yards shall be located along the outer perimeter of a property line abutting a residential zone. See Figure 20.12-2. 
(2)  Residential side of the wall shall be landscaped and maintained by the property owner of the industrial use. 
(3)  The minimum width of an industrial buffer yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(4)  Industrial buffer yards shall include a solid masonry or equivalent wall no less than six (6) feet in height. 
(5)  Industrial buffer yards shall be planted with a mix of drought-tolerant, deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs of suitable type, size, and spacing to achieve screening year-round. 
(6)  All plantings within an industrial buffer yard shall be maintained in a manner consistent with landscaping maintenance standards in Chapter 20.36 (Landscaping). 
(7)  Paved surfaces, except sidewalks, shall be prohibited within industrial buffer yards. Buffer yards shall not be used for parking, driveways, trash enclosures, building areas, or any other activity associated with the primary use on the property. 
Figure 20.12-2 Industrial Buffer Yards
 
C.  Performance Standards. All land uses and structures in the industrial zones shall comply with the following performance standards. Applicants are responsible for providing compliance evidence for all applicable performance standards. 
1.  Noise. 
a.  Maximum Exposure. No operation or activity shall transmit any noise exceeding 70 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and 60 dBA between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. beyond the property line. Any uses abutting residential zoning shall not transmit any noise between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. beyond the property line. If any operation or activity proposed exceeds the maximum decibel level stated in this section, the applicant must submit a plan to mitigate noise in order to obtain building permits. 
b.  Exceptions. Upon written application from the owner or operator of an industrial or commercial noise source, the review authority, as part of a permit approval, may conditionally authorize exceptions to local noise emission standards, including the times of day described in "a" above, based upon analysis supported by the department of development services, in the following situations: 
(1)  Infrequent noise; 
(2)  Noise levels at or anywhere beyond the property lines of the property of origin when exceeded by an exempt noise in the same location; and 
(3)  If, after applying best available control technology, a use existing prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance is unable to conform to the standards established by this section. 
2.  Vibration. No ground vibration, excluding vibration generated from motor vehicles, which is discernible by human senses for more than tree (3) minutes or more duration in any 1 (one) hour, is permitted beyond the property line. 
3.  Odor. No objectionable odor or noxious gas emission which is discernible at any point beyond the property line is permitted. 
4.  Air Quality. All uses shall comply with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations regarding contaminants and pollutants. This requirement includes, but is not limited to, emissions of suspended particles, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, odors, toxic or obnoxious gases and fumes. 
5.  Heat. No use shall generate heat so that increased ambient air temperature or radiant heat is measurable at any exterior lot line. 
6.  Radioactivity. No radiation of any kind shall be emitted in quantities which are dangerous to humans. 
7.  Industrial Waste. 
a.  All uses are prohibited from discharging liquid, solid, toxic, or hazardous wastes onto or into the ground and into streams, lakes, or rivers. Discharge into a public or private waste disposal system in compliance with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations is permitted. 
b.  Wastes detrimental to a public sewer system or a sewage treatment plant shall not be discharged to a public sewer system unless they have been pretreated to the degree required by the authority having jurisdiction over the sewerage system. 
c.  The handling and storage of hazardous materials, the discharge of hazardous materials into the air and water, and the disposal of hazardous waste in connection with all uses shall be in conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
d.  All burning of waste materials accessory to any use shall comply with the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District rules and regulations. 
e.  The disposal or dumping of solid wastes accessory to any use, including, but not limited to, slag, paper, and fiber wastes or other industrial wastes, shall be in compliance with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
8.  Exterior Lighting. Direct light shall not extend beyond a property line into a lot occupied by a single-family home. Lighting shall not create a source of glare visible from a neighboring single-family home. The minimum illumination level for area intended shall be one (1) foot candle. 
9.  Electromagnetic Interference. Devices which generate electromagnetic interference shall not cause interference with any activity outside the property upon which the device is located. Public utilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
10.  Fire and Explosive Hazards. All uses involving the use or storage of combustible, explosive, caustic, or otherwise hazardous materials shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal safety standards and shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment in accordance with the requirements of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.14 - DOWNTOWN ZONING DISTRICTS 
Sections : 
 
20.14.010 - Purpose of the downtown zoning districts. 
A.  Downtown Core (D-COR). The purpose of the D-COR zoning district is to maintain and enhance a vibrant downtown core with a diversity of land uses. The D-COR zoning district supports downtown as a destination for arts, entertainment, retail, and dining uses, with housing that contributes to the vitality of the area. The design of development helps to create a pedestrian-friendly environment and an active public realm. A mixture of land uses and higher intensity development supports transportation options, including walking, bicycling, and use of transit. 
B.  Downtown Office (D-O). The purpose of the D-O zoning district is to accommodate a concentration of office uses that support a vibrant and dynamic downtown. The D-O zoning district accommodates a variety of land uses, including personal services in addition to office uses. In the D-O zoning district buildings are designed to support an active and inviting public realm. The D-O zoning district creates an attractive environment for businesses and employers that enhances the economic vitality of the community. The D-O zoning district also serves as a buffer between more intensive development in the D-COR zoning district and surrounding residential neighborhoods. 
C.  Downtown Commercial (D-CM). The purpose of the D-CM zoning district is to encourage growth and investment in commercial areas adjacent to Merced's downtown core. New development in the D-CM zoning district will provide amenities for adjacent residential neighborhoods and enhance the appearance of gateways into downtown. Development supports a pedestrian-friendly environment with buildings located near the front sidewalk and parking located to the side or rear. A variety of land uses, including residential, commercial, and office, contribute to an active and inviting environment. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.14.020 - Land use regulations for downtown zoning districts. 
A.  Permitted Uses. Table 20.14-1 identifies land uses permitted in downtown zoning districts. 
Table 20.14-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Downtown Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District 
P  Permitted Use 	D-COR 	D-O 	D-CM [1] 	Additional 
Regulations 
M Minor Use Permit Required 				
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 				
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 				
X  Use Not Allowed 				
Residential Uses 
Group/Transitional/Supportive Housing 	P [3] 	P [3] 	SP 	
Live/Work Units 	P [2] 	P [2] 	P [2] 	Sec. 20.44.080 
Multiple-Family Dwellings 	P 	P 	SP 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small (6 or fewer) 	P [3] 	P [3] 	SP 	
Residential Care Facilities, Large (More than 6) 	C 	C 	C 	
Single-Room Occupancy 	P [3] 	SP 	SP 	Sec. 20.44.120 
Community Uses 
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	
Colleges and Trade Schools 	P 	P 	C 	
Community Gardens 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Cultural Institutions 	M 	M 	M 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Small (8 children or less) 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Large (9 to 14 children) 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care Centers 	M 	M 	M 	
Government Offices 	P 	P 	P 	
Instructional Services 	P 	M 	P 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	
Public Safety Facilities 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Rehabilitation Centers 	X [4][5] 	C [4][5] 	C [4][5] 	
Schools, Public or Private 	C 	C 	C 	
Social Assistance Services 	C 	SP 	SP 	
Commercial Uses 
Bail Bond Businesses 	X [4] 	C [4] 	C [4] 	
Banks, Retail 	P 	P 	P 	
Bars and Nightclubs 	C 	X 	C 	
Bed and Breakfast 	C 	C 	C 	Sec. 20.44.030 
Billiard Parlor or Pool Hall (6 or more tables) 	C 	X 	C 	
Business Support Services 	SP 	M 	M 	
Check Cashing/Payday Loan Establishments 	X [4] 	C 	C 	Sec. 20.44.040 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	P 	X 	P 	
Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales 	X 	X 	C 	
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries 	C 	C 	C 	
Gas and Service Stations 	C 	X 	C 	Sec. 20.44.070 
Hookah Lounges 	C 	X 	C 	
Hotels and Motels 	P 	C 	P 	
Maintenance and Repair Services 	C 	X 	C 	
Mobile Food Vendors 	X 	C 	C 	
Office, Professional 	P 	P 	P 	
Pawn Shops 	X[4] 	X 	C 	
Personal Services 	P 	M 	P 	
Restaurant 	P 	SP 	P 	
Retail, General 	P 	C 	P 	
Retail, with Alcohol Sales (If Less than 20,000 Square Feet in Building Size) 	C 	X 	C 	Sec. 20.44.010 
Retail, with Alcohol Sales (More than 20,000 Square Feet in Building Size) 	P 	X 	P 	Sec. 20.44.010 
Skateboard Stores 	X [4] 	X 	P [4] 	
Tattoo Parlors 	C 	M 	M 	
Vehicle Rentals 	M 	X 	C 	
Vehicle Sales 	C [6] 	X 	C 	
Industrial Uses 
Research and Development 	C 	SP 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 
Recycling Facilities 				Sec. 20.44.090 
 Reverse Vending Machines 	P 	P 	P 	
 Small Collection Facilities 	X 	X 	M 	
 Large Collection Facilities 	X 	X 	C 	
Transportation Terminals 	C 	X 	C 	
Parking Facilities 	SP 	SP 	SP 	
Utilities, Major 	C 	C 	C 	
Utilities, Minor 	P 	P 	P 	
Wireless Communication Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 	
 
Notes: 
[1] A site plan review permit may be required per Chapter 20.32 (Interface Regulations) regardless of the uses shown in Table 20.14-1. 
[2] Residential use on the ground floor is prohibited unless it is located on the back of the property where it is not visible or approved with a conditional use permit. 
[3] Prohibited as a single use unless approved with a conditional use permit. Permitted as part of a residential mixed-use project. 
[4] Prohibited in the city center area between 19 th and 16 th Streets and O Street and Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, including properties fronting on either side of each of the above streets. 
[5] Rehabilitation centers for drug, methadone, and alcohol are prohibited. 
[6] A conditional use permit is required for new and used vehicle sales but only in small showrooms, not large parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.14.030 - Development standards for downtown zoning districts. 
A.  Parcel Dimensions and Intensity. Table 20.14-2 identifies required parcel dimensions and maximum development intensity standards in the downtown zoning districts. 
Table 20.14-2 Parcel and Intensity Standards in Downtown Zoning Districts 
	Standard by Zone 
	D-COR 	D-O 	D-CM 
Parcel Area (min.) 	1,250 sq. ft. 
Parcel Width (min.) 	25 ft. 
Parcel Depth (min.) 	50 ft. 
Residential Density (max.) 	36 du/acre 	36 du/acre 	36 du/acre 
 
B.  Building Form and Placement. 
1.  Basic Standards. Table 20.14-3 identifies building form and placement standards in the downtown zoning districts. See Figure 20.14-1. 
Table 20.14-3 Building Form and Placement Standards in Downtown Zoning Districts 
	Figure
Label 	Standard by Zone 
		D-COR 	D-O 	D-CM 
Setbacks 
Exterior [1] 	? 	Min: 0 ft. 
Max: 10 ft. 	Min: 0 ft. 
Max: 10 ft. 	Min: 0 ft. 
Max: 10 ft. 
Interior Rear 	? 	0 ft. [1] 	0 ft. [1] 	0 ft. [1] 
Interior Side 	? 	0 ft. [2] 	0 ft. [2] 	0 ft. [2] 
Height (max.) [3] 	? 	None 	60 ft.[3] 	60 ft.[3] 
Stepbacks (Min.) 
Exterior, above 6 stories 	? 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
Interior, above 2nd floor when adjacent to single-family home 	? 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Ten (10) feet min. from property line adjacent to a single-family home. 
[2] Fifteen (15) feet min. from property line adjacent to a single-family home. 
[3] Height limits only apply where directly adjacent to residential zones and in those cases, exceptions to the height limitations may be granted by the site plan review committee. 
2.  Increased Exterior Setbacks. In exception to Table 20.14-3 above, a maximum of forty (40) percent of the building frontage may be set back up to twenty-five (25) feet from an exterior property line to provide a space for public and semi-public amenities such courtyards or outdoor seating areas with the approval of a minor use permit. See ? in Figure 20.14-1. 
Figure 20.14-1 Downtown Development Standards
 
C.  Parking (Only applies in D-COR zone). Exceptions to the following standards (C1, C2, C3, & C4) may be granted by the director of development services through the issuance of a minor use permit. 
1.  Location. 
a.  Surface parking shall be located only to the rear or side of buildings, unless approved with a minor use permit. See Figure 20.14-2. Surface parking is only allowed towards the back of the building with access on alleys and screening, which would block visibility of a surface parking lot from the exterior streets, unless otherwise approved with a minor use permit. 
b.  Parking completely or partially underground may match the setbacks of the main building, but shall be screened from view. 
2.  New Driveways. For parcels served by a rear alley, new driveways for vehicular access shall be off the alley only. New driveways off the front or side of the parcel may be approved with a minor use permit. To approve the minor use permit, the director of development services must make the following findings: 
a.  The driveway is necessary to provide vehicle access to the property. 
b.  The design and placement of the new driveway minimizes impacts on pedestrians to the greatest extent possible. 
Figure 20.14-2 Downtown Parking Location and Buffers
 
3.  Buffers and Screening. 
a.  Surface parking located adjacent to an exterior property line shall be screened along the public right-of-way with a decorative wall, hedge, trellis, or landscaping at least three (3) feet in height. See Figure 20.14-2. 
b.  A landscaped buffer at least three (3) feet wide and six (6) feet tall shall be located for any surface parking adjacent to a single-family home. See Figure 20.14-2. 
4.  Parking Structure Design. 
a.  All exterior walls of parking structures shall feature materials that maintain a common architectural character with the structure served by the parking structure. 
b.  Parking structure facades shall be broken-up through the use of textured concrete on exterior walls, the incorporation of planters and trellises at each parking level, and other architectural treatments to minimize large blank walls without architectural relief. 
c.  Parked vehicles at each level within the structure shall be shielded from view from adjoining streets through the use of architectural appurtenances and landscaping. 
D.  Street-Level Building Design (Only applies in the D-COR zone). Exceptions to the following standards (D1, D2, D3, & D4) may be granted by the director of development services through the issuance of a minor use permit. 
1.  Building Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented towards a public street with the primary entrance to the site or building directly accessible from an adjacent sidewalk. The director of development services may allow buildings and their primary entrances to be oriented toward a public space. The primary entrance to a building shall not be oriented towards surface parking. See Figure 20.14-3. 
Figure 20.14-3 Building Orientation
 
2.  Blank Walls. The maximum length of an unarticulated/blank building wall shall be ten (10) feet in the D-COR zoning district, and twenty-five (25) feet for all other downtown zoning districts, unless otherwise approved with a minor use permit. Architectural articulation shall have similar pattern as other adjacent buildings to provide cohesive design in the neighborhood. See ? in Figure 20.14-4. Building articulation may be provided by: 
a.  Doors, windows, and other building openings; 
b.  Building projections or recesses, doorway and window trim, artwork displays, and other details that provide architectural articulation and design interest; 
c.  Varying wall planes, heights or contrasting materials and colors; and, 
d.  Awnings, canopies, or arcades to reinforce the pedestrian scale and provide shade and cover from the elements. 
Figure 20.14-4 Downtown Blank Wall and Storefront Width
 
3.  Storefront Width. The maximum building/storefront width in the D-COR zoning district shall be fifty (50) feet and one hundred (100) feet in all other downtown zoning districts, unless otherwise approved through a minor use permit. Larger buildings shall be broken down into a pedestrian-scale rhythm with individual building bay width of twenty-five (25) to fifty (50) feet. See ? in Figure 20.14-4. 
4.  Ground Floor Building Transparency. 
a.  The ground floor street-facing building walls of nonresidential uses shall provide transparent windows or doors with views into the building for a minimum of forty (40) percent of the building frontage located between two and one-half (2½) and seven (7) feet above the sidewalk. Fifty (50) percent of the transparent windows or doors area shall remain clear to allow views into the building. See Figure 20.14-5. 
Figure 20.14-5 Downtown Ground Floor Building Transparency
 
b.  Exceptions to this transparency requirement may be allowed with a minor use permit if the director of development services finds that: 
(1)  The proposed use has unique operational characteristics which preclude building openings, such as for a cinema or theater; and, 
(2)  Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief and detail, and will be enhanced with landscaping or artwork in such a way as to create visual interest at the pedestrian level. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.16 - URBAN VILLAGE ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.16.010 - Purpose of the urban village zoning districts. 
A.  General. The urban village zoning districts are intended to promote the development of high quality neighborhoods in new growth areas of Merced. These neighborhoods are characterized by a mixture of land uses that enable residents to easily walk and bike to a variety of destinations. A diversity of housing types, including single-family homes and multi-family housing, expand affordable housing options for all income levels. A network of interconnected streets allows for safe and convenient circulation that minimizes traffic congestion on major roadways. The location, type, and intensity of new development support increased transit use and expands transportation options for residents and workers. Development in the urban villages zoning districts supports a high quality design environment with a distinctive sense of place enjoyed by residents, workers, and visitors. 
The urban village zoning districts implement the urban village concept in the general plan. This concept envisions urban villages consisting of three (3) components: A commercial or mixed-use commercial core, an inner village residential area, and an outer village residential area. The basic form of the urban village concept is illustrated in Figure 20.16-1. 
B.  Inner Village Residential (R-IV). The R-IV zoning district allows for higher density residential development within an urban village. The R-IV zoning district accommodates a range of housing types, including apartments, townhomes, and other forms of multi-family housing. The R-IV zoning district supports higher density housing located in close proximity to transit, employment uses, and commercial areas. The R-IV zoning district also may function as a buffer between village commercial areas and surrounding lower-density residential neighborhoods. 
C.  Outer Village Residential (R-OV). The R-OV zoning district allows for lower density residential uses within an urban village. Typical housing types within the R-OV zoning district include single-family homes, duplex homes, and second units. The R-OV zoning district accommodates single-family neighborhoods located in close proximity to public amenities such as parks and schools as well as neighborhood-serving retail and service uses. 
D.  Village Commercial (C-V). The C-V zoning district functions as the center of activity within an urban village. The C-V zoning district accommodates a diversity of land uses, including commercial, residential, and civic uses. Development in the C-V zoning district supports a pedestrian-friendly environment and encourages the use of transit. Local streets, sidewalks, and bicycle paths provide safe and convenient access to the C-V zoning district from surrounding residential neighborhoods. The C-V zoning district meets the day-to-day shopping needs of area residents and provides a central gathering place for the use and enjoyment of surrounding neighborhoods. 
Figure 20.16-1 Urban Village Concept (Sample Layout)
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.16.020 - Land use regulations for the urban village zoning districts. 
A.  Table 20.16-1 identifies land uses permitted in the urban village zoning districts. 
Table 20.16-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Urban Village Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District 	
P  Permitted Use 	R-OV 	R-IV 	C-V 	Additional 
Requirements 
M Minor Use Permit Required 				
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 				
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 				
X  Use Not Allowed 				
Residential Uses 
Single Family Dwellings 	P 	C [3] 	X 	
Duplexes 	P 	P [3] 	X 	
Multiple Family Dwellings 	X 	P [3] 	P [1][3] 	
Secondary Dwelling Units 	P 	P [3] 	X 	Chapter 20.42 
Live/Work Units 	C 	M [3] 	P [1] 	Sec. 20.44.080 
Group/Transitional/Supportive Housing 	X 	SP [3] 	P [1] 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small (6 or Less) 	P 	P 	X 	
Residential Care Facilities, Large 
(More than 6 residents) 	C 	C 	C [1] 	
Residential Mixed Use 	X 	C [3] 	SP [3] 	
Single-Room Occupancy 	X 	SP [3] 	SP [1][3] 	Sec. 20.44.120 
Community Uses 
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	
Colleges and Trade Schools 	X 	C 	C 	
Community Gardens 	C 	C 	SP 	
Cultural Institutions 	C 	C 	P 	
Day Care Centers 	SP 	M 	M 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Small (1-8 children) 	P 	P 	P 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Large (9-14 children) 	P 	P 	P 	
Government Offices 	X 	X 	P 	
Instructional Services 	X 	X 	P 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	P 	P 	P 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	
Schools, Public or Private 	C 	C 	C 	
Social Assistance Services 	X 	X 	SP 	
Commercial Uses 
Banks, Retail 	X 	X 	P 	
Bars and Nightclubs 	X 	X 	C 	
Business Support Services 	X 	X 	M 	
Check Cashing/Payday Loan Establishments 	X 	X 	C 	Sec. 20.44.040 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	X 	X 	SP 	
Construction, Maintenance, and Repair Services 	X 	X 	C 	
Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales 	X 	X 	SP 	
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries 	X 	X 	C 	
Gas and Service Stations 	X 	X 	C 	Sec. 20.44.070 
Hookah Lounges 	X 	X 	C 	
Hotels and Motels 	X 	X 	P 	
Office, Professional 	X 	X 	P 	
Pawn Shops 	X 	X 	C 	
Personal Services 	X 	X 	P 	
Retail, General 	X 	C [1] 	P 	
Retail, with Alcohol Sales (Less than 20,000 Square Feet in Building Size) 	X 	X 	C 	
Retail, with Alcohol Sales (More than 20,000 Square Feet in Building Size) 	X 	X 	P 	
Restaurants 	X 	X 	P 	
Tattoo Parlors 	X 	X 	M 	
Vehicle Sales and Rental 	X 	X 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 
Recycling Facilities 				Sec. 20.44.090 
 Reverse Vending Machines 	P 	P 	P 	
 Small Collection Facilities 	X 	X 	M 	
Parking Facilities 	X 	X 	C 	
Transportation Terminals 	X 	X 	C 	
Utilities, Major 	C 	C 	C 	
Utilities, Minor 	P 	P 	P 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Prohibited as a single use unless approved with a conditional use permit. Permitted as part of a residential mixed-use project. 
[2] All activities, including the overnight boarding of animals, shall occur indoors. 
[3] Must meet minimum density requirements of ten (10) dwelling units/acre. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.16.030 - Development standards/guidelines for urban village zoning districts. 
A.  Development Standards. Table 20.16-2 identifies development standards that apply in the urban village zoning districts. 
Table 20.16-2 Parcel and Intensity Standards in Urban Village Zoning Districts 
	Standard by Zone 
	R-OV 	R-IV 	C-V 
Parcel Area (min.) 	3,000 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 	7,500 sq. ft. 
Parcel Width (min.) 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	50 ft. 
Parcel Depth (min.) 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 
Residential Density (Average Minimum) 	4 du/acre 	10 du/ac 	10 du/ac 
Residential Density (max.) 	12 du/acre 	36 du/acre 	36 du/acre 
Floor Area Ratio (max.) 	- 	- 	2.5 
Setbacks 
 Exterior (min.) 	15 ft. [1] 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
 Interior Rear 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	0 ft. [2] 
 Interior Side 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	0 ft. [2] 
Height (max.) 	35 ft. 	40 ft. [3] 	40 ft.[3] 
 
Notes: 
[1] Porches may be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front property line. 
[2] Ten (10) feet min. from property line adjacent to a single-family home. 
[3] Height limit only applies where directly adjacent to residential zones. In those cases, an increase in height may be approved with a site plan review permit. 
B.  Additional Standards and Guidelines. Proposed projects within urban village zoning districts shall comply with the following additional standards and guidelines. Further guidance for residential and commercial development within urban villages is provided in Chapter 6—Urban Design of the Merced Vision 2030 General Plan . 
1.  Land Use and Intensity. 
a.  R-OV zoning districts shall be located no more than one (1) mile from a neighborhood-serving commercial use or a C-V zoning district. 
b.  R-IV zoning districts shall be located within a one-fourth (¼) mile walking distance of a neighborhood-serving commercial use or a C-V zoning district. 
c.  The average minimum density of all residential uses shall be no less than four (4) du/acre for the R-OV zoning district and ten (10) du/acre for the R-IV zoning district. 
2.  Transportation Options. 
a.  R-IV zoning districts shall be located within one-fourth (¼) mile of an existing or planned bus service. 
b.  R-OV and R-IV zoning districts shall have direct access to a neighborhood-serving commercial zoning district without having to cross a street designated as a "Minor Arterial" or higher order street. 
3.  Housing. Each R-IV zoning district shall allow for the development of the following housing types with no single housing type making up more than fifty (50) percent of the total number of housing units in the zoning district. 
a.  Single-family homes on lots of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet or smaller. 
b.  Second units 
c.  Duplexes 
d.  Multi-family dwellings 
e.  Live/Work Units 
f.  Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) units 
4.  Street Network. 
a.  A network of interconnected collector and local streets shall provide direct connections into the C-V zoning district from the R-OV and R-IV zoning districts. In no case shall trips to internal destinations within a square mile area bound by arterials be forced onto an arterial street. 
b.  Interconnected pedestrian and bicycle paths shall be provided throughout the C-V, R-IV, and R-OV zoning districts. 
c.  Bicycle/pedestrian connections are provided at the end of at least fifty (50) percent of all cul-de-sacs. 
d.  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of all blocks within an R-OV or R-IV zoning district shall be no more than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
5.  Village Commercial Guidelines. The following guidelines shall apply in the C-V zoning district only. 
a.  The principal entry of the building should front a public space, such as a street, park, or plaza, and not a parking lot. Buildings should be as close to the sidewalk as possible to promote a walkable environment. 
b.  There should be no instances of surface parking located between a building and an exterior property line. 
c.  There should be no unarticulated/blank building walls exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in length facing a collector or higher order street. 
d.  All ground-floor building walls of nonresidential uses that face a collector or higher order street should provide transparent windows or doors with views into the building for a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the building width. 
e.  Mixed use, office, and residential uses are encouraged on the upper stories of commercial buildings within the C-V zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.18 - PUBLIC USE AND AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.18.010 - Purpose of the public use and agricultural zoning districts. 
A.  Parks and Open Space (P-OS). The P-OS zoning district provides areas for public parks and recreational facilities to serve existing and future residents. 
B.  Public Facility (P-F). The P-F zoning district provides areas for land uses and facilities owned and operated by governmental agencies. 
C.  Public Parking District (P-PK). The P-PK zoning district provides a location for parking lots that are available for use by the public at no cost for minimum periods of time in each 24-hour period. 
D.  Agriculture (A-G). The A-G zoning district provides space for continued agricultural uses within the City of Merced's City limits. This zone replaces the previous A-1-20 zoning district and applies to all land zoned A-1-20 within the city. Minimum size of an A-G district is twenty (20) acres. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.18.020 - Land use regulations for the public use and agricultural zoning districts. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 20.18-1 identifies land uses permitted in the public use and agricultural zoning districts. 
Table 20.18-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Public Use and Agricultural Zoning Districts 
Key 	Zoning District 	
P  Permitted Use 	P-OS 	P-F 	P-PK 	A-G 
[11] 	Additional 
Requirements 
M Minor Use Permit Required 					
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 					
C  Conditional Use Permit Required 					
X  Use Not Allowed 					
Residential Uses 
Residential Care Facilities, Small 	X 	X 	X 	P [2] 	
Single-Family Dwellings 	X 	X 	X 	P [2] 	
Community Uses 
Cemeteries and Mausoleums 	C [1] 	C 	X 	C 	
Colleges and Trade Schools 	X 	C 	X 	C [2] 	
Community Assembly 	X 	C 	X 	X 	
Cultural Institutions 	C [1] 	C 	X 	C [2] 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Small (8 or less 
children) 	X 	X 	X 	P [2] 	
Day Care Home Facilities, Large (9 to 14 
children) 	X 	X 	X 	P [2] 	
Day Care Centers 	X 	M 	X 	X 	
Golf Courses 	C 	C 	X 	C 	
Government Offices 	X 	P 	X 	X 	
Hospitals 	X 	C 	X 	X 	
Instructional Services 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	P 	X 	X 	
Schools, Public or Private 	X 	C 	X 	C 	
Social Assistance Services 	X 	C 	X 	X 	
Commercial Uses 
Bars and Nightclubs 	X 	X 	C [3] 	X 	
Banks, Retail 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	X 	X 	C [3] 	X 	
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 	C 	X 	X 	C [4] 	
Hotels and Motels 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Office, Professional 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	P 	P 	X 	P [2] 	
Personal Services 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Restaurants 	X 	X 	P [3][8] 	X 	
Retail, General 	X 	X 	P [3] 	SP[6] 	
Retail, with Alcohol Sales (Less than 20,000 Square Feet in Building Size) 	X 	X 	C [3] 	X 	
Wholesale Horticultural Nurseries 	X 	X 	X 	C 	
Vehicle Parts and Accessories Sales 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Vehicle Sales and Rental 	X 	X 	P [3] 	X 	
Industrial Uses 
Manufacturing and Processing, Light 	X 	X 	X 	C [7] 	
Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution 	X 	X 	X 	C [7] 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Uses 
Agricultural Processing 	X 	X 	X 	C [7] 	
Animal Raising and Production 	X 	X 	X 	P [9] 	Chapter 6.04 
Crop Cultivation 	X 	X 	X 	P 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 
Parking Facilities 	C [1] 	C 	P [5] 	X 	
Recycling Facilities (All Types) 	X 	X 	X 	X 	Sec. 20.44.090 
Transportation Terminals 	X 	C 	X 	X 	
Utilities, Major 	X 	C 	X 	C 	
Utilities, Minor 	M 	M 	X 	C [10] 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 20.58 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Permitted only as part of a larger park or recreation use. 
[2] Permitted only when associated with an agricultural use which constitutes the primary use on the property. 
[3] Permitted only when part of a multistory structure that provides on-site public parking area equal to or greater than the square footage of the parcel minus the required setbacks and driveway approaches. 
[4] Permitted uses only include outdoor recreational facilities with minor improvements and public stables for riding academies, which is subject to animal density requirement. 
[5] Minimum of fifty-five (55) percent of the parking space are available for use by the public at no charge for a minimum of four (4) hours during every 24-hour period; and a maximum of forty-five (45) percent of the parking spaces are available for lease to neighboring businesses to meet the parking requirements for those businesses. 
[6] Limited to one (1) stand for the display and sale of produce raised on the premises. More than one (1) stand may be allowed upon approval of a site plan review permit. 
[7] Conditional use only includes packing facilities of products raised on the premises. 
[8] Fast-food restaurants prohibited. 
[9] The use must conform with the regulations in Merced Municipal Code Chapter 6.04 (Animal Control). 
[10  Conditional use permit is required only for the water storage and reservoir for the agricultural uses; minor use permit is required for all other uses. 
[11  Also applies to land zoned A-1-20. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.18.030 - Development standards for public use and agricultural zoning districts. 
A.  General Standards. Table 20.18-2 identifies development standards that apply to all parcels and structures located in public use and agricultural zoning districts. 
Table 20.18-2 Development Standards for Public Use and Agricultural Zoning Districts 
	Standard by Zoning District 
	P-OS 	P-F 	P-PK 	AG [4] 
Lot and Intensity Standards (min.) 
Lot Area 	1,000 sq. ft. 	20 acres 
Lot Width 	25 ft. 	300 ft. 
Lot Depth 	50 ft. 	300 ft. 
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 	- 	- 	- 	20 acres 
Primary Building Standards 
Setbacks (min.) 
 Exterior 	[1] 	[2] 	0 ft. 	40 ft. 
 One Interior 	[1] 		0 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Other Interior 	[1] 		0 ft. 	20 ft. 
Height (max.) [5] 
 Feet 	40 ft. [5] 	60 ft. [5] 	35 ft. [5] 
Other Standards 
Accessory Structure Height 	See Section 20.28 
Lot Coverage (max.) 	- 	- 	- 	2% 
Separation Between Structures 	As required by the California Building Code 	15 ft. [3] 
Off-Street Parking 	See Section 20.38 
 
Notes: 
[1] Minimum required setbacks shall be the same as the abutting zoning district. Multiple setback standards may be applied to different parts of the lot if multiple zoning districts are adjacent. 
[2] Fifteen (15) feet of setback required if adjacent to a residential zoning district and/or use. 
[3] Minimum separation requirement shall apply between dwelling units, between dwelling unit and building for agricultural use, and between buildings for agricultural use. 
[4] Also applies to land zoned A-1-20. 
[5] Increases in height may be approved by a site plan review permit. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.20 - SPECIAL USE ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
20.20.010 - Urban transition (U-T) zoning district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the U-T zoning district is to allow the lawful continuation of land uses on land that is annexed to the city but not proposed for immediate urban development. 
B.  Land Use Regulations. The following land uses shall be permitted in the U-T zoning district: 
1.  Any legally established and operated use in full compliance with the Merced County Code existing at time of the annexation of the property to the city. 
2.  New agriculture uses, but not including hog raising, if such uses are in compliance with all other laws and ordinances, provided there is no retail sale of products on the premises. 
3.  Large and small residential day care facilities. 
4.  Home occupations. 
C.  Development Standards. Structures within the U-T zoning district shall comply with the applicable county development standards in effect at the time of annexation, except as provided below. 
1.  Height. Buildings shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet for principal buildings and twenty-five (25) feet for accessory buildings, except that these heights may be exceeded by any legal buildings as they existed at the time of annexation. 
2.  Yards. The required yards that existed for the subject lot at the time of annexation to the city shall be the minimum required yard areas, except for new or enlarged accessory buildings of a legally permitted primary use and dwelling units, which may have a minimum exterior yard area of twenty (20) feet and a minimum interior yard area of ten (10) feet. 
3.  Residential Density. Except for secondary units permitted under Chapter 20. 42 (Second Units), residential density of the lot may not be increased. 
D.  Existing Land Uses. 
1.  Land in the U-T zoning district may continue with any legal and lawful use that existed in the county without time limit. However, this authority to continue such uses is not intended to legalize uses or structures operating or existing contrary to the terms of any other law or ordinance. 
2.  Any major expansion in use, density, or other measurement of size or intensity shall require a change to a zoning district other than the U-T zoning district. The director of development services shall determine whether a proposed change to an existing use will require a change to a zoning district other than the U-T zoning district. 
E.  Annexation Requirements. At the time of annexation, the property owner shall submit a written statement and site plan on a form provided by the city that describes the use, height, area, lot, yard, and parking characteristics of the subject property. Those characteristics that were legally established and existing in the county at the time of annexation will be permitted to continue in the city within the U-T district upon annexation. A record of these property characteristics will be established and will become part of the U-T zoning district for the subject property. If the property owner does not submit the written statement and site plan as required by this section, then the city may prepare its own written statement in order to complete the zoning process upon annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.20.020 - Planned Development (P-D) zoning districts. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the planned development (P-D) zoning districts is to allow for high quality development that deviates from standards and regulations applicable to other zoning districts within Merced. The planned development zoning districts are intended to promote creativity in building design, flexibility in permitted land uses, and innovation in development concepts. The planned development zoning districts are also intended to ensure project consistency with the general plan. Planned development zoning districts provide land owners with enhanced flexibility to take advantage of unique site characteristics to develop projects that will provide public benefits for residents, employees, and visitors to Merced. 
B.  Types of PD Zoning Districts. There are two (2) types of planned development zoning districts: The planned development (P-D) zoning district and the residential planned development (RP-D) zoning district. The RP-D zoning district is identical to the P-D zoning district except that only residential land uses are permitted in the RP-D zoning district and a larger project size is required for the P-D zoning district. 
C.  Permitted Land Uses. In all planned development zoning districts, permitted land uses shall conform to the applicable general plan designation, provided that such land uses are shown on the official site utilization plan for the particular P-D zone as approved by the city council, and except that in the RP-D zoning district, only residential land uses shall be permitted. 
D.  Minimum Project Size. Minimum project size in the planned development zoning districts shall be as follows: 
1.  Planned Development (P-D) zoning district: five (5) acres minimum. 
2.  Residential Planned Development (RP-D) zoning district: one (1) acre minimum. 
3.  Planned Development projects located within the area shown in Figure 20.20-1 and at least one-half (½) of an entire city block shall be exempt from these minimum project size requirements. 
E.  Pre-Application Conference. Prospective applicants are encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the planning division before completing and filing an application for the establishment of a planned development or a revision to a planned development. At the pre-application conference, prospective applicants shall describe the general concepts of the development project, including site layout, land uses, standards, circulation, and other information necessary to describe key aspects of the project. The planning division shall provide preliminary feedback on the described development project relative to project consistency with city policies. The planning division shall also review with the prospective applicant submittal requirements and the process for application review and action by the planning commission and city council. 
F.  Application Submittal. An application for a planned development establishment or revision shall be filed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified by the planning division, in addition to the materials required for approval of a preliminary site utilization plan, as described below. 
Figure 20.20-1 Areas with No Minimum Project Size Requirement for
Planned Development

 
G.  Preliminary Site Utilization Plan. Applications for approval of a preliminary site utilization plan (preliminary SUP) shall include the following materials: 
1.  Project Description. The applicant shall provide a written description of the project proposed within the planned development zoning district. The project description shall include a narrative statement of the project's objectives and a statement of how the proposed project will comply with general plan goals and policies for the land use designation of the project site. The project description may also include a diagram illustrating the proposed project. 
2.  Site Map. The application shall include maps depicting the existing topography, on-site structures and natural features, mature trees, and other significant vegetation and drainage patterns. The map shall show the proposed planned development zoning district zone boundaries and all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the site boundary. The map shall be accompanied by a description of the type and condition of mature trees. 
3.  Site Utilization Plan (SUP). The applicant shall provide an overall diagram of the site utilization. This diagram shall illustrate the overall development concept, including proposed land uses, buildings, circulation, transit facilities, landscaping, open space, and any other significant elements in the proposed site. Phases shall be clearly indicated if multiple phases are proposed. 
4.  Parcel or Subdivision Map. If the project within the proposed planned development zoning district zone involves the subdivision of land, the application shall include a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map as required by Title 18 (Subdivisions) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
5.  Infrastructure. The application shall include a written description of the infrastructure necessary to serve each phase of the project proposed within the planned development zoning district. 
6.  Special Provisions for Planned Development Prezoning at Annexation. For applications for planned development prezoning prior to annexation to the city, the director of development services may waive or defer any or all of the above requirements for the preliminary site utilization plan as long as the final site utilization plan contains all the above requirements in addition to the requirements in Section 20.20.020.M when approved prior to development. 
H.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. 
1.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the planned development establishment or revision application as required by Chapter 20.80 (Zoning Ordinance Amendments). The planning commission shall consider the full application at this hearing, including the preliminary site utilization plan. 
2.  The planning commission shall forward a written recommendation, and reasons for the recommendation, on the proposed planned development establishment or revision and preliminary site utilization plan to the city council. The recommendation shall be based on the findings in Subsection J (Findings), in addition to the zoning ordinance map amendment findings specified in Section 20.80.060 (Findings and Decision). 
I.  City Council Review and Decision. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall conduct a public hearing and either approve, approve in modified form, or deny the planned development establishment or revision and preliminary site utilization plan. The city council may approve the application only if all of the findings in Subsection J (Findings) below can be made, in addition to the zoning ordinance map amendment findings specified in Section 20.80.060 (Findings and Decision). 
J.  Findings. The city council may approve an application for planned development establishment or revision with accompanying preliminary site utilization plan only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the goals, policies, and actions of the general plan and any applicable specific plan and community plan. 
2.  The site for the proposed development is adequate in size and shape to accommodate proposed land uses. 
3.  The site for the proposed development has adequate access considering the limitations of existing and planned streets and highways. 
4.  Adequate public services exist or will be provided to serve the proposed development. 
5.  The proposed development will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property, will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area, and will enhance the desirability of the area and have a beneficial effect. 
6.  The proposed development carries out the intent of the planned development zoning district by providing a more efficient use of the land and an excellence of site design greater than that which could be achieved through the application of established zoning standards. 
7.  Each individual unit of the proposed development, in each phase as well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating a good environment in the locality and being in any stage as desirable and stable as the total development. 
8.  Any deviation from the standard ordinance requirements is warranted by the design and additional amenities incorporated in the development plan, which offer certain unusual redeeming features to compensate for any deviations that may be permitted. 
9.  The principles incorporated in the proposed development plan indicate certain unique or unusual features, which could not otherwise be achieved under the other zoning districts. 
K.  Ordinance Approving the Development Plan. If the city council approves the establishment of a planned development zoning district, it shall do so by adoption of an ordinance and adoption by reference of the preliminary site utilization plan. The ordinance shall also include any other provisions that the city council finds to be necessary to constitute the regulations for use, property maintenance, and property improvement in the planned development zoning district. 
L.  Effect of Site Utilization Plan. All proposed development and new land uses within a P-D zone shall comply with the approved site utilization plan. Land uses not shown on the site utilization plan are not permitted. 
M.  Final Site Utilization Plan. Prior to or concurrent with applications for any building permits within a planned development zoning district, a final site utilization plan (final SUP) shall be approved by the site plan review committee, unless the director of development services determines that the final SUP should be referred to the planning commission for approval because of substantial modifications or more than three (3) years have passed since the preliminary SUP was adopted. The final site utilization plan shall include: 
1.  Land Use. The final site utilization plan shall include a map showing the location of each land use proposed within the site, including open space and common areas. The land use map shall be accompanied by a narrative description of permitted land uses, allowable accessory uses, and uses allowed with a conditional use permit. Only those uses specifically listed above are allowed in the planned development. 
2.  Subdivision Map. If the project involves the subdivision of land, the application shall include a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map as required by Title 18 (Subdivisions) of the Merced Municipal Code. The proposed parcels shall have, at least, minimum parcel area and minimum parcel dimensions. 
3.  Circulation/Transit. The final site utilization plan shall include map and descriptions of the major circulation features within the site including vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and transit facilities; traffic flow of internal traffic; and existing and proposed public streets and sidewalk improvements. 
4.  Public Facilities and Open Space. The application shall include the amount (in square feet or acres) and percentage of site area that will be dedicated for all types of open space, including proposed recreational facilities and amenities; and any public facilities, including public utility easements, public buildings and public land uses. The map(s) with location and dimensions of each open space shall be also submitted. 
5.  Development Standards. The final site utilization plan development standards shall identify all development standards that apply within the site, including parcel dimensions, density, setbacks, structure height, building architecture and design, parking, and landscaping requirements, which assures the suitable integration of the P-D into the neighborhood or area in which it is located. Applicable conditions of approval, mitigation measure, and terms of any development or legislative action agreement, where appropriate, shall be included. 
6.  Single-Family Residential Development Standards. The final site utilization plan shall demonstrate that all single-family residential development complies with the following standards: 
a.  Garages. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of garages fronting a street shall have recessed doors (by at least one (1) foot) for dwelling units with the standard twenty (20) foot setback. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the garages along a street shall have greater setbacks which are five (5) feet greater than the minimum setback for the remainder of the dwelling unit. No three-car garages are allowed for lots five thousand (5,000) square feet or smaller, except on lots with alley access or lots exceeding sixty (60) feet in width. 
b.  Elevations. Projects shall incorporate a variety of dwelling elevations. Varied setbacks, some two-story houses, front porches, bays and balconies are encouraged as ways of achieving variety; and windows, doors, non-recessed garage doors on the front elevation shall have raised trim in order to provide visual interest and relief. 
c.  Neighborhood Compatibility. Projects shall be designed to be compatible with adjacent single-family residential neighborhoods. The director of development services shall consider the relationship of second-story windows, doors, and balconies with the privacy of neighbors, and may require that these features be redesigned or omitted from second-story rear walls. 
d.  Landscaping. Front yard shall contain landscaping, including trees, lawn, or other type of drought-tolerant groundcover, shrubs, and an irrigation system, to be installed prior to occupancy. 
N.  Revisions to a Planned Development. A public hearing by the planning commission and city council shall be required prior to approval of significant revisions to the preliminary or final site utilization plan (SUP) which involve changes in land use, expansion or intensification of development or changes in the standards of development. The director of development services shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, those instances where a revision to the preliminary or final SUP is necessary, following the same procedure as the original application. Changes in an approved preliminary or final SUP which do not involve changes in land use, expansion or intensification of development or changes in the standards of development may be approved by the site plan review committee if such changes are consistent with the purposes, character, and conditions of the P-D. 
O.  Minor Changes. Minor changes to an approved site utilization plan shall be approved as specified in Section 20.72.050 (Changes to an Approved Project). 
P.  Identification. Each P-D zone shall be numbered, the first adopted being shown on the zoning map as "P-D (1)" and each zone subsequently adopted being numbered consecutively. 
Q.  Individual Projects within a Planned Development. After the final SUP has been approved, individual projects within a planned development shall require a site plan review permit prior to development to address conformance with the final SUP. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.22 - OVERLAY ZONES 
 
20.22.010 - Purpose of overlay zones. 
A.  General. Overlay zones establish additional standards and regulations to specific areas, in addition to the requirements of the underlying base zoning district. 
B.  Conflicts. Whenever a requirement of an overlay zone conflicts with a requirement of the underlying base zoning district, the overlay zone shall control. When two (2) or more overlay zone requirements conflict, the director of development services shall determine the appropriate requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.22.020 - Airport environ (/AE) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The airport environs (/AE) overlay zone identifies areas in the City of Merced where additional requirements apply to ensure the compatibility of land uses and development with operations at the Merced Regional Airport. 
B.  Applicability. The /AE overlay zone applies to land within the City of Merced designated as an airport influence area in the airport land use compatibility plan (ALUCP) for the environs of the Merced Regional Airport. 
C.  Land Use Regulations. All development projects and land use actions proposed within the /AE overlay zone shall comply with the compatibility criteria specified in the ALUCP, excluding those criteria specifically overruled by the city council in a manner consistent with Public Resources Code Section 21676.  
20.22.030 - High speed rail (/HSR) overlay zone.RESERVED  
20.22.040 - Urban residential (/UR) overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The /UR overlay zone is intended to encourage high quality residential development in Merced's downtown and other urban neighborhoods. The overlay zone identifies permitted residential building types that reflect the traditional scale and character of these neighborhoods. These building types are permitted in addition to the use allowed by the underlying base zoning district. The /UR overlay zone increases choices for property owners and residents, promotes high quality design, and supports a vibrant and welcoming downtown area. 
B.  Site Plan Review or Minor Use Permit Required. A site plan review or minor use permit shall be required per Table 20.22-1 for the construction of permitted residential building types that do not conform to the standards of the base zoning district. 
C.  Building Types. 
1.  Building Type Defined. A building type is a particular kind of structure with its own recognizable identity. Building types are defined primarily by their form (mass, scale, and design) with building function being of secondary importance. 
2.  Permitted Building Types. Permitted residential building types in the /UR overlay zone are based on the underlying base zoning district. Table 20.22-1 (Permitted Residential Building Types) identifies permitted residential building types in the /UR overlay zone by residential zoning district. 
Table 20.22-1 Permitted Residential Building Types 
Key 	Base Zoning District 
SP Site Plan Review Permit Required 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 
M Minor Use Permit Required 				
X  Use Not Allowed 				
Small Lot Single-Family Homes 	M 	M 	M 	M 
Carriage Homes 	M 	M 	M 	M 
Side Yard Homes 	M 	M 	M 	M 
Duplexes, Triplexes, and Fourplexes 
("Mansion Apartments") 	X 	M 	M 	M 
Rosewalk 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 
Bungalow Court 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 
Townhomes 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 
Side Yard Apartments 	X 	X 	M 	M 
Courtyard Apartments 	X 	X 	M 	M 
Live/Work 	X 	X 	SP 	SP 
 
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  General. The development standards that apply to building types in the /UR overlay zone shall be as specified in this section. If the standards in this chapter conflict with the underlying base zoning district, this section shall govern. 
2.  Standards for All Residential Building Types. Following standards shall apply to all permitted building types. 
a.  Orientation. Front entrances to buildings shall face onto or be clearly visible from a public street or alley. 
b.  Corner Lots. Buildings on corner lots shall feature well-articulated facades for each street frontage. 
c.  Pathways. A pathway shall connect the adjacent public sidewalk to a building's front entry. 
d.  Parking and Access. 
(1)  Alley-Loaded Buildings. For buildings served by an alley, vehicle access to the lot is allowed only through the alley. When an alley is present, vehicle parking areas, including garages, carports, and surface parking spaces, shall be set back from the front lot line a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total lot depth and screened from the public street. Utilities, above ground equipment, trash containers, and other services shall be accessed only through the alley. 
(2)  Front-Loaded Buildings. For front-loaded buildings without an alley, vehicle parking area, including garages, carports, or surface parking spaces, shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the front façade of the building. 
3.  Standards for Individual Residential Building Types. Individual building types within the /UR overlay zone shall comply with standards described below. Diagrams of building types are for illustrative purposes only and do not establish or imply any requirements not specified in the text or tables of this section. 
a.  Small Lot Single-Family Homes. 
(1)  Definition. Small lot single-family homes are detached residential structure on a small lot. (This can include zero-lot line homes.) 
Figure 20.22-1 Small Lot Single-Family Home Example
 
(2)  Standards. Small lot single-family homes shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-2, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-2 Development Standards for Small Lot Single-Family Homes 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	30 ft. 	100 ft. 
Length 	75 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior 	15 ft. [1] 	25 ft. 
 Interior, Side 	4 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	25 ft. [2] 	- 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Front porches may be setback ten (10) feet from the front property line. 
[2] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
b.  Carriage Homes. 
(1)  Definition. An accessory dwelling unit located above a detached or semi-detached garage structure. 
Figure 20.22-2 Carriage Homes Example
 
(2)  Standards. Carriage homes shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-3, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-3 Development Standards for Carriage Homes 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	40 ft. 	100 ft. 
Length 	50 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front [1] 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 Exterior, Street Side 	10 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Side 	10 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	5 ft. 	- 
Height 	- 	30 ft. and 2 stories 
 
Notes: 
[1] Twenty (20) feet required for driveways. 
c.  Side Yard Homes. 
(1)  Definition. An alley-loaded single dwelling unit with one (1) active side yard. 
Figure 20.22-3 Side Yard Homes Example
 
(2)  Standards. Side yard homes shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-4, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-4 Development Standards for Side Yard Homes 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	40 ft. 	100 ft. 
Length 	50 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 Interior, Rear 	5 ft. 	- 
 Side, Inactive 	3 ft. 	- 
 Side, Active, and Street Side 	20 ft. for at least 50% of 
building facade 10 ft. for 
remaining wall length 	- 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
(3)  Pedestrian Access. The main entry to a side yard house shall be through either the building façade facing the active side yard or the front street-facing façade. 
(4)  Frontage. The building façade fronting the active side yard shall feature a porch; and the active side yard shall front the street on a corner lot. 
d.  Duplexes, Triplexes, and Fourplexes. 
(1)  Definition. A residential structure that contains two (2) to four (4) dwelling units that are either stacked or placed side-by-side and appear as a large single-family house. 
Figure 20.22-4 Duplexes, Triplexes, and Fourplexes Example
 
(2)  Standards. Duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-5, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-5 Development Standards for Duplexes, Triplexes, and Fourplexes 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	50 ft. 	120 ft. 
Length 	75 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 Exterior, Street Side 
 (For Corner lot) 	10 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Side 	5 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	15 ft. [1] 	- 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
;sz=8;Notes: 
[1] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
e.  Rosewalk. 
(1)  Definition. A grouping of detached dwelling units arranged in two (2) rows on either side of a common green. 
Figure 20.22-5 Rosewalk Example
 
(2)  Standards. Rosewalk shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-6, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-6 Development Standards for Rosewalk 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 
Length 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior 	15 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Interior 	5 ft. 	- 
 Between Structures on Lot 	8 ft. 	- 
 Structure Front (common 
 green) 	15 ft. 	30 ft. 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
f.  Bungalow Court. 
(1)  Definition. A grouping of detached single-family homes arranged around a shared courtyard that is typically perpendicular to the street. 
Figure 20.22-6 Bungalow Court Example
 
(2)  Standards. Bungalow courts shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-7, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-7 Development Standards for Bungalow Court 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	100 ft. 	200 ft. 
Length 	100 ft. 	300 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 Exterior, Side (Corner lots only) 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Interior, Side 	10 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	15 ft. [1] 	
 Between Structures on Lot 	8 ft. 	- 
 Structure Front (common green) 	15 ft. 	30 ft. 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
(3)  Pedestrian Access. 
a)  The primary pedestrian entry to a bungalow court shall be provided from a public sidewalk adjacent to the central courtyard. 
b)  The main entry to each unit shall face either the central courtyard or a public street. 
(4)  Central Courtyard. 
a)  The central courtyard shall be a shared space accessible to all building residents. 
b)  Pathways shall be provided from each unit to the central courtyard and from the central courtyard to a public sidewalk adjacent to the site. 
c)  The central courtyard shall be visible from the primary street frontage. 
d)  The amount of impervious surface in central courtyard shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total courtyard area. 
g.  Townhomes. 
(1)  Definition. A single-family home attached to one (1) or more other single-family homes in a linear arrangement. 
Figure 20.22-7 Townhomes Example
 
(2)  Standards. Townhomes shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-8, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-8 Development Standards for Townhomes 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior 	None 	15 ft. 
 Interior, Side 	None 	None 
 Interior, Rear 	5 ft. 	- 
Height 	None 	35 ft. 
 
h.  Side Court Apartments. 
(1)  Definition. A 2- to 3-story structure that contains multiple dwelling units and most of its dwelling units facing an active side yard. 
Figure 20.22-9 Side Court Apartments Example
 
(2)  Standards. Side court apartments shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-9, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
a.  The side courtyard shall be a shared space accessible to all building residents. 
b.  Pathways shall be provided from each unit to the side courtyard and from the side courtyard to a public sidewalk adjacent to the site. 
Table 20.22-9 Development Standards for Side Court Apartments 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	10 ft. 	20 ft. 
 Interior, Rear 	15 ft. [1] 	- 
 Side, Inactive 	4 ft. 	- 
 Side, Active and Street 	20 ft. 	- 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
Notes: [1] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
i.  Courtyard Apartments. 
(1)  Definition. A grouping of attached dwelling units arranged to share one (1) or more central courtyard. 
Figure 20.22-10 Courtyard Apartments Example
 
(2)  Standards. Courtyard apartments shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-10, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-10 Development Standards for Side Court Apartments 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	10 ft. 	20 ft. 
 Exterior, Side 	10 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Side 	5 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	15 ft. [1] 	- 
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
Notes: [1] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
  
(3)  Pedestrian Access. The primary entry to individual units or the interior lobby of a courtyard apartment building shall be through the central courtyard. 
(4)  Central Courtyard. 
a)  The central courtyard shall be a shared space accessible to all building residents. 
b)  Pathways shall be provided from each unit to the central courtyard and from the central courtyard to a public sidewalk adjacent to the site. 
c)  The central courtyard shall be visible from the primary street frontage. 
d)  The amount of impervious surface in central courtyard shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total courtyard area. 
e)  The central courtyard shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width. 
(5)  Frontage. The active side yard shall front the street on a corner lot. 
j.  Live/Work. 
(1)  Definitions. Attached dwelling units that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes. 
Figure 20.22-11 Live/Work Example
 
(2)  Standards. Live/work shall comply with the development standards shown in Table 20.22-11, unless otherwise approved through the minor use permit or site plan review permit process. 
Table 20.22-11 Development Standards for Live/Work 
	Minimum 	Maximum 
Parcel Standards 
Width 	25 ft. 	50 ft. 
Length 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 
Building Standards 
Setbacks 		
 Exterior, Front 	0 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Exterior, Side 	15 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Interior, Side 	5 ft. 	- 
 Interior, Rear 	25 ft. [1] 	
Height 	- 	35 ft. 
 
Notes: [1] The minimum rear setback shall be five (5) feet when abutting an alley. 
(3)  Pedestrian Access. 
a)  The main entrance to the ground floor work space shall be accessed directly from and face a public street. 
b)  Dwelling unit shall be located above the work space, and accessed from a separate entrance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
PART 3 - GENERAL REGULATIONS  
Chapter 20.24 - HEIGHT MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
20.24.010 - Height measurement. 
The height of a structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, vents and other similar projecting features. See Figure 20.24-1. 
Figure 20.24-1 Structure Height
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.24.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  Permitted Height Exceptions. 
1.  The following features may exceed the maximum permitted structure height in the applicable zoning district: 
a.  Barns, silos or other agricultural structures, provided these are fifty (50) feet or more from any property line. 
b.  Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, observation towers, distribution and transmission towers, lines and poles, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio towers, masts and aerials and other similar projecting features, provided these do not occupy an area greater than fifteen (15) percent of the building footprint area. 
c.  Outdoor theater screens with no outdoor advertising matter. 
d.  Places of public assembly and other permitted public and semi-public buildings, including schools and churches. 
(1)  Located on the first floor of the building. 
(2)  For each one (1) foot exceeding maximum height requirement for appropriate zoning district, its side and rear yards shall be increased by one (1) foot. 
2.  Height exceptions are not permitted within the airport environs (/AE) overlay zone. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.26 - SETBACK MEASUREMENT AND PROJECTIONS 
 
20.26.010 - Setback measurement. 
Setbacks shall be measured as the distance between the property line and the nearest point of the structure along a line at a right angle to the property line. (See Figure 20.26-1: Setback Measurements.) Minor modifications of no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required setback may be approved by the director of development services through the minor use permit process. 
Figure 20.26-1 Setback Measurements
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.26.020 - Projections. 
A.  Projections over Property Lines. Structures may not extend beyond a property line or into the public right-of-way, except when allowed with a temporary encroachment permit. 
B.  Projections into Required Setback. Building features may extend into required setback areas as shown in Table 20.26-1, subject to the requirements of the building code. 
Table 20.26-1 Projections Into Required Setback 
Projecting Features 	Maximum Projection into 
Required Setback 	Minimum Distances from
Property Lines 
Cornices, eaves, canopies, covered patios, architectural features, and similar roof projections [1] 	5 feet 	One-half of the required setback 
Bay windows, balconies, sills, fire escapes, fireplaces, chimneys, and similar wall projections [2] 	1.5 feet 	None 
Open, unenclosed, and uncovered entry porches, stairways, platforms or landing places, and similar entry features [3] 	6 feet 	None 
Wheelchair ramps and similar features for the disabled [4] 	None [4] 	None 
Uncovered patios [4] 	None [4] 	None 
 
Notes: 
[1] Projection allowed if features provide no additional floor area within the building. 
[2] Wall projections may not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) (in aggregate) of the width of the wall in which it is located. 
[3] Ground floor only; open railing required with maximum railing height of thirty (30) inches. 
[4] May be located in required yards with no restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.28 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
 
20.28.010 - General requirements. 
A.  Separation Between Structures. Accessory structures shall be set back from other structures on the same lot as required by the building code. 
B.  Attached Structures. Accessory structures attached to a primary structure shall be considered a part of the primary structure and shall comply with all standards applicable to the primary structure, including lot coverage requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.28.020 - Residential accessory structures. 
A.  Permitted Residential Accessory Structures and Uses. Accessory structures and uses permitted in residential zones include: 
1.  Home occupations (See Chapter 20.48). 
2.  Second units (See Chapter 20.42). 
3.  State licensed foster homes, state-licensed small family day care homes of one (1)—eight (8) children, and state-licensed large family day care homes of no more than fourteen (14) children. 
4.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, such as garages, carport, off-street parking areas, personal storage buildings, fences, etc. 
5.  Temporary subdivision tract offices, building yards, and tract signs, for a period not to exceed six (6) months after completion of construction of the tract. 
6.  Rooming houses and boarding homes of no more than one (1) person in R-1 zones and no more than two (2) persons in R-2, R-3, and R-4 zones. 
7.  Other uses listed in Section 20.28.020.C and 20.28.020.D. 
8.  Underground public utility distribution and transmission lines. 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  The maximum height and minimum setbacks for accessory structures in residential zoning districts shall be as specified in Table 20.28-1 and as shown in Figure 20.28-1. 
2.  Accessory structures shall be subject to all other development standards that apply to primary structures in the applicable zoning district. 
Table 20.28-1 Height and Setback Standards for Residential Accessory Structures 
Height (max.) 	35 ft. 
Setbacks (min.) 
 Interior Yard 	3 ft. [1] 
 Exterior Yard 	Same as required for primary structure 
 
Notes: 
[1] Five (5) feet minimum for garages off an alley or any accessory structure exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
Figure 20.28-1 Development Standards for Residential Accessory Structures
 
C.  Habitable Accessory Structures. 
1.  Rear Dwellings. 
a.  An accessory structure to the rear of a primary structure on the same lot shall be used for residential purposes only if it conforms to all the lot area, setback, open space, and off-street parking requirements within the applicable zoning district. 
b.  Vehicle access to all such rear dwellings shall be provided by a driveway with a minimum width of ten (10) feet for lots with two (2) dwelling units and twenty (20) feet for lots with three (3) or more dwelling units. 
2.  Dwelling Units over Garages. Accessory structures with a dwelling unit above a ground floor garage shall be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from a rear property line abutting an alley with the garage itself requiring a minimum setback of five (5) feet. 
3.  Guest Houses. 
a.  Guest houses or detached servants' quarters shall be located on the rear half of the lot. 
b.  No kitchen facilities shall be permitted and no plumbing or utilities shall be allowed except for heating, air conditioning, and the discharge of wastes from a toilet or bathroom. 
D.  Swimming Pools. 
1.  Swimming pools shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines, unless otherwise allowed under the building code. 
2.  Fences, barriers, and pool equipment storage areas for swimming pools shall be provided as required by the building code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.28.030 - Nonresidential accessory structures. 
Accessory structures in nonresidential zoning districts are subject to the same development standards (e.g., height and setbacks) as primary structures in each zoning district. Accessory structures in nonresidential zoning districts shall be limited to those structures needed to support the primary structure or land use on the site, including, but not limited to, off-street parking facilities, storage buildings, equipment buildings, utility buildings, etc., subject to the discretion of the director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.30 - WALLS AND FENCES 
Sections : 
 
20.30.010 - Measurement of fence and wall height. 
A.  Measurement from Finished Grade. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the adjacent finished grade at the base of the fence or wall, to the top edge of the fence or wall. 
B.  Ornamental Features. Ornamental features that provide a screening function and are fifty (50) percent or more opaque shall be included in the height measurement of a fence or wall. 
C.  Fences Atop Walls. If a fence is atop a wall, the total height shall be measured from the base of the wall. 
D.  Different Finished Grades. If the adjacent finished grade is different on opposite sides of a fence or wall, the height shall be measured from the side with the highest finished grade to the highest point on the fence. See Figure 20.30-1 (Fence and Wall Height). 
Figure 20.30-1 Fence and Wall Height
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.30.020 - Height limits. 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  Basic Standards. Fences, walls, and hedges in residential zoning districts shall comply with the standards in Table 20.30-1 (Fence Height in Residential Zoning Districts) and as illustrated in Figure 20.30-2 (Height Limits for Fences, Walls, and Hedges). 
2.  Decorative Features and Materials. 
a.  Any lattice or other similar material on top of a wall or fence cannot extend above the maximum fence height. 
b.  Decorative arches and other similar entry features within these setback areas may be up to eight (8) feet in height. 
Table 20.30-1 Fence Height in Residential Zoning Districts 
Location 	Maximum Height 
Within required exterior yards 	4 feet [1] 
Within a driveway vision triangle 	2.5 feet [2] 
Within a corner vision triangle 	See Section 20.30.040 (Vision Triangles) 
All other locations [3] 	7 feet [3] 
Corner Lot Exterior Yards [4] 	7 feet [4] 
 
Notes: 
[1] Fence height for non-solid fences (wrought iron, chain link, picket, etc., that are mostly transparent) may be increased to a maximum of six (6) feet with a minor use permit. 
[2] As shown in Figure 20.30-02, a driveway vision triangle is the area on the street side of a line connecting two (2) points, one (1) on the back of sidewalk (or property line, whichever is closer to the street) and one (1) on the side line of any public or private driveway or alley, each point being ten (10) feet from the point of intersection of the back of sidewalk (or property line, whichever is closer to the street) and the side line of the driveway or alley. 
[3] In multi-family zones, may be increased to eight (8) feet with a minor use permit. 
[4] Only if corner lot exterior yard doesn't abut the front yard of an adjacent lot or possible adjacent lot. 
Figure 20.30-2 Height Limits for Fences, Walls, and Hedges
 
3.  Reversed Corner Lots. Reversed corner lots are those whose front yard directly abuts the side or rear yard of the adjacent lot instead of another side or rear yard. 
a.  With a minor use permit, fences, walls or hedges not exceeding seven (7) feet in height may be located in the required exterior side yard of a reversed corner lot: however, the fences, walls or hedges may not encroach into the triangular area, two (2) equal sides of which are the first twenty (20) feet of property lines of the subject reversed corner lot, measured from the point of intersection of the exterior side yard property line and the exterior yard property line shared with the adjacent lot. 
b.  If the front of a house is located on the exterior side yard on a reversed corner lot, then the front yard of the lot may be treated as a side yard. 
4.  Through Lots. On through lots with frontage on two (2) parallel public streets, either property line separating the lot from a public street may be treated as the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on the lots next adjoining. If such adjoining lots are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the lot is located. 
5.  Hedges in Exterior Yards. Hedges or other plantings of any height are allowed in exterior yards if they are at least fifteen (15) feet from the property line. 
6.  Open Ended Cul-De-Sac Lots. For open-ended cul-de-sac lots, fences and gates in the required front yard or exterior side yard of a lot at the end of an open-ended cul-de-sac are permitted with approval of a minor use permit. Any such fence or gate shall remain open for public to access into the block from the public right-of-way. 
Figure 20.30-3 Open Ended Cul-de-Sac Lots
 
B.  Nonresidential Zoning Districts 
1.  The maximum height of a fence or wall within a nonresidential zoning district shall be eight (8) feet. 
2.  Fences up to ten (10) feet in height may be approved with a site plan review permit or with any other discretionary permit if required for the same project. 
C.  Minor Use Permits for Fences. In addition to the requirements in Section 20.68.020 (Minor Use Permits), to approve a minor use permits for fences, the following findings must be made by the reviewing authority: 
1.  The fence materials are of high quality with an aesthetically-pleasing appearance that fit in well with the neighborhood. 
2.  The added fence height or alternative material is necessary to address privacy, noise, interface, or security concerns and/or issues with animals. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.30.030 - Corner vision triangles. 
A.  Definition. The minimum required area of a corner vision triangle is based on abutting street type as shown in Table 20.30-2 (Required Vision Triangle Distances by Street Type). The corner vision triangle is the area formed by measuring the distance "X" along the front and side property lines from the point of intersection, and then diagonally connecting the ends of the two (2) lines. The back of sidewalk line may be used instead of the property line if the back of sidewalk is closer to the street and the property line is more than one and one-half (1½) feet behind the back of the sidewalk. See Figure 20.30-2 (Height Limits for Fences, Walls, and Hedges). 
Table 20.30-2 Required Vision Triangle Distance by Street Type 
Street Type 	Distance "X" 
Driveway or Alley 	10 feet 
Local Street or Rural Road 	25 feet 
Collector Street 	40 feet 
Arterial 	40 feet 
 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a fence or wall within a corner vision triangle is two and one-half (2½) feet. 
C.  Exceptions: Maximum fence and wall height within corner vision triangles do not apply within a zoning district with no required exterior yards. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.30.040 - Materials. 
A.  Permitted Materials. Fences and walls shall be constructed of decorative masonry, ornamental steel or iron, or wood and shall be of a complementary color and material with adjacent buildings. Other materials may be permitted if the director of development services determines the design to be compatible with adjacent structures and its surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  Prohibited Materials. 
1.  Fences and walls shall not be constructed of inappropriate materials such as sheet metal, vehicles, underground/above-ground tanks, garage doors, aluminum siding, corrugated tin, and other similar materials not specifically designed for use as fencing. 
2.  Barb-wire fences are prohibited in all zoning districts unless approved with a minor use permit. 
3.  Razor wire fences are prohibited in all zoning districts unless approved with a minor use permit. 
C.  Electric Fences. Electric fences are prohibited in all residential zones. Electric fences are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts only with a minor use permit if set back a minimum of five (5) feet from an exterior property line and located so that it cannot be touched by any person in the public right-of way. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.32 - INTERFACE REGULATIONS 
 
20.32.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes special permit requirements for projects proposed near to existing land uses that might be negatively impacted by the new use. These requirements are intended to protect existing residential neighborhoods and to ensure that new development is designed in a manner to minimize negative impacts on nearby uses to the greatest extent possible to promote harmonious and orderly development, and the stability of land values and investments. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.32.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  A parcel is "abutting" another parcel if it is located immediately adjacent to another parcel and shares at least one (1) property lot line. 
B.  A parcel is "across from" another parcel if any of its property lines when extended across the street or alley touch the parcel on the other side of the street. 
C.  A parcel is "developed" if there is a minimum of twenty (20) percent lot coverage and the parcel contains a land use legally conforming to the zoning district within which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.32.030 - Site plan review. 
A.  A proposed use in a "High Impact" zoning district shall require a site plan review permit if it is abutting or across from a developed parcel in a "Low Impact" zoning district. For example, if a proposed use is located in the R-3 zoning district and is abutting or across from a parcel in the R-1 zoning district, then a site plan review permit is required. Table 20.32-1 lists out all cases that require a site plan review permit pursuant to this chapter. Figure 20.32-1 illustrates the concept. 
B.  A site plan review permit (with a public hearing and public notice per Section 20.68.050.E and Chapter 20.70) shall also be required for a proposed use in a high impact zoning district that is abutting or across from either: 
1.  A developed parcel that is zoned planned development with a use similar to a permitted use within the corresponding low impact zoning district; or, 
2.  A parcel outside the Merced city limits with a use similar to a permitted use within the corresponding low impact zoning district. 
C.  The director of development services may refer any application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
Table 20.32-1 Site Plan Review Permit Required 
	High Impact Zoning District 
	R-3 	R-4 	R-MH 	C-N 	C-SC 	C-C 	D-CM 	C-O 	C-T 	C-G 	B-P 	I-L 	I-H 	A-G 
Low Impact Zoning District 	R-1 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	
	R-2 				¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	
	R-3 										¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	
	R-4 										¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	
	R-MH 										¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	
	C-O 										¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	
	A-G 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	
 
¦ 	Site Plan Permit Required 
	No Site Plan Permit Required 
 
Figure 20.32-1 —Site Plan Review Requirement
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.32.040 - Exceptions. 
This section shall not apply to parcels across the street if the street is a proposed or existing arterial or higher order street as shown on the general plan circulation map. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.34 - CREEK BUFFERS 
Sections : 
 
20.34.010 - Purpose. 
This article establishes standards for land uses and development in areas adjacent to creeks. These standards are intended to: 
A.  Reduce risks to property owners and the public from erosion and flooding; 
B.  Protect and enhance the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of water resources in the city; 
C.  Minimize pollutants entering water bodies from urban stormwater runoff; and, 
D.  Preserve riparian vegetation and protect wildlife habitat and wildlife corridors along natural drainage ways. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.34.020 - Applicability. 
The standards in this chapter apply to all riparian areas within the City of Merced. As shown in Figure 20-34-1 (Creek Buffer Measurement), riparian areas are defined as areas between the banks and twenty-five (25) feet in width measured from the top of bank or fifty (50) feet in width measured from centerline of any intermittent or perennial stream or river landward, whichever is greater. Excluded from this definition are stock ponds and other stock watering facilities, culverted sections of creeks and engineered systems developed by a public agency for collection of storm or flood waters, or systems other than natural creeks designed to deliver irrigation or water supplies. 
Figure 20.34-1 Creek Buffer Measurement
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.34.030 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Activities. The following activities are permitted by right in riparian areas: 
1.  Livestock grazing and agricultural practices where permitted by the applicable zoning district; 
2.  Native landscaping; 
3.  Fencing that does not interfere with the flow of flood waters or wildlife migration corridors; 
4.  Utilities, including the installation, operation, and maintenance of water pumps; 
5.  Storm drains into riparian areas and creeks; 
6.  Trails, including pedestrian and bicycle trails, and recreational activities not involving the establishment of any structures, except for small accessory structures such as benches or signs; 
7.  Construction and maintenance of publicly-owned culverts, rip-rap, and other drainage facilities; and, 
8.  Construction and maintenance of publicly-owned bridges. 
B.  Conditionally Permitted Uses. 
1.  Uses, structures, and activities permitted in the applicable zoning district are permitted within riparian areas only with approval of a minor use permit. 
2.  To approve a minor use permit for riparian area development, the director of development services shall make all of the following findings in addition to the findings in Section 20.68.020 (Conditional Use and Minor Use Permits): 
a.  The proposed use, structure, or encroachment cannot be feasibly located outside the riparian area because such location would have a more adverse effect on the stream environment or alter the flood plain. 
b.  Measures are included that provide adequate protection of wildlife habitat, water quality and in-stream habitat, and capacity for flood management. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.34.040 - Performance standards. 
A.  Construction. Construction is prohibited in riparian areas over which the city maintains jurisdiction unless the necessary permits have been obtained from other responsible governmental agencies and plans have been approved by the director of development services. 
B.  Grading or Alterations to Riparian Vegetation. Grading, alteration of the natural contours of the land, or cutting or alteration of natural vegetation that protects a riparian habitat is prohibited within riparian areas except when such action is: 
1.  Necessary to protect public health and safety as determined by the director of development services; or, 
2.  Associated with an approved creek restoration and enhancement project intended to improve the health and environmental integrity of the waterway; or, 
3.  Associated with an approved land use entitlement. 
C.  Streambed Alteration. Filling, grading, excavating, or obstructing streambeds is prohibited except in the following circumstances or under any applicable provisions of state or federal law: 
1.  Placement of city-approved storm drain and irrigation outflow structures shall be designed so as to eliminate or minimize increases in the rate and amount of storm or irrigation water discharge; 
2.  Placement of public and nonpublic utility lines; 
3.  Construction of bridges and their connecting roadways; 
4.  Maintenance activities necessary to protect public health and safety; 
5.  Creek restoration and improvement projects; and, 
6.  Development associated with an approved land use entitlement. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.34.050 - Coordination with other regulatory agencies. 
A.  Required Permits. All required permits from the California Department of Fish and Game, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the California State Water Resources Control Board, the Central Valley Flood Protection Board, Merced Irrigation District (MID), or other applicable agencies, including any permit required under an approved Habitat Conservation Plan, shall be obtained prior to, concurrently with, or as a condition of, the approval of any city permits for development within riparian areas. 
B.  Submittal of Approvals. Evidence of approval or pending approval of any such permit shall be submitted to the planning division, including all appropriate supporting materials, environmental documentation, and studies. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.36 - LANDSCAPING 
 
20.36.010 - Purpose. 
The landscaping standards contained in this chapter are intended to enhance the aesthetic appearance of developed areas within Merced and to promote the efficient use of water resources. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.36.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all new development with landscape areas as follows: 
A.  Greater than five hundred (500) square feet; or, 
B.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregated landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.36.030 - Water efficient landscaping ordinance. 
In addition to the standards contained in this chapter, all applicable development in Merced shall also comply with Municipal Code Chapter 17.60 (Water Efficient Landscaping and Irrigation) and any subsequent amendments or emergency drought regulations. Chapter 17.60 implements the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (Government Code Section 65591 et seq.). In the event of a conflict, Chapter 17.60 or State regulations will prevail, whichever is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.36.040 - Landscape and sprinkler plans. 
A.  Landscape and Sprinkler Plan Required. Projects subject to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 17.60 shall submit a landscape and sprinkler plan as part of applications for all permits as required by the zoning ordinance and as part of subsequent building permit applications. 
B.  Required Contents. Landscape plans shall include the following features and information: 
1.  Site boundaries. 
2.  Existing structures on the property. 
3.  Structures immediately adjacent to the property. 
4.  All new structures and improvements proposed as part of the development project. 
5.  Existing landscaping, trees, and vegetation to be retained. 
6.  All new landscaping proposed, including parking lot and street trees, as part of the development project specifying plant location, species, and size. 
7.  Irrigation plan specifying the location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system, including backflow prevention devices. 
8.  Water efficient landscape calculations, including hydrozone information table, water budget calculations, maximum applied water allowance, estimated total water use, and soil management and grading plans per Chapter 17.60. 
9.  Any additional information as determined by the director of development services to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Review and Approval. The development services department shall review all landscape plans to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Landscape plans shall be approved by the review authority acting upon the permit application for the proposed new development. 
D.  Changes to Approved Landscape Plans. 
1.  Substantial modifications to an approved landscape plan shall be made only by the review authority which approved the landscape plan. 
2.  The director of development services may approve minor modifications to a landscape plan previously approved by the planning commission or city council. Minor modifications are defined as changes to a landscape plan that bring the plans into conformance with state law (including emergency drought regulations), do not significantly decrease the total amount of landscaped area, alter the general design character or water conservation of the landscaped area, or alter a feature of the landscaped area specifically required by the decision-making authority, unless as otherwise required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.36.050 - Required landscape areas. 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  All required exterior setback areas, excluding areas required for access to the property, shall be landscaped. See Figure 20.36-1. 
Figure 20.36-1 Required Landscape Area for Residential Zoning Districts
 
2.  Landscaping may consist of any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs and turf; related natural features such as rock, stone or bark chips; or artificial turf that meets acceptable standards as determined by the department of development services. Decorative hardscape featuring pervious materials are permitted within required landscaping areas. Drought tolerant landscape materials are required, unless otherwise approved with a minor use permit. 
3.  Street trees per city standards. 
B.  Nonresidential Zoning Districts. 
1.  The minimum landscaped area on a site shall be as shown in Table 20.36-1. Outdoor dining areas and other similar quasi-public outdoor seating areas do not count toward landscaping requirements. 
2.  All required exterior setback areas excluding areas required for access to the property and public or quasi-public open space such as courtyards and outdoor seating shall be landscaped. 
Table 20.36-1 Minimum Landscaped Area in Nonresidential Zoning Districts 
Zoning Districts 	Minimum Landscaped Area 
D-COR, D-O, D-CM, P-PK 	10% 
C-G, C-T, C-N, C-SC, C-O, P-F, C-V 	15% 
I-L, I-H, A-G, U-T 	None 
B-P 	15% 
P-OS, P-D 	As determined by the permit approval process 
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.36.060 - Landscape standards. 
A.  General Standards. The following standards apply within all zoning districts. 
1.  Plant Selection. A minimum of ninety (90) percent of plants and trees shall be selected drought-tolerant, non-invasive species, unless otherwise approved with a minor use permit. 
2.  Turf Lawns. 
a.  Natural turf areas shall be limited to no more than fifty (50) percent of the landscaped area. The planning commission may approve larger areas if the lawn area provides functional open space for ballfields, etc. 
b.  Drought-resistant grass species shall be used exclusively. 
c.  Turf shall not be used on berms, slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent, street median, or park strips less than ten (10) feet wide unless sub-surface irrigation is used. 
d.  Artificial turf may be used in all areas if it meets the minimum standards as established by the development services department. 
3.  Plant Groupings. Where irrigation is proposed, plants shall be grouped in separate hydrozones (i.e., plants within each irrigation valve area shall have the same watering requirements). 
4.  Water Features. Decorative water features (e.g., fountains, ponds, waterfalls) shall have recirculating water systems. 
5.  Public Safety. Plant species shall be selected and located so that at maturity they do not interfere with pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular circulation and do not conflict with overhead lights, or utility lines. 
B.  Irrigation and Water Efficiency. Landscaped areas shall comply with the following irrigation and water efficiency. 
1.  Irrigation System. Water-efficient irrigation systems (e.g., bubbler type, drip, mini-spray) shall be required. Irrigation systems shall include check valves to prevent low head drainage, appropriate nozzles to prevent overspray, and automatic and self-adjusting irrigation controllers that include moisture and/or rain sensor shutoff; or other systems meeting minimum standards as established by the development services department. 
2.  Irrigation Schedule. Landscape irrigation hours shall be in compliance with Section 15.42 (Water Shortage Regulations). 
C.  Timing of Installation. Landscaping systems shall be installed prior to final building permit inspection or certification of occupancy. 
D.  Maintenance. 
1.  General. Landscape areas shall be maintained in a neat and healthful condition at all times, except in times of an official drought declaration by the Merced City Council. 
2.  Replacement of Dead or Dying Plants. Within ninety (90) days of a determination by the director of public works that a plant is dead or severely damaged or diseased, the plant shall be replaced by the property owner in accordance with the standards specified in this chapter. 
3.  Removal of Landscaping. Any removed mature landscaping shall be replaced with landscaping of similar size and maturity as that which was removed. Mature trees shall be replaced with a twenty-four (24) inch-box tree at minimum. 
4.  Irrigation Systems. Irrigation systems shall be maintained in a fully functional manner as approved by the city and required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.38 - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
20.38.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes off-street parking requirements in order to: 
A.  Provide a sufficient number of off-street parking spaces for all land uses; 
B.  Provide for functional off-street parking areas that are safe for vehicles and pedestrians; 
C.  Ensure that parking areas are well-designed and contribute to high-quality design environment within Merced; 
D.  Allow for flexibility in off-street parking requirements to support a multi-modal transportation system and sustainable development pattern; and, 
E.  Ensure that off-street parking areas do not adversely impact land uses on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.020 - Applicability. 
A.  New Structures and Uses. All new structures and uses shall comply with the standards in this chapter, including the amount of required off-street parking as specified in Table 20.38-1 (Off-Street Parking Requirements). 
B.  Changes in Existing Structures and Uses. 
1.  Additional parking shall be required for a change in use or any modification to an existing structure that results in an increase in the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of required off-street parking as specified in Table 20.38-1 (Off-Street Parking Requirements). 
2.  Additional off-street parking shall be required only to accommodate the incremental change or expansion of the structure or use. Additional parking shall not be required to remedy parking deficiencies existing prior to the change to an existing structure or use. 
3.  Additional parking for nonresidential uses is not required if the parking needed to accommodate the change is either: 
a.  Two (2) or fewer parking spaces; or, 
b.  Ten (10) percent or less of the total required off-street parking spaces for the use. 
Table 20.38-1 Off-Street Parking Requirements 
Land Uses 	Number of Required Parking Spaces 
RESIDENTIAL LAND USES 
Caretaker's Home 	1 per unit 
Duplexes 	1.75 spaces per each unit up to 30 units and 1.5 spaces per each unit thereafter 
Group Homes and Facilities 	1 per unit plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office and other nonresidential areas 
Group Housing 	1 per unit 
Live/Work Units 	1.75 per unit 
Mobile Home Parks 	1 per unit and 1 per office or employee 
Multiple Family Dwellings/Condominiums 	1.75 spaces per unit of 2 bedrooms or less up to 30 units and 1.5 spaces per unit thereafter, plus 0.5 spaces per additional bedroom over 2 in each unit and 1.0 spaces per additional full or partial bathroom over 3 in each unit 
Residential Care Facilities, Small 	1 per unit 
Residential Care Facilities, Large (Includes Convalescent/Nursing Homes) 	1 per 4 beds; plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Secondary Dwelling Units ("Second Units") 	One or two bedrooms: 1 per unit; 
Three or more bedrooms: 2 per unit 
Single Family Dwellings 	1 per unit 
Single-Room Occupancy 	1 per unit 
Transitional/Supportive Housing 	1 per 4 beds plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office and other nonresidential areas 
PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC LAND USES 
Cemeteries, Mausoleums, Funeral Parlors, and Mortuaries 	1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of largest assembly area without fixed seats 
Colleges and Trade Schools 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of classroom area or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Community Assembly 	1 per 3.5 fixed seats, or 1 per 60 sq. ft. of assembly area for uses without fixed seats 
Cultural Institutions 	
Day Care Centers 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area used for daycare and 1 per employee 
Day Care Home Facilities, Small (1-8 children) 	1 per unit 
Day Care Home Facilities, Large (9-14 children) 	1 per unit plus 1 per employee 
Drug Rehabilitation Center 	1 per 6 beds plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office or other nonresidential floor area 
Emergency Shelters 	1 per 10 beds plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office or other nonresidential floor area 
Government Offices 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
Hospitals 	1 per bed up to 100 beds; 1 per 2 beds for up to next 100 beds; 1 per 4 beds thereafter 
Medical Offices and Clinics 	1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 
Public Safety Facilities 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. and 2 additional parking spaces for station vehicles 
Schools, Public or Private 	2 per classroom or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Social Assistance Services 	1 space per 300 square feet of floor area 
COMMERCIAL LAND USES 
Adult Entertainment Businesses 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
Alcoholic Beverage Sales, Retail 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 
Animal Sales and Services 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
Banks, Retail 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Bars and Nightclubs 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of floor area used for dancing or 1 per 2.5 seats, whichever is greater 
Bed and Breakfast 	1 per bedroom plus 2 for owner plus 1 for each employee on largest shift 
Building Supplies and Home Improvement Stores 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 
Business Support Services 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 
Card rooms/Gaming Establishments 	1 per 2.5 seats 
Check Cashing Establishments 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 
Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales 	1 per 350 sq. ft. of floor area 
Equipment Sales and Rental 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per vehicle for sale or rent 
Flea Market 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of display/sales area or 1 per booth, whichever is greater 
Food and Beverage Sales 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 
Furniture and Appliance Stores 	1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per vehicle used in the conduct of business 
Gas and Service Stations 	3 spaces plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of retail sales area 
Hotels and Motels 	1 per sleeping unit or suite up to 100 units, 1 per each 2 units for each unit thereafter 
Mobile Home Sales 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area, but in no case less than 6 spaces, plus 1 for each mobile home for sale 
Mobile Vending 	2 per motorized coach, none required for pushcarts 
Office, Professional 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 
Pawn Shops 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
Personal Services 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per employee, whichever is greater 
Restaurant, Full Service 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor seating area or 1 for each 2.5 seats, whichever is greater 
Restaurant, Limited Service 	
Retail, General 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 
Vehicle Sales and Rental 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area; for outdoor vehicle sales lots, 3 per lot 
Vehicle Parts and Accessories Sales 	
Vehicle Repair and Maintenance 	
INDUSTRIAL LAND USES 
Contractors' Facilities 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 
Maintenance and Repair Services 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per 2 employees on the largest shift, whichever is greater; and 1 per vehicle used in the conduct of business 
Manufacturing and Processing, General 	
Manufacturing and Processing, Heavy 	
Manufacturing and Processing, Light 	
Public/Mini Storage 	1 per 50 storage units or 5 spaces, whichever is greater 
Recycling Collection or Processing Facilities 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
Research and Development 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per 2 employees on the largest shift, whichever is greater; and 1 per vehicle used in the conduct of business 
Warehousing, Wholesaling and Distribution 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per 2 employees on the largest shift, whichever is greater 
RECREATIONAL LAND USES 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	1 per 3.5 fixed seats or 1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area used by customers, whichever is greater 
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 	1 per 3.5 fixed seats or 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area used by customers, whichever is greater 
Golf Courses 	3 per hole plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office or other retail area 
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	25 per ball field plus 5 spaces per acre of active recreational area 
Sports Stadium or Arenas or Theaters 	1 per 4 seats or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of floor area if no fixed seats 
AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES LAND USE 
Agricultural Processing, On-Site 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area for all habitable buildings associated with the use, or 1 per each 2 employees on the largest shift, whichever greater 
Animal Processing, On-Site 	
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND UTILITIES LAND USES 
Airports and Heliports 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area of enclosed passenger terminal area 
Freight Terminals 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area 
Parking Facilities 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area used by employees or 1 per employee whichever is greater 
Utilities, Major 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area, plus 1 per vehicle required to service each facility 
Utilities, Minor 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area for habitable buildings 
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.030 - Required parking spaces. 
A.  Number of Spaces. All land uses shall provide a minimum number of off-street parking spaces as specified in Table 20.38-1 (Off-Street Parking Requirements), except as provided in Section 20.38.050 (Parking Reductions). 
B.  Unlisted Uses. 
1.  The director of development services shall determine the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for land uses not listed in Table 20.38-1 based on the requirements for the most comparable use in this chapter or an analysis of parking requirements for similar uses in other jurisdictions or state or national standards. 
2.  Off-street parking requirements for unlisted land uses shall be based on the parking requirements of similar uses in Table 20.38-1. 
3.  The director of development services may require the preparation of a parking demand study at the expense of the applicant to determine the parking requirement for unlisted uses. 
C.  Mixed or Multiple Uses. When more than one (1) land use is conducted on a parcel, the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the number of parking spaces required for each individual use. 
D.  Unknown Uses. 
1.  The director of development services shall determine the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for nonresidential "shell" structures with no identified tenants. 
2.  Off-street parking requirements for nonresidential "shell" structures shall be based on anticipated tenants for the structures, as determined by the director. 
E.  Units of Measurement. 
1.  For the purpose of this chapter, "floor area," in the case of offices, merchandising or service types of uses, means the gross floor area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale or merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes such as incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, for show windows, for restrooms, for utilities, or for dressing rooms, fitting rooms, or alteration rooms. Unless additional information is provided by the applicant, these "non-public areas" will be assumed to be fifteen (15) percent of the total gross floor area and will not be used in calculating floor area for parking purposes. 
2.  In indoor or outdoor places of assembly in which spectators or patrons occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each twenty (20) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining off-street parking facilities. 
3.  When units of measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in requirements of a fractional space, fractions of spaces over one-half (½) shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
F.  Conforming Status. Structures or uses established prior to the effective date of the zoning ordinance shall not be deemed nonconforming by reason of providing fewer off-street parking spaces than required by Table 20.38-1. However, no such structure or use may further reduce the number of provided off-street parking spaces below the requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Additional Required Parking. The planning commission may require more off-street parking than required by Table 20.38-1 if the commission determines that additional parking is needed to serve the proposed use and to minimize adverse impacts on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.040 - General requirements. 
A.  Availability and Use of Spaces. 
1.  Required parking spaces shall be permanently available and maintained for parking purposes for the use they are intended to serve. 
2.  Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having control of the operation of a use for which parking spaces are required shall not prevent or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces. 
3.  Required parking spaces shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be used for the sale, lease, display, repair, advertising, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Location of Parking. 
1.  Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve, except as allowed by subsection C below. 
2.  When the required off-street parking for a one-family or two-family structure in any R district is not to be provided in a covered garage or carport, each required car space shall be so located that it may later be covered by a garage or carport structure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Off-Site Parking. 
1.  For multi-family housing and nonresidential uses, the site plan review committee may approve off-site parking if it finds that practical difficulties prevent the parking from being located on the same lot it is intended to serve. 
2.  Off-site parking shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the use it is intended to serve or another reasonable distance as determined by the site plan review committee. 
3.  If off-site parking is approved, a covenant record, approved by the city attorney, shall be filed with the county recorder. The covenant record shall require the owner of the property where the off-site parking is located to continue to maintain the parking space so long as the building, structure, or improvement is maintained within the city. This covenant shall stipulate that the title and right to use the spaces shall not be subject to multiple covenants or contracts for use, or termination, without prior written consent of the city. 
D.  Parking for Persons with Disabilities. 
1.  Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in compliance with California Code of Regulations Title 24. 
2.  Parking spaces required for the disabled shall count toward compliance with the number of parking spaces required by Table 20.38-1. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.050 - Parking reductions. 
The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces as specified in Table 20.38-1 may be reduced as described below. 
A.  Shared Parking. Multiple land uses on a single parcel or development site may use shared parking facilities when operations for the land uses are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when hours of peak use differ. Requests for the use of shared parking may be approved if: 
1.  A parking demand study approved by the director of development services demonstrates that there will be no substantial conflicts between the land uses' principal hours of operation and periods of peak parking demand; 
2.  The total number of parking spaces required for the land uses does not exceed the number of parking spaces anticipated at periods of maximum use; 
3.  The proposed shared parking facility is located no further than four hundred (400) feet from the primary entrance of the land use which it serves; and, 
4.  A covenant record as described in Section 20.38.040.C.3 shall be recorded. 
B.  Common Parking Facilities. Common parking facilities, public or private, may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained in this chapter, provided, the total of such off-street parking facilities, when used together, shall not be less than the sum of the various uses computed separately. Such common facilities shall be approved by the planning commission with a conditional use permit, and the planning commission may grant a reduction in the total required parking for the uses by no more than fifteen (15) percent. 
C.  Low Demand. The number of parking spaces may be reduced if the land use will not utilize the required number of spaces due to the nature of the specific use, as demonstrated by a parking demand study approved by the director of development services. 
D.  Transportation Demand Management Plan. The number of parking spaces may be reduced by the director of development services up to twenty (20) percent if the project applicant prepares a transportation demand management plan which demonstrates a reduction in the demand for off-street parking spaces by encouraging the use of transit, ridesharing, biking, walking, or travel outside of peak hours. 
E.  Bus Stop/Transportation Facility Credit. The number of parking spaces may be reduced by up to five (5) percent for commercial or multiple-family development projects within four hundred (400) feet of a City-approved bus stop. If a commercial or multiple-family development project is located within four hundred (400) feet of a transit center, the project may reduce parking spaces by up to ten (10) percent. 
F.  Mixed-Use Projects. A mixed-use project with commercial and residential units may reduce parking requirements by up to thirty (30) percent as demonstrated by a parking demand analysis approved by the director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.060 - Parking assessment districts. 
If a parking assessment district has been established, a fee may be paid to the city in lieu of providing required off-street parking within the district. 
A.  Exception for Parking Districts. Property located within a district in which special assessments have been or are to be levied for providing public off-street parking shall not be required to provide off-street parking facilities for the ground floor of any such structure. 
B.  Special Assessment Financing. 
1.  In any special assessment proceedings for financing the cost of public off-street parking facilities, any improved property shall be granted a credit against the assessment to be levied, in such ratio as the city Council shall determine, for any improved customer, owner, tenant or employee parking spaces or reasonable access areas. 
2.  In determining the amount of assessment credit, the area of credit shall be improved in accordance with this code. If not so improved at the time of granting the credit, the owner shall cause the area to be so improved within sixty (60) days thereafter, or otherwise the credit shall be removed. A parking space is defined as an area of eight and one-half (8½) by twenty (20) feet in dimension. The determination of the city council as to the amount of "reasonable access" shall be final. 
3.  Areas used for parking of delivery vehicles or other commercial or industrial vehicles, and open areas used for storage or otherwise in the operation of the business, shall not be included in any area of credit. Any area for which a credit for parking is granted shall remain subject to the requirements of this chapter for providing off-street parking. 
C.  In-lieu Parking Fee. In lieu of providing off-street parking within a special assessment parking district, an owner may pay to the city a sum equal to one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per parking space, which money shall be deposited in a special fund and used for providing, improving or maintaining off-street parking facilities in said district. 
D.  Additions to Parking Districts. 
1.  Each owner of a property not included within a district in which special assessments are levied for providing public off-street parking, but within four hundred (400) feet of a public parking lot located within such a district, may pay a participation fee to defray the cost of providing required off-street public parking facilities, in exchange for the benefits and the responsibilities of inclusion in said district. Upon payment of the participation fee as provided in Section 20.38.060.D.2 and continuing payment of assessments imposed by the district, the owner of the subject property shall not be required to provide off-street parking facilities for the ground floor of any structure on the property, and may also pay in-lieu parking fees as provided in Section 20.38.060.C. 
2.  The participation fee shall be deposited in a special fund and used for providing, improving, or maintaining off-street parking facilities in said district. The amount of participation fee shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Participation fee = (Basic Charge + Cost Index) 
b.  "Basic charge" is ninety (90) cents per square foot of the subject property, and two hundred forty-five dollars ($245.00) per front foot of the subject property, measured as the subject property's frontage along the public right-of-way with the highest traffic volume. 
c.  "Cost index" is the most current cost index (calculated on an annual basis based on the previous year's Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers, published by the U.S. Department of Labor), multiplied by the total square foot and front foot of the subject property. In the event of discontinuation of such index, the index most closely resembling said index. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.070 - Parking design and development standards. 
A.  Dimensions. The minimum required dimensions for off-street parking spaces shall conform to the latest edition of the city's Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structures. However, all parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width. 
B.  Compact Spaces. 
1.  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of required off-street parking spaces may be compact spaces. 
2.  All parking spaces for compact cars shall be clearly marked with the word "Compact" either on the wheel stop or curb, or on the pavement at the opening of the space. 
C.  Parking Access. The required dimensions for driveways providing access to off-street parking spaces shall conform to the latest edition of the city's Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structures. 
Figure 20.38-1 Example of 90-Degree Parking Space Dimensions
 
D.  Surfacing. 
1.  All permanent parking spaces and drive aisles shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or other all-weather surface per the latest edition of the city's Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structures. 
2.  Permeable paving materials, such as porous concrete/asphalt, open-jointed pavers, and turf grids, are a permitted surface material, subject to approval by the city engineer. 
E.  Tandem Parking Spaces. Tandem parking spaces may be permitted for all residential land uses, provided that they comply with the following standards: 
1.  Parking spaces in a tandem configuration shall be reserved for and assigned to a single dwelling unit. 
2.  All required guest parking shall be provided as single, non-tandem parking spaces. 
3.  Tandem parking spaces shall not block the use of the drive aisle to access other parking spaces located within the parking area. 
4.  Tandem parking spaces shall be used to accommodate passenger vehicles only. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  General Standards. All landscaping within parking areas shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 20.36 (Landscaping) in addition to the standards within this section. 
2.  Landscaping Defined. Except as otherwise specified in this section, landscaping and landscaped areas shall consist of drought-tolerant plant materials, including any combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover. 
3.  Parking Lot Standards. As illustrated in Figure 20.38-2 (Parking Lot Landscaping Standards), the following landscaping standards, as well as the standards in the city's Standard Designs of Common Engineering Structures, shall apply to parking lots containing six (6) or more parking spaces. All landscape areas shall have an irrigation system. 
Figure 20.38-2 Parking Lot Landscaping Standards
 
a.  Interior Landscaping. All areas within a parking lot not utilized for parking spaces or access/circulation shall be landscaped with plantings with drought-tolerant, non-invasive species. 
b.  Shade Trees. 
(1)  One (1) shade tree shall be provided for every six (6) parking spaces, or portion thereof, in a parking lot in addition to street trees. 
(2)  Shade trees shall be a minimum fifteen (15) gallon box in size and shall provide a minimum thirty (30)-foot canopy at maturity. 
(3)  Shade trees shall be of a type that can reach maturity within fifteen (15) years of planting and shall be selected from a city-approved list of canopy tree species suitable for the valley climate. 
(4)  Shade trees shall be arranged in a parking lot to provide maximum shade coverage (based on a thirty (30)-foot canopy) on August 21. The arrangement should approximate nearly fifty (50) percent shade coverage at noon on August 21 within fifteen (15) years of planting. 
(5)  The above standards may be modified with a minor use permit if alternative shade structures (including solar carports) are provided. Design standards for such shade structures shall be approved as part of the minor use permit process as well. 
4.  Concrete Curbs 
a.  All landscape areas shall be separated from parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways by a raised concrete curb. Raised concrete curbs shall be a minimum of six (6) inches high by six (6) inches deep. 
b.  The city may approve alternatives to raised concrete curbs as needed to comply with any mandatory storm water drainage standards. 
5.  Parking Space Landscaping. A maximum of two (2) feet at the front end of a parking space may be landscaped in lieu of paving surface. 
6.  Timing. Landscaping shall be installed prior to the city's authorization to occupy any buildings served by the parking area, or prior to the final inspection for the parking lot, unless otherwise approved by the director of development services. 
G.  Lighting. 
1.  A parking area with six (6) or more parking spaces shall include outdoor lighting that provides a minimum illumination of 1.0 foot candles over the entire parking area or as otherwise required by the building code. 
2.  Outdoor lighting as required by Subsection G.1 above shall be provided during nighttime business hours. 
3.  All parking space area lighting shall be energy efficient and designed so that any glare or spillage is directed away from residential properties. 
4.  All fixtures shall be hooded. 
H.  Pedestrian Access. Parking lots shall include pedestrian walkways in compliance with American with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements and the California Building Code. 
I.  Screening. Parking lots of six (6) spaces or more shall comply with the following screening standards, unless otherwise approved with a minor use permit. 
1.  Location. Screening with a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be provided along the perimeter of parking lots fronting a public or private street or abutting a residential zone. 
2.  Height. 
a.  Screening adjacent to streets shall have a minimum height of two and one-half (2½) feet. 
b.  Screening abutting a residential zoning district shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet, except in required setback areas, where the minimum height shall be four (4) feet. 
c.  Commercial parking lots abutting residential zoning districts shall have a solid wall with a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
3.  Materials. Required screening may consist of one (1) or more of the following materials: 
a.  Low-profile walls constructed of brick, stone, stucco or other durable material with graffiti-proof coating materials or landscaping/vines. 
b.  Evergreen plants that form an opaque screen. 
c.  An open fence combined with landscaping to form an opaque screen. 
d.  A berm landscaped with ground cover, shrubs, or trees. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.080 - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Applicability. All multi-family and nonresidential land uses shall provide bicycle parking as specified in this section and in accordance with Sections 20.38.020 (Applicability) and 20.38.030 (Required Parking Spaces), except for the following uses: 
1.  Gas and service stations 
2.  Maintenance and repair services 
3.  Vehicle repair 
4.  Vehicle sales and rental 
5.  Wholesaling 
6.  Construction and material yards 
7.  Warehousing and distribution 
8.  Other similar uses as determined by the director of development services. 
B.  Types of Bicycle Parking. 
1.  Short-Term/Class II Bicycle Parking. Short-term/Class II bicycle parking provides shoppers, customers, and other visitors who generally park for two (2) hours or less a convenient and readily accessible place to park bicycles. 
2.  Long-Term/Class I Bicycle Parking. Long-term/Class I bicycle parking provides employees, residents, visitors and others who generally stay at a site for several hours a secure and weather-protected place to park bicycles. 
C.  Bicycle Parking Spaces Required. The number of required bicycle parking spaces shall be as specified in Table 20.38-4 (Required Bicycle Parking Spaces). 
Table 20.38-4 Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
	Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Land Use 	Short-Term Spaces 	Long-Term Spaces 
Multi-Family Dwellings of 6 units or more, Group Housing, and Single Room Occupancy 	10% of required automobile parking spaces; minimum of 2 spaces 	1 per 10 units; minimum of 2 spaces 
Non-Residential Uses 	8% of required automobile spaces, minimum of 2 spaces 	8% of required automobile spaces for uses 10,000 sq. ft. or greater; minimum of 2 spaces 
 
D.  Short-Term/Class II Bicycle Parking Standards. Short-term bicycle parking shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the primary entrance of the structure or use it is intended to serve, be readily visible to passers-by, and at least twenty-five (25) percent of required short-term bicycle parking spaces shall be covered. 
E.  Long-Term Bicycle Parking Standards. Following standards shall be recommended for long-term bicycle parking: 
1.  Location. Long-term bicycle parking shall be located in highly visible, well-lighted areas that are convenient to the street and users. 
2.  Cover. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of required long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be covered. 
3.  Parking Facilities. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must be secure and may include: 
a.  Covered, lockable enclosures with permanently anchored racks for bicycles; or, 
b.  Lockable bicycle rooms or areas with permanently anchored racks; or, 
c.  Lockable, permanently anchored bicycle lockers. 
F.  Parking Space Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum dimensions of two (2) feet by six (6) feet shall be provided for each bicycle parking space (illustrated in Figure 20.38-3). 
2.  An aisle of at least five (5) feet shall be provided behind all bicycle parking to allow room for maneuvering. 
3.  Two (2) feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, polls, landscaping, pedestrian paths, and other similar features. 
4.  Four (4) feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent automobile parking spaces and drive aisles. 
G.  Rack Design. Bicycle racks must be capable of locking both the wheels (one (1) wheel with a U-type lock), providing at least two (2) points of contact with the frame of the bicycle, and supporting bicycles in an upright position. "Inverted U" bicycle racks are highly recommended. 
H.  Cover. Required cover for bicycle parking spaces shall be permanent, designed to protect the bicycle from sun and rainfall, and be at least seven (7) feet above the floor or ground. 
Figure 20.38-3 Short-Term/Class II Bicycle Parking Dimensions
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.38.090 - Off-street loading. 
A.  Applicability. All retail, restaurant, hotel, warehousing, manufacturing, hospitals, laundry, and similar uses that involve the frequent receipt or delivery of materials or merchandise shall provide off-street loading spaces consistent with the requirements of this section. 
B.  Number of Loading Spaces. The minimum number of required loading spaces shall be as specified in Table 20.28-5 (Required Loading Spaces). 
Table 20.38-5 Required Loading Spaces 
Total Gross Floor Area 	Required Loading Spaces 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	None 
5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. 	1 
Greater than 25,000 sq. ft. 	2 plus 1 per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. 
 
Figure 20.38-4 Off-Street Loading
 
C.  Location. 
1.  Required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve. 
2.  A formal agreement among property owners shall be required and recorded if an immediately adjacent lot is used as required loading spaces. 
3.  No loading space shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to a residential zone, unless the loading space is wholly enclosed within a building or screened by a solid wall not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
D.  Dimensions. 
1.  Each loading space shall have minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet wide, thirty-five (35) feet long, and fourteen (14) feet in vertical clearance. 
2.  Deviations from the minimum dimensions standards may be approved by the director of development services if the spatial needs are less than the minimum required due to the truck size and type that will be utilized in the operation of a specific business. 
E.  Design and Configuration. 
1.  Loading spaces shall be configured to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and not within adjacent public rights-of-way. 
2.  Sufficient maneuvering area shall be provided for loading spaces so that vehicles may enter and exit an abutting street in a forward direction. 
3.  Loading spaces and their associated maneuvering areas shall not encroach into required employee or visitor parking areas or other on-site areas required for vehicle circulation. 
4.  Loading spaces shall be striped and clearly identified as for loading purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.40 - SMALL LOT SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES 
 
20.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of small lot single-family home provisions is to allow for increased flexibility in the design of new residential development in a manner that increases housing choices for residents, utilizes land resources efficiently, and ensures a high quality neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.40.020 - Location. 
Small lot single-family homes may be proposed in residential planned development (RP-D), inner village residential (R-IV), outer village residential (R-OV), and low medium density residential (R-2) zoning districts. The city may determine that a proposed small lot single-family home subdivision is not allowed where public facilities and services are insufficient for the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.40.030 - Permits required. 
Small lot single-family homes shall require approval of a conditional use permit. All subdivisions of land shall receive permits and approvals required by Title 18 (Subdivisions) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.40.040 - Use regulations. 
A small lot single-family home may be developed with only those uses allowed in the zoning district applicable to the site. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.40.050 - Development standards and guidelines. 
A.  Basic Standards. 
1.  Development standards for small lot single-family homes shall be established for each development with the approval of the conditional use permit. In general, small lot single-family homes should comply with the city's most recent edition of the Small Lot Single-Family Home Design Guidelines , Table 20.40.050 (Development Standards for Small Lot Single-Family Homes), and other standards and guidelines in this chapter, unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. The Guidelines provide for two (2) types of lots: 
a.  PD-1-4 Designation: Lots between forty (40) feet and fifty (50) feet in width 
b.  PD-1.3 Designation: Lots between less than forty (40) feet but no less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
2.  Small lot single-family homes shall also comply with Section 20.22.040 (Urban Residential Overlay Zone) if those same individual residential building types (as illustrated in Figures 20.22-1 through 20.22-11) are proposed, unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. 
B.  Parking Standards 
1.  All required parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front property line and/or sidewalk, whichever is closer. 
2.  Shared driveway access between two (2) adjacent parcels is allowed when the garages are set back behind the primary residential unit or recessed so the home's entry elevation retains a dominant visual appearance. 
3.  Two (2) on-site parking spaces shall be provided per unit with at least one (1) being covered. Spaces in the driveway shall count toward this requirement. 
C.  Other Standards and Guidelines. Small lot single-family homes should comply with the guidelines for façade design, open space, service area, lane (alley), parking configurations, driveway access, fencing, public streets, and architectural features in the city's most recent edition of the Small Lot Single-Family Home Design Guidelines , available under separate cover from the city planning division, unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. 
Table 20.40.050 Development Standards for Small Lot Single-Family Homes 
	PD-1-3 	PD-1-4 	Additional 
Standards 
Lot and Density Standards (Minimums) 
Lot Area 	3,000 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 	- 
Lot Width 	30 ft. 	40 ft. 	- 
Lot Width (Corner Lots) 	35 ft. 	45 ft. 	
Lot Depth 	65 ft. 	75 ft. 	
Primary Structure Standards 
Setbacks (min.) 	As determined through the Conditional Use Permit Process. 
Height (max.) 
 Feet 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	Section 20.62.020 
 Stories 	3 	3 	Section 20.62.020 
Lot Coverage 	60% 	60% 	- 
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.42 - SECOND UNITS 
 
20.42.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for the location and construction of second units (also known as "secondary dwelling units") in conformance with Government Code Section 65852.2. These standards are intended to allow for second units as an important form of affordable housing while preserving the character and integrity of residential neighborhoods within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.42.020 - Minor use permit required. 
Approval of a minor use permit is required prior to the establishment of any second unit or a subdivision with multiple second units. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.42.030 - Site and design standards. 
A.  Location. Second units shall be permitted in residential zoning districts as provided in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). 
B.  Site Requirements. 
1.  Second units that comply with this chapter shall be permitted on all legally established residential parcels, regardless of parcel size. 
2.  A second unit may only be established if a single-family dwelling unit ("primary dwelling") exists on the parcel or is being built at the same time. 
C.  Maximum Number Permitted. 
1.  Only one (1) second unit shall be allowed on a single parcel. 
2.  A second unit is not permitted on parcels already containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
D.  Size. 
1.  Attached Second Units. The floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the living area of the primary dwelling or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater. Garages and carports are excluded from floor area calculations for both the primary dwelling and second unit. 
2.  Detached Second Units. The floor area of a detached second unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, excluding any space devoted to a carport or garage. 
E.  Relationship to Primary Dwelling. 
1.  A second unit may be within, attached to, or detached from the primary dwelling. Attachment to the primary dwelling shall be by sharing a common interior wall or common roof. 
2.  A second unit shall have its own kitchen, bathroom facilities, and entrance separate from the primary dwelling. 
3.  The secondary unit shall be clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling by size, appearance, and location on the parcel. 
F.  Development Standards. 
1.  A second unit shall comply with all current development and design standards of the general plan and zoning ordinance that are applicable to the primary dwelling, including, but not limited to, building setbacks, parcel coverage, building height, and architectural design. 
2.  The secondary dwelling unit in compliance with this section shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located and shall be deemed to be a residential use which is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot. 
3.  No lot line adjustment, subdivision of land, air rights or condominium shall be allowed to enable the sale, transfer, or disposal of the second unit independently of the primary dwelling unit or any portion of the property. This stipulation shall be included in a recorded deed restriction on the property. 
4.  The secondary dwelling unit must be eligible to receive city sewer and water services. 
G.  Design Requirements. 
1.  A second unit shall be compatible with the primary dwelling and the surrounding neighborhood with respect to structure height, scale, and massing. 
2.  The architectural design and detailing, roof color and material, and exterior color and finish materials of a second unit shall match the primary dwelling. 
3.  The parcel shall retain a single-family appearance and the second unit shall be integrated into the design of the existing improvements of the property. 
4.  The addresses of both the primary dwelling and the second unit shall be displayed and clearly visible from the street. 
H.  Parking 
1.  Second units with one (1) or two (2) bedrooms shall provide one (1) additional off-street parking space in addition to those spaces required for the primary dwelling. 
2.  If the second unit has three (3) or more bedrooms, two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to those spaces required for the primary dwelling. 
3.  The creation of a second unit through the conversion of all or a portion of a garage is prohibited unless replacement parking is provided elsewhere on the property in conformance with required parking standards as defined in Chapter 20.38 (Parking and Loading). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.42.040 - Occupancy standards. 
A.  Owner Occupancy. The owner of a parcel occupied by a second unit shall reside in either the primary dwelling or the second unit. 
B.  Deed Restrictions. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a second unit, a covenant of restriction to run with the land shall be recorded which specifies that the second unit cannot be sold separately, transferred, or otherwise disposed of independently from the primary dwelling unit that the property owner shall reside in either the primary or second unit, and that these restrictions shall be binding on successors in ownership. 
C.  Other Requirements. 
1.  Prior to occupancy of the second unit, a new address shall be assigned by department of development services. 
2.  A new second unit shall be required to pay all applicable fees, including impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.44 - SPECIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS 
 
20.44.010 - Alcoholic beverage sales for off-premises consumption. 
A.  Permit Required. A conditional use permit is required for any use with alcoholic beverage sales for off-premises consumption with a building size less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
B.  Findings. To approve a conditional use permit for a use with alcoholic beverage sales for off-premises consumption, the city shall make all of the following findings in addition to the findings in Section 20.68.020 (Conditional Use and Minor Use Permits): 
1.  The proposed use will not result in an "undue concentration" of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages as defined in Sections 23958 and 23958.4 of the California Business and Professions Code and giving consideration to the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control's guidelines related to the number and proximity of such establishments within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the site. 
2.  The proposed use shall not adversely affect the economic and societal welfare of the pertinent community or residentially zoned community in the area of the city involved, after giving consideration to the distance of the proposed use from residential zoning districts, churches, schools, hospitals, playgrounds, public parks, or any other similar uses as determined by the director of development services. 
3.  The proposed use shall not significantly adversely affect the crime rate in the area of the proposed site. Particular attention shall be given to those crimes involving public drunkenness, the illegal sale or use of narcotics, drugs or alcohol, disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.020 - Food trucks in fixed locations. 
A.  Location. Food trucks (or "mobile food vendors") that park in fixed locations, instead of being "street and sidewalk vendors" as defined in Chapter 5.54 (Street and Sidewalk Vendors), are only permitted in zoning districts as shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts) and planned developments with those same designations. A "fixed location" is considered to be parked on any one (1) parcel for more than one (1) hour a day. 
B.  Permits Required. A site plan review permit or conditional use permit is required for all food trucks that park in a fixed location as shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts) or in planned developments with a conditional use permit. Such permits are required for each location if there are multiple locations. 
C.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Number per Parcel. Only one (1) food truck shall be allowed per developed site and shall not be allowed on vacant parcels without another permitted use operating on the site, unless otherwise approved by conditional use permit as part of a food truck parking area as defined in Subsection 7 below. 
2.  Hours of Operation. Food trucks shall be operated only between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily, unless otherwise approved by site plan or conditional use permit. 
3.  Parking and Access. Food trucks shall only be allowed in parking lots which are paved and striped to city standards. Each food truck shall provide parking as required in Chapter 20.38 (Parking and Loading) and shall not utilize parking spaces required for another permitted use on the site. Food trucks shall not block driveways or parking aisles. 
4.  Maintenance. The site shall be maintained free of trash and debris at all times and provision shall be made for refuse collection containers for patrons. 
5.  Advertising. All signage shall be contained on the catering vehicle. No A-frame signs, banners, flags, or moving or portable signs shall be permitted for the use anywhere on or off the site. 
6.  Licenses. Food trucks shall comply with all city business license requirements as well as all requirements of the Merced County Health Department, including provisions for food safety, approved commissary, and employee restrooms (no portable toilets allowed). 
7.  Establishment of Multiple Food Truck Parking Areas. With a conditional use permit in any zoning district which permits food trucks, parking areas for multiple food trucks may be established. The city may require permanent seating, shelters, refuse containers, and other amenities with the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.030 - Bed and breakfast. 
A.  Permits Required. A conditional use permit is required to establish a bed and breakfast in any zoning district as provided in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). 
B.  Owner Occupancy. The owner shall reside on the premises of a bed and breakfast, and separate owner's quarters shall be maintained. 
C.  Maximum Accommodation. The maximum number of rooms to accommodate overnight guests shall not exceed twelve (12). 
D.  Meals. Meals may be provided to overnight guests only. 
E.  Parking. Off-street parking to be provided in accordance with Chapter 20.38 (Parking and Loading). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.040 - Check cashing/payday loan establishments. 
A.  Location. 
1.  Check cashing/payday loan establishments are only permitted in zoning districts as shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). 
2.  Check cashing/payday loan establishments shall not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of another check cashing/payday loan establishment. 
B.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Hours of Operation. Check cashing/payday loan establishments shall be operated only between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. No loitering shall be permitted during, before, and after hours of operation. 
2.  Transparency. No windows or doors fronting public streets shall be obscured in any way, and adequate interior lighting shall be provided to be visible from the businesses across the street. 
3.  Security Plan. A security plan, reviewed and approved by Merced Police Department, shall be submitted with other submittal materials for city permits. 
4.  Lighting Plan. On-site lighting plan shall be required upon submittal for city permits. On-site lighting plan shall ensure safety and security of the property, including parking and access areas. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.050 - Community gardens. 
A.  Location. Community gardens are only permitted in zoning districts as shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). 
B.  Required Permits. A site plan review or conditional use permit per the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts) shall be required before applying for a building permit for construction of a community garden. 
C.  Applicant. An applicant shall be a public entity, civic organization, or community-based organization, which would manage and maintain community gardens. 
D.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Owner's Agreement. The applicant shall be required to bring a signed affidavit from the property owner, if applicant is not the owner. 
2.  Hours of Operation. The community gardens shall only be operated between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily. 
3.  Animals Prohibited. No animals, including bees and fish, shall be allowed to be housed in community gardens. Only produce, plants, or flowers shall be allowed to grow in community gardens. Marijuana plants are prohibited. 
4.  Commercial Activities. On-site sale of community garden products shall be prohibited, unless located in a commercial zone or as otherwise authorized by a site plan or conditional use permit. 
5.  Lighting Plan. On-site lighting plan shall be required upon submittal for a city permit. On-site lighting plan shall ensure safety and security of the property, including parking and access areas. 
6.  Maintenance. Community gardens shall be maintained free of weeds, trash, and debris. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.060 - Fraternities/sororities. 
A.  Permit Required. A conditional use permit is required to establish and operate fraternity and sorority houses. 
B.  Application Materials. In addition to materials required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements), an application for a fraternity or sorority house shall include the following materials: 
1.  Annual report of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all fraternity and sorority officers residing at the fraternity or sorority house and two (2) community sponsors. Such a report shall be submitted to the city in October of each year. 
2.  Written authorization from the property owner granting the applicant permission to operate a fraternity or sorority house on the property. 
3.  A copy of the adopted by-laws and regulations and registration showing proof of being a campus organization for the fraternity or sorority. 
4.  The application shall be signed by an officer of the fraternity or sorority and shall contain an acknowledgment that all state and local laws and ordinances must be complied with, including but not limited to, the Merced Municipal Code regarding trash and recyclables collection area, signs, parking and noise. 
C.  Performance Standards. 
1.  Noise. Any fraternity or sorority houses shall comply with the noise element of Merced General Plan. 
2.  Public Nuisance. Any fraternity or sorority houses shall maintain the premises and operate in compliance with Chapter 8.40 (Nuisance), Chapter 9.64 (Disruptive Parties and Gatherings on Private Property), and Chapter 9.65 (Hosting Parties Where Alcohol is Consumed by Persons Under the Age of 21 on Private Property) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
3.  Occupancy. The maximum number of residents permitted shall be based on building code requirements. 
4.  Revocation. The city council may revoke the conditional use permit if found that such establishment degrades the health and safety of the public or creates a nuisance per the provisions of Chapter 8.40 (Nuisance). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.070 - Gas and service stations. 
A.  Minor Repair Permitted. 
1.  Minor automobile repairs are permitted on the premises of a gas and service station. Examples of minor automobile repairs include detailing services, quick lube services, and tire and battery sales and installation. Major automobile repairs, including body repair and painting, are prohibited, unless otherwise permitted in that zoning district (Part 2). See Chapter 20.90 for definitions of minor and major repair. 
2.  Incidental sales of products, accessories, and services directly related to minor automobile repair services are permitted as are general convenience goods. 
3.  All automobile services and repairs shall be done in a completely enclosed building. 
B.  Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. 
1.  Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, if the retail outlet is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in building size. 
2.  Standards. Uses engaged in the concurrent sale of alcoholic beverages and gasoline or diesel fuel shall comply with the following performance standards: 
a.  No alcohol shall be displayed within five (5) feet of the cash register or the front door. 
b.  No advertisement of alcoholic beverages shall be displayed on motor fuel islands, in landscaped areas, or outside the building. 
c.  No self-illuminated advertising for alcoholic beverages shall be located on buildings or windows. 
d.  No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-up window. 
e.  No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub. 
f.  Employees shall be at least twenty-one (21) years old to sell alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.080 - Live/work. 
A.  Limitations on Use. 
1.  Nonresidential uses of a live/work unit shall be only those uses that are allowed within the applicable zoning district. 
2.  A live/work structure shall be occupied only by the business operator and family or employees and family. Live/work structures shall serve primarily as a business with accommodations for living space. 
3.  Exclusive residential use is not allowed in a live/work unit. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are not permitted as part of a live/work unit: 
1.  Adult entertainment businesses. 
2.  Vehicle sales, service, maintenance, or repair. 
3.  Welding, machining, or open-flame work, unless approved with a minor use permit. 
4.  Manufacturing or processing activities, unless approved with a minor use permit. 
5.  Any use that might affect the health or safety of nearby residents or associated with hazardous materials and other uses determined incompatible by the director of development services because of their potential to create dust noise, vibration, noxious gases, odors, smoke, or any other negative impacts are not permitted in live/work units. 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Floor Area Requirements. The minimum floor area of the live/work unit shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. A maximum of fifty (50) percent of this space shall be reserved for work space; the rest reserved for occupancy. 
2.  Access. Each unit shall be clearly separate from other units and any different uses which may be in the structure should be accessed from common public access areas, corridors, halls, and/or public sidewalks. 
3.  Commercial or Industrial Use. The design of live/work units shall be similar to structures occupied by commercial or industrial uses commonly found in the vicinity of the live/work units. 
D.  Operating Standards. 
1.  Occupancy. Living space and working space shall not be separately rented or sold separately as a residential space for persons not working on the premises or as a place of business for persons not living on the premises, but both uses shall be occupied by the same persons, the business operator and family or employee and family. 
2.  Business License. The operator and resident of a live/work space shall maintain at all times a valid City of Merced business license. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.090 - Recycling facilities. 
A.  Permits Required. Permits required for recycling facilities are shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). In considering a permit for a recycling facility, the city shall make the following findings: 
1.  The recycling facility will not have a detrimental effect on the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  Conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance, operation, color, signs, and site planning for the protection of adjacent properties and public interest have been imposed. 
B.  Reverse Vending Machines. 
1.  Accessory Use Only. Reverse vending machines are allowed only as an accessory use to a commercial, industrial, or public use permitted in the applicable zone. 
2.  Maximum Allowed. Maximum of three (3) machines allowed per site. 
3.  Location. If located outside of a structure, reverse vending machines shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance to the primary structure on the parcel and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation or occupy required on-site parking spaces. 
4.  Size. Reverse vending machines shall occupy no more than one hundred (100) square feet of floor space per unit, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  Signs. The maximum sign area shall be one (1) square foot per unit, exclusive of operating instructions, and shall be located on the unit. 
C.  Small Collection Facilities. 
1.  Location. 
a.  Small collection facilities shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zoning district. 
b.  Small collection facilities shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way and shall not interrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
2.  Size. A small collection facility shall occupy no more than five hundred (500) square feet of area. 
3.  Screening. All outdoor storage and centralized refuse storage and collection areas shall be enclosed with a solid six-foot-high fence; the latter shall be covered. 
4.  Operating Standards. Small collection facilities shall not use power-driven processing equipment and shall only accept glass, metal, plastic containers, paper, and reusable items. Sites shall be maintained free of trash, loose debris, and graffiti at all times. 
5.  Noise. Noise level shall not exceed 60 dBA when measured at the closest residential property; otherwise, noise level shall not exceed 70 dBA. 
6.  Hours of Operation. Small collection facilities shall be attended and operate only between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily. 
D.  Large Collection Facilities. 
1.  Location. A large collection facility shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from a residential zone. 
2.  Size. A large collection facility is defined as occupying five hundred (500) square feet of area or more. 
3.  Screening. Large collection facilities shall be enclosed in a structure or screened from view by an opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
4.  Operating Standards. Power-driven processing shall not produce dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration in excess of ambient levels. Sites shall be maintained free of trash, loose debris, and graffiti at all times. 
5.  Hours of Operation. Large collection facilities shall be attended and operate only between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily. 
E.  Recycling Processing Facilities. 
1.  Location. Parcels occupied by a recycling processing facility shall not abut or be located across the street from a residential zone and shall be limited to the C-G, I-L, and I-H zoning districts only. 
2.  Allowed Activities. Baling, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding, sorting, and repairing are allowed. Only beverage and food containers and paper/cardboard may be baled, compacted, or shred. 
3.  Exterior Storage. Exterior storage of material shall also be located in sturdy storage containers or be enclosed. 
4.  Screening. Processing facilities shall be enclosed in a structure or screened from view by an opaque fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  Operating Standards. Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration shall not exceed ambient levels. Sites shall be maintained free of trash, loose debris, and graffiti at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.100 - Outdoor displays of merchandise. 
A.  Minor Use Permit Required. A minor use permit is required for any permanent outdoor display of merchandise, including propane exchange displays and automated retail, water, or movie rental vending machines. 
B.  Standards. Outdoor displays of merchandise shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Displayed items shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Movable sale items (not vending machines) shall be displayed only during operating hours of the primary commercial use. Items shall be removed from display and moved into a permanently enclosed structure upon close of business, unless otherwise stated on the approved minor use permit. 
3.  Items shall be located on the same parcel as the associated primary use and shall not be placed within any permanent landscaped area, required parking space, or loading area. 
4.  No items shall be displayed within the public right-of-way. 
5.  Display areas shall not be placed in a location that would cause a safety hazard, obstruct the entrance to a building, encroach upon driveways, or otherwise create hazards for pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
6.  Display areas shall have at least four (4) feet of clear space and comply with any other Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements at all times. 
7.  Automated retail, water, or movie rental vending machines shall occupy no more than twenty-five (25) square feet of floor space per machine or display. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.110 - Photovoltaic energy systems and public utility distribution lines. 
A.  Applicability. Regulations and standards in this section only apply to photovoltaic energy systems for onsite use only. 
B.  Permitted in all Zoning Districts. Photovoltaic energy systems are permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory structure. 
C.  Standards. Photovoltaic energy systems shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Ground-mounted photovoltaic solar panels shall meet the height and setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Ground-mounted photovoltaic solar panels should be screened from public view. 
3.  Roof-mounted photovoltaic solar panels shall meet the height requirement of the designated zoning district, but may be allowed to extend higher in accordance with the California Building Code. 
4.  Whenever feasible, photovoltaic solar panels should be integrated into the structure design as one of its architectural elements. 
5.  Photovoltaic solar panels shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the National Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, and the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability as well as all applicable building code requirements. 
6.  If determined to increase efficiency or performance of photovoltaic solar panels and not adversely impact public health and safety, the director of development services may modify standards in this section through a minor use permit. 
7.  Solar carports can be approved by a minor use permit, which could allow modifications to the above standards. 
D.  Public Utility Distribution Lines. Public utility distribution and transmission lines, if underground, shall be permitted in all zoning districts without a zoning permit as are small public utility structures, such as transformers. However, overhead lines shall require a conditional use permit in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.120 - Single room occupancy. 
A.  Location. A single-room occupancy (SRO) use, including college dormitories, shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any other SRO use or emergency shelter, unless such use is located within the same building, on the same lot, or on the same college campus. 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  SRO units shall have a minimum size of one hundred (150) square feet and a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
2.  Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons. 
3.  SRO uses shall provide adequate exterior security lighting. 
4.  Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one (1) washer and one (1) dryer for every twenty (20) units or fractional number thereof, with at least one (1) washer and dryer per floor. 
5.  An SRO unit is not required to, but may contain, partial or full bathroom facilities. 
a.  A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink and bathtub, shower, or bathtub/shower combination. 
b.  If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the currently adopted building code for congregate residences with at least one (1) full bathroom per ten (10) units or one (1) per floor, whichever is greater. 
6.  A partial or full kitchen facility may be provided in each unit, but is not required. 
a.  A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator and stove, range top, or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one (1) of these appliances. 
b.  If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided with at least one (1) full kitchen per floor. If meals are provided, one (1) large cafeteria or dining facility may substitute for the individual kitchens. 
7.  Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet. 
8.  Each SRO unit shall comply with all requirements of the currently adopted building code, and all units and common areas shall meet applicable accessibility and reasonable accommodation requirements. 
C.  Management Standards. 
1.  An SRO facility with ten (10) or more units shall provide on-site management. 
2.  An SRO facility with less than ten (10) units may provide a management office off-site. 
D.  Tenancy. Tenancy of SRO units shall not be for less than thirty (30) days. 
E.  Existing Structure. An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the provisions of this section. Any such conversion must bring the entire structure up to current building code standards, including accessibility and adaptability standards, unless otherwise exempted by the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.130 - Underground storage tanks. 
A.  Location Requirement. All underground storage tanks (except for those that store only water) shall be located a minimum of four hundred fifty (450) feet away from any parcel containing a city water well. 
B.  Exemption. Underground storage tanks existing prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 2220 (effective date of January 6, 2006) shall be exempted from the above requirements. 
C.  Removal or Relocation. When leakage is discovered from tanks located within four hundred fifty (450) feet of any parcel with a city water well, then the leaking tank shall be removed immediately and relocated away from any city water well site in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.140 - Wrecking and salvage establishments. 
A.  General Requirements. All wrecking and salvage establishments shall be in compliance with Chapter 5.32 (Wrecking Establishments) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
B.  Permits. A conditional use permit is required to establish or operate any wrecking and salvage establishments. 
C.  Location Standards. 
1.  Wrecking and salvage establishments shall be only located in C-G, C-T, I-L, and I-H zoning districts. 
2.  Wrecking and salvage establishments shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zoning district, churches, schools, hospitals, playgrounds, public parks, and any other similar uses as determined by the director of development services. 
3.  No wrecking and salvage establishments shall be located within one hundred (100) feet from any highway right-of-way unless the area is zoned industrial or used for industrial uses. 
D.  Performance Standards. Wrecking and salvage establishments shall comply with the following performance standards: 
1.  Noise. Operation shall be in compliance with standards in the noise element of the Merced General Plan. 
2.  Vibration. No vibration of the ground shall be permitted beyond the property line. 
3.  Screening. 
a.  Wrecking and salvage establishments shall be conducted entirely behind a solid wall or board fence not less than eight (8) feet high, but may be higher per the requirements of Chapter 20.30 (Walls and Fences). Materials shall not be stored above the height of the wall or fence. 
b.  The planning commission may require, among other special considerations, a planted barrier of evergreen trees. 
4.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
5.  Cleanup. In case of a revoked or denied permit, applicant shall clean up the site properly within six (6) months of the decision date. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.150 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Permits. Emergency shelters are principally-permitted uses in the C-G zone. Permits required in other zones are shown in the land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts). 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  Beds. The maximum number of beds on a property is two hundred (200). 
2.  Parking. Off-street parking is required as shown in Section 20.38 (Parking and Loading). 
3.  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided in all parking, pedestrian paths, and entry areas and shall be shielded and reflected away from adjacent uses. 
4.  Management/Security. Adequate management, support staff, and security must be present during the hours of operation, with a minimum of one (1) supervisory staff member, and one (1) employee of the same gender as clients. 
5.  Length of Stay. The maximum length of stay shall be no longer than that established by the California Health and Safety Code for emergency shelters. 
6.  Outdoor Activity. Outdoor activity shall be allowed only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
7.  Pets. If pets are allowed, all pets shall be housed within the emergency shelter or within cages in a protected area. 
8.  Services. Supportive services may include counseling, medical services, showers, and laundry facilities within the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.160 - Tobacco sales prohibited near schools. 
A.  Prohibited within One Thousand (1,000) Feet of Schools and Other Youth-Oriented Facilities. New tobacco retailers (including the sale of cigarettes, cigars, e-cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, and all other tobacco products or paraphernalia restricted by the State of California for sale to minors) are prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel which is presently legally occupied by the following: 
1.  Any public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; 
2.  Playgrounds, parks, youth centers, city-owned and operated recreational facilities, and libraries. 
B.  Measurement and Exceptions. 
1.  Measurement. One thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the property boundary to the nearest point of the other property boundary. 
2.  Exceptions 
a.  The above prohibition does not apply to any tobacco retailer which is operating legally and continues to operate with a suspension of no more than ninety (90) days at its current location as of the date of this ordinance. 
b.  The above prohibition does not apply to a tobacco retailer which occupies in its entirety a building of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.44.170 - Regulation of commercial cannabis activities—Commercial cannabis business permit required. 
A.  Zoning Compliance and Commercial Cannabis Business Permit Requirements. Specific commercial cannabis businesses are allowed as a special use in the C-C, C-O, C-G, C-N, I-L and 1-H zoning districts and planned developments which have the equivalent general plan land use designations of those zones. Commercial cannabis activities are expressly prohibited in all other zones in the city. Commercial cannabis businesses shall apply for and conduct business only in the appropriate zones as described in Table 20.44-1 and the city's zoning ordinance as a requisite for obtaining a commercial cannabis business permit (CCBP). No commercial cannabis business may operate in the city without a commercial cannabis business permit. 
This land use table 20.44-1 shall be used to determine whether a cannabis business is not permitted—'X', or permitted 'P'. Any commercial cannabis business in the city shall also operate in compliance with the city's zoning ordinance. If a zoning district is not listed in the land use table in this section then the use is expressly not permitted. 
Commercial Cannabis Business Activities Use Type 	City of Merced Municipal Code Table 20.44-1 	Additional Specific Use Standards 
	Land Use Classification [4][5] 	C-C 
Zone 	C-O 
Zone 	C-G 
Zone 	C-N 
Zone 	I-L 
Zone 	I-H 
Zone 	
Commercial Cannabis Business Activities 	City of Merced Municipal Code Table 20.44-1 							Additional Specific Use Standards 
Use Type 	Land Use Classification [4][5] 	C-C Zone 	C-O Zone 	C-G Zone 	C-N Zone 	I-L Zone 	I-H Zone 	
Cultivator 	Greenhouse, Type A 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(i) 
Cultivator 	Greenhouse, Type B 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(i) 
Cultivator 	Greenhouse, Type C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(i) 
Nursery 	Greenhouse, Type D 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(i) 
Manufacturing 	Manufacturing, non-volatile 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(h) 
Manufacturing 	Manufacturing, volatile 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(h) 
Dispensary [1][2] 	Pharmaceutical, medical 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	Sec. 20.44.170(f) 
Dispensary [1][2] 	Retail, non-medical/combined 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	Sec. 20.44.170(f) 
Testing Laboratory 	No Retail 	P 	P 	P 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(j) 
Distribution [3] 	Freight/Transport 	X 	X 	P 	X 	P 	P 	Sec. 20.44.170(k) 
 
Footnotes: 
1.  Only five (5) dispensaries shall operate within the city limits. At least one (1) of those dispensaries shall also dispense medicinal cannabis goods. If state law allows medical and adult use dispensaries on the same premises, the city would allow a combined use, but in no case shall more than five (5) dispensaries of any kind be allowed within the city at any one time. 
2.  Dispensaries (medical or adult use) are prohibited in the city center area between 19th and 16th Streets and O Street and Martin Luther King Jr. Way, including properties fronting on either side of each of the above streets. 
3.  Only allowed in General Commercial (C-G) zones if it meets the provisions of Section 20.44.170 (K)(10). 
4.  If listed as "permitted" in a specific zone above, then that use is also "permitted" in Planned Development (P-0) zones that have the equivalent general plan land use designation as that zone. 
5.  No cannabis dispensary may be located within a 1,000-foot radius from a school or within a 600-foot radius from a day care center, youth center, library or public park that is in existence at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted to the city, as required in Merced Municipal Code Section 20.44.170(E)(3)(f). No cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, testing facility or any other commercial cannabis business facility may be located within a 600-foot radius from a school, day care center, youth center, library, or public park that is in existence at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted to the city, as required in Merced Municipal Code Section 20.44.170(E)(3)(f). 
Land use classifications: 
Greenhouse, Commercial A—Permitted cultivation area: zero (0) to five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
Greenhouse, Commercial B—Permitted cultivation area: five thousand and one (5,001) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Greenhouse, Commercial C—Permitted cultivation area: ten thousand (10,000) to twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet. 
Greenhouse, Commercial D—Permitted cultivation area: twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet. 
B.  Cultivation of Cannabis for Personal Use in Residential Zones. 
1.  When authorized by state regulations, an authorized resident shall be allowed to cultivate cannabis only in a private residence in a residential zone, only indoors, and only for personal use, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The cannabis cultivation area shall be located indoors within a residential structure and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and not exceed ten (10) feet in height, nor shall it come within twelve (12) inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting, nor shall it exceed the limits set forth in Section 20.44.170(B)(1)(j) below. Cultivation in a greenhouse or other legal accessory structure on the property of the residence, but not physically part of the home, is permitted as long as it is fully enclosed, secure, not visible from a public right-of-way, and meeting all requirements in this chapter. Additionally, all structures must meet setback, height limitations, and be constructed in accordance with all local requirements as well as all applicable building codes. 
b.  If the resident is not the property owner, they must have the property owner's express written authorization to conduct cannabis cultivation. Nothing contained herein shall limit the property owner's right to deny or revoke permission to allow cannabis cultivation as set forth by state law. 
c.  The use of gas products such as, but not limited to, C02, butane, methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas for marijuana or cannabis cultivation or processing is prohibited. 
d.  There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of cannabis cultivation outside the private residence from the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any marijuana or cannabis plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, and any light emanating from cultivation lighting. 
e.  The authorized resident shall reside full-time on the property where the cannabis cultivation occurs. 
f.  The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for cannabis cultivation. 
g.  The cannabis cultivation area shall be in compliance with the current adopted edition of the California Building Code including § 1203.4 Natural Ventilation or § 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation (or equivalent), as amended from time to time. 
h.  The building official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including, but not limited to, installation of fire suppression sprinklers. 
i.  The cannabis cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes. 
j.  No more than six (6) cannabis plants, mature or immature, for personal use, are permitted per residence for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter, unless permitted under state regulations. 
k.  Cannabis in excess of twenty-eight and one-half (28.5) grams produced by plants kept for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence not visible from the public right-of-way. 
i.  The authorized grower shall not provide any cannabis in any form to animals or any minors that are not authorized users under Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act or the Adult Use of Marijuana Act. Anyone found in violation shall be prosecuted pursuant to State regulations. 
ii.  Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited in all zones and districts of the city. 
C.  Definitions. The definitions are incorporated herein as fully set forth and are applicable to this section. All definitions are intended to comply with those set forth by the State of California for all commercial cannabis activities. 
1.  "Applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of a dispensary. 
2.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 14017 of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
3.  "Cannabis waste" means waste that is not hazardous waste, as defined in Public Resources Code section 40191, that contains cannabis and that has been made unusable and unrecognizable in the manner prescribed by the state. 
4.  "Canopy" means all of the following: 
a.  The designated area(s) at a licensed premises that will contain mature plants at any point in time; 
b.  Canopy shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable boundaries of all area(s) that will contain mature plants at any point in time, including all of the space(s) within the boundaries; 
c.  Canopy may be noncontiguous but each unique area included in the total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary such as an interior wall or by at least ten (10) feet of open space; and 
d.  If mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation. 
5.  "City" means the City of Merced. 
6.  "Commercial cannabis business permit (CCBP)" means a permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter to a commercial cannabis business. 
7.  "Commercial cannabis activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, distribution, delivery, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product, except as set forth in Section 19319 of the Business and Professions Code, related to qualifying patients and primary caregivers. 
8.  "Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in Vehicle Code section 260. 
9.  "Concentrated cannabis product" means a consolidation of cannabinoids made by dissolving cannabis in its plant form into a solvent. 
10.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
11.  "Customer" means a natural person twenty-one (21) years of age or over or a natural person eighteen (18) years of age or older who possesses a physician's recommendation. 
12.  "Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 1596.76, 1596.7915, 1576.750, and 1596.78. 
13.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under this division, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products. 
14.  "Delivery employee" means an individual employed by a licensed dispensary who delivers cannabis goods from the permitted dispensary premises to a medical cannabis patient or primary caregiver or qualified purchaser at a physical address. 
15.  "Dispensary" means a premises where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers cannabis or cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
16.  "Display" means cannabis goods that are stored in the licensed dispensary's retail area during the hours of operation. 
17.  "Display case" means container in the licensed dispensary retail area where cannabis goods are stored and visible to customers. 
18.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between entities licensed pursuant to the Medical and Adult Use of Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same. 
19.  "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
20.  "Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a fully-enclosed space within a building that complies with the California Building Code ("CBSC"), as adopted in the city, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBSC, that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, is accessible only through one (1) or more lockable doors, and is not visible from a public right-of-way. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two (2) inch by four (4) inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If indoor lighting or air filtration systems are used, they must comply with the California building, electrical, and fire codes as adopted in the city. 
21.  "Free sample" means any amount of cannabis goods provided to any person without cost or payment or exchange of any other thing of value. 
22.  "Greenhouse" means a facility in which plants are grown and is inclusive of facilities using solely artificial light and facilities using mixed-light. In order to be lawful and permitted in the city, a greenhouse must be a "fully enclosed and secure structure" as defined above in 20.44.170(C), Subsection 20. 
23.  "Indoors" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as that structure is defined above in 20.44.170(C), Subsection 20. 
24.  "License" means a state license issued under this division, and includes both an A-license and an M-license, as well as a testing laboratory license. 
25.  "Limited-access area" means an area in which cannabis goods are stored or held and which is only accessible to a licensee and the licensee's employees and contractors. 
26.  "Medical" or "medicinal" have the same meaning under the terms of this section. 
27.  "Medical cannabis goods" means cannabis, including dried flower, and manufactured cannabis products. 
28.  "Medical cannabis patient" is a person whose physician has recommended the use of cannabis to treat a serious illness, including cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other illness for which cannabis provides relief. 
29.  "Manufacturer" means a licensee that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
30.  "Manufacturing" or "manufacturing operation" means all aspects of the extraction and/or infusion processes, including processing, preparing, holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products. Manufacturing also includes any processing, preparing, holding, or storing of components and ingredients. 
31.  "Nonvolatile solvent" means any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent. For purposes of this chapter, a nonvolatile solvent includes carbon dioxide used for extraction, or as it may be defined and amended by the state. 
32.  "Operating hours" means the hours within a day during which a permitted retail sales outlet may allow qualified cannabis purchasers and primary caregivers to enter the dispensary premises and purchase cannabis goods. 
33.  "Owner" or "ownership interest" means an interest held by a person or entity who is an owner as defined by State of California commercial cannabis regulations or who has a financial interest in the commercial cannabis business of five percent (5%) or more. In the event an entity holds a financial interest in the commercial cannabis business of five percent (5%) or more, any person who holds a financial interest in said entity of five percent (5%) or more is also considered an "owner" of the commercial cannabis business. 
34.  "Package" and "packaging" means any container or wrapper that may be used for enclosing or containing any cannabis goods for final retail sale. "Package" and "packaging" does not include a shipping container or outer wrapping used solely for the transport of cannabis goods in bulk quantity to a licensee. 
35.  "Patient or qualified patient" shall have the meaning given that term by California Health and Safety Code and possesses a valid physician's recommendation. 
36.  "Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
37.  "Pest" means undesired insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, bird, vertebrate, invertebrate, weed, virus, bacteria, or other microorganism that is injurious to human health. 
38.  "Physician's recommendation" means a recommendation by a physician and surgeon that a patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
39.  "Premises" means the designated structure(s) and land specified in the application that are in possession of and used by the applicant or licensee to conduct the commercial cannabis activity. 
40.  "Pre-roll" means dried cannabis flower rolled in paper prior to retail sale. 
41.  "Primary caregiver" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code. 
42.  "Private security officer" has the same meaning as that term as defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code section 7574.01. 
43.  "Publicly owned land" means any building or real property that is owned by a city, county, state, federal, or other government entity. 
44.  "Purchase" means obtaining cannabis goods in exchange for consideration. 
45.  "Purchaser" means a person who is engaged in a transaction with a licensee for purposes of obtaining cannabis goods. 
46.  "Quarantine" means the storage or identification of cannabis goods, to prevent distribution or transfer of the cannabis goods, in a physically separate area clearly identified for such use. 
47.  "Retail area" means a building, room, or other area upon the licensed dispensary premises in which cannabis or other goods are sold or displayed. 
48.  "School" means those sites upon which full-time instruction in any of grades K through 12 is provided where the primary purpose is education, as determined in the sole discretion of the city council, and which are identified as a school on the city's official "list of schools" as provided in Section 20.44.170(E)(3)(f)(i). "School" does not include any private site upon which education is primarily conducted in private homes. 
49.  "Security monitoring" means the continuous and uninterrupted attention to potential alarm signals that can be transmitted from a security alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement. 
50.  "Selection panel" means the group consisting of the city manager, chief of police, and director of development services, or their designees, convened for the purpose of evaluating applicants based on the merit-based scoring system, and making recommendations to the planning commission with respect to issuance of commercial cannabis business permits. 
51.  "Sell," "sale," and "to sell" include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis is transferred from one (1) person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis goods pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis goods by a licensee to the licensee from whom such cannabis goods were purchased. 
52.  "Sublet" means to lease or rent all or part of a leased or rented property. 
53.  "State" means the State of California. 
54.  "Testing laboratory" means a facility, entity, or site that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, and that is accredited as operating to ISO standard 17025 by an accrediting body, and registered with the State Department of Public Health. 
55.  "Vehicle alarm system" is a device or series of devices installed to discourage theft of the commercial vehicle or its contents and is intended to summon general attention or to summon law enforcement as a result of an indication of an attempted breach of the commercial vehicle. 
56.  "Volatile solvent" means any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. Examples of volatile solvents include but are not limited to, butane, hexane, propane, and ethanol, or as it may be defined and amended by the state. 
57.  "Wholesale" means the sale of cannabis goods to a distributor for resale to one (1) or more dispensaries. 
58.  "Youth center" means any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club activities, video arcades with over ten (10) or more video games on the premises, or similar amusement park facilities, or as otherwise described in Health and Safety Code Section 11353.1(e)(2). 
D.  Compliance with State and Local Licensing Requirements. Any dispensary, cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, testing facility or any other commercial cannabis activity as defined by the State of California or the city shall operate in conformance with all regulations and standards set forth in this section of the Municipal Code to assure that the operations of the dispensary, cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, distribution facility, testing facility or any other commercial cannabis activity as defined by the State of California or allowed by the city are in compliance with local and state law and are established to mitigate any adverse secondary effects from its operations. 
Cannabis operators shall be required to obtain a state license once they become available, and shall comply with any applicable state licensing requirements, such as operational standards and locational criteria. 
Multiple cannabis uses and licenses proposed on any one site shall occur only if authorized by the state and the city and only if all uses proposed are allowed pursuant to the city's zoning code. 
E.  General Provisions for Commercial Cannabis Activities in the City of Merced. 
1.  Commercial Cannabis Business Permit Required. 
a.  Each business shall have a commercial cannabis business permit specific to the business activity defined by the state pertaining to that activity and whether the activity is medical or non-medical or any other commercial cannabis activity the state may define and as they may be amended. Following is a list of current license types: 
i.  Cultivation. 
ii.  Distribution. 
iii.  Manufacturing. 
iv.  Retail sales (dispensary). 
v.  Testing. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any commercial cannabis business without a commercial cannabis business permit. A cannabis business shall register and obtain a commercial cannabis business permit from the city prior to operation. The commercial cannabis business permit applicant shall pay an annual non-refundable regulatory fee in an amount and at a frequency established by the city council by resolution. 
c.  A copy of the commercial cannabis business permit shall be displayed at all times in a place visible to the public. 
d.  A commercial cannabis business permit shall be valid for one (1) year or until December 31 of each year, unless sooner revoked. In the event a commercial cannabis business permit is issued on or after October 1, said permit shall be valid until December 31 of the following calendar year. No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the above-referenced period. 
e.  A commercial cannabis business permit shall not be issued to an individual or a business entity owned or managed in whole or in part by an individual or a business entity employing an individual who has a previous conviction for or has entered a plea of nolo contendere/no contest to any of the following: 
i.  A felony offense listed in California Health and Safety Code Section 11590. 
ii.  A felony offense listed in California Penal Code Section 667.S(c). 
iii.  A felony offense listed in California Penal Code Sections 1197.2(c) or Section 1192.8. 
iv.  A felony or misdemeanor offense that substantially relate to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession. 
v.  A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement. 
vi.  A felony or misdemeanor offense involving the sale or giving to a minor of controlled substances, cannabis, alcohol, or tobacco. 
A commercial cannabis business permit may be issued, at the discretion of the city, to an individual with a conviction listed above provided a period of ten (10) years has elapsed in which the individual has remained free of criminal convictions or violations of parole or probation, and the individual has either obtained a certificate of rehabilitation pursuant to Penal Code Section 4852.01 or received expungement pursuant to California Penal Code Section 1203.4. 
f.  The commercial cannabis business permit shall be issued to the specific person/persons/entity listed on the cannabis permit application. 
g.  A commercial cannabis business permit is not transferable except under the terms of Merced Municipal Code Section 20.44.170(L)(7), and does not run with the land or with the business. 
2.  Maintenance of Records and Reporting. All records for the commercial cannabis business of the following activities shall be maintained and available to the city for at least seven (7) years. Records shall be produced within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by an authorized city representative: 
a.  The business shall obtain and maintain a valid seller's permit from the State Board of Equalization. 
b.  Financial records include, but are not limited to: bank statements, sales invoices, receipts, tax records, and all records required by the California State Board of Equalization under Title 18 California Code of Regulations Section 1968. 
c.  Personnel records, including each employee's full name, address, phone number, social security, or individual tax payer identification number, date of beginning employment, and date of termination of employment if applicable. 
d.  Training records, including, but not limited to, the content of the training provided and the names of the employees that received the training. 
e.  Contracts with other licensees regarding commercial cannabis activity. 
f.  Permits, licenses, and other local authorizations to conduct the licensee's commercial cannabis activity, including BOE sellers permit. 
g.  Security records. 
h.  Records shall be kept in a manner that allows the records to be produced for the city in either hard copy or electronic form, whichever the city requests. 
i.  Proof of building ownership or landlord letter acknowledging business type. 
j.  Proof of insurance. 
3.  Operational Standards for All Commercial Cannabis Business Activities. 
a.  Interior and exterior locations of the business property shall be monitored at all times by closed circuit cameras for security purposes. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the sufficient identification of any individual committing a crime on the location premises. Cameras shall record twenty-four (24) hours a day at a minimum of twenty (20) frames per second. 
b.  The applicant shall conduct and pay for any required CEQA reviews and analyses, and pay for all costs, including those of the city, associated with project review under CEQA. 
c.  The surveillance system storage device or cameras shall be transmission control protocol/TCP capable of being accessed through the internet by the Merced Police Department or their designee on request. 
d.  All controlled access areas, security rooms and all points of ingress/egress to limited access areas and all point of sale (POS) areas shall have fixed camera coverage capable of identifying activity occurring within a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Camera video recordings shall be maintained unaltered in a secure location for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days, and be available for inspection at any time. The city or law enforcement may request the recordings in connection with an investigation. If the recordings are not voluntarily provided, the city or law enforcement may seek a warrant or court order for the recordings. 
e.  All commercial cannabis businesses shall create and maintain an active account within the state's track and trace system prior to commencing any commercial cannabis activity. In the event of system failure, the business shall keep a hard copy record and transfer the information to the track and trace system within twenty-four (24) hours of the system being available. 
f.  No cannabis dispensary may be located within a 1,000-foot radius from a school or within a 600-foot radius from a day care center, youth center, library or public park that is in existence at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted to the city. No cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, testing facility or any other commercial cannabis business facility may be located within a 600-foot radius from a school, day care center, youth center, library, or public park that is in existence at the time the application for commercial cannabis business permit is submitted to the city. For purposes of this subsection only, a public park shall not include any park designated in Merced Municipal Code Section 9.70.030 as a bike path. The distance specified in this section shall be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of the sensitive use noted above to the closest property line of the lot on which the commercial cannabis business shall be located without regard to intervening structures. 
(i)  The city shall establish an official "list of schools" which are located within the city by resolution of the city council after a public hearing. Said list shall be updated on an annual basis on or before January 31 of each year, and/or whenever a commercial cannabis business permit for a dispensary becomes available. 
g.  No physical modification of the permitted premises is allowed without written prior permission by the city and payment of any additional fees required by the city. 
h.  All commercial cannabis activities shall provide adequate off-street parking and comply with the City of Merced Municipal Code requirements in Chapter 20.38 Parking and Loading, to service customers without causing negative impact. 
i.  The commercial cannabis business shall provide adequate handicapped parking per the requirements in the California Building Code. 
j.  The commercial cannabis business shall provide adequate interior and exterior lighting for safety and security as determined by the police chief or designee. 
k.  The commercial cannabis business shall minimize nuisances such as trash, litter, and graffiti. 
l.  Any and all signage, packaging, and facilities shall not be "attractive," as it is defined by the state, to minors. 
m.  All commercial cannabis facilities shall be required to provide an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result from its operations. This requirement at a minimum means that the facility shall be designed to provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the location is not detected outside the building, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the facility if the use occupies only a portion of a building. The air treatment system must also prevent the build-up of mold within the facility. 
n.  A permitted commercial cannabis business entity shall have one hundred eighty (180) days after permit issuance by the city to begin initial operations, unless otherwise approved by the development services director or designee. A permitted commercial cannabis business entity that remains inoperative for more than sixty (60) calendar days after initial operations begin shall be deemed "abandoned" and the permit shall be forfeited. A business may temporarily suspend operations for a period of time as may be reasonably required to affect upgrades, modifications, repairs, or other property issue mitigations as approved by the development services director or designee. 
o.  The cannabis business shall comply with all state and city regulations regarding testing, labeling and storage of all cannabis products. 
p.  The cannabis business shall meet all state and local regulations for the disposal of all cannabis materials and materials used in conjunction with processing, distributing and cultivating of cannabis as well as any unsold cannabis or cannabis products. 
q.  The cannabis business shall conform to all state regulations regarding the use of appropriate weighing devices. 
r.  The cannabis business shall conform to all state and local regulations regarding water usage. No liquids of any kind shall be discharged into a public or private sewage or drainage system, watercourse, body of water or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (California Administrative Code, Title 23, Chapter 3). 
s.  The cannabis businesses' electrical and plumbing shall comply with state and local regulations. 
t.  The cannabis business shall maintain a comprehensive general liability combined single occurrence insurance policy issued by an "A" rated insurance carrier in an amount no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) and naming the city as additional insured. 
u.  No free samples of any cannabis or cannabis product may be distributed at any time. 
v.  All agents, private security officers or other persons acting for or employed by a licensee shall display a laminated identification badge at least two (2) inches × two (2) inches in size, issued by the licensee. The badge, at a minimum, shall include the licensee's "doing business as" name and license number, the employees first and last name, and a color photo of the employee that shows the full front of the employee's face. 
w.  The commercial cannabis business shall have a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system which shall include all perimeter entry points and perimeter windows. 
x.  A licensee shall ensure a licensed alarm company operator or one (1) or more of its registered alarm agents installs, maintains, monitors and responds to the alarm system. The alarm company shall obtain a city business license. 
y.  Meet all state deadlines for applying for a state license and receive a state license within six (6) months after the date the state begins issuing licenses. This may be waived if the state has longer delays in issuing licenses of the type the commercial cannabis business seeks. The permittee must inform the city in writing within ten (10) days of receipt of a state license. Said notification shall be addressed to the director of development services or designee at 678 W. 18th St., Merced, CA 95340. 
z.  All persons hiring employees to engage in commercial cannabis activities shall document compliance with the following employee safety practices: 
i.  Emergency action response planning as necessary. 
ii.  Employee accident reporting and investigation policies. 
iii.  Fire prevention. 
iv.  Hazard communication policies, including maintenance of material safety data sheets. 
v.  Materials storage and handling policies. 
vi.  Personal protective equipment policies. 
vii.  Operation manager contacts. 
viii.  Emergency responder contacts. 
ix.  Poison control contacts. 
aa.  All persons with ownership interest; and all employees agents, officers or other persons acting for or employed by a permittee must be at least 21 (twenty-one) years of age. 
F.  Additional Regulations for Dispensary and Retail Sales of Cannabis. 
1.  Only five (5) dispensaries shall operate within the city limits, regardless of the location's compliance with any other section specified in this section. At least one (1) of those dispensaries shall also dispense medicinal cannabis goods. If state law allows medical and adult use dispensaries on the same premises, the city would allow a combined use, but in no case shall more than five (5) dispensaries of any kind be allowed within the city. 
2.  No retail cannabis facility may engage in check cashing activities at any time. 
3.  Only one (1) dispensary permit per person with ownership interest is allowed in the city. Any person with community property rights of an ownership interest is considered a person with ownership interest in this section. 
4.  Restrooms shall remain locked during business hours and not open to the public. 
5.  The total number of dispensaries in operation shall be determined based on the number of locations which have been issued a commercial cannabis business permit for a dispensary by the city. 
6.  Display of cannabis products shall be limited to only an amount necessary to provide a visual sample for customers. 
7.  At all times, when the cannabis dispensary is open to the public, the dispensary shall provide at least one (1) security guard who is registered with Bureau of Security and Investigative Services, and possesses a valid and current security guard registration card on their person while on-duty. 
8.  Security guards are permitted, but not mandated, to carry firearms. 
9.  All cannabis products available for sale shall be securely locked and stored. 
10.  The security guard and cannabis dispensary personnel shall monitor the site and the immediate vicinity of the site to ensure that patrons immediately leave the site and do not consume cannabis in the vicinity of the dispensary or on the property or in the parking lot. 
11.  Medical cannabis dispensaries shall maintain the full name, address and telephone number(s) of all patient members to whom the business provides medical cannabis, and a copy of a physician-issued recommendation card or state-issued card for all patient members. 
12.  Dispensaries shall also record on the video surveillance system point-of-sale areas and areas where cannabis goods are displayed for sale. 
13.  Any commercial cannabis retail or medical retail sales facility shall be open to the public a minimum of forty (40) hours per week, unless otherwise specified in the commercial cannabis business permit. 
14.  Hours of operation in Commercial Office (C-O) zones shall be limited to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. Pacific Time and no later than 7:00 p.m. Pacific Time. Hours of operation in all other zones shall be limited to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. Pacific Time and no later than 9:00 p.m. Pacific Time, unless zoning regulations specify more restrictive hours. 
15.  Exterior signage shall be limited to one (1) wall sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. Interior signage or advertising may not be visible from the exterior. No temporary signs (banners, A-frames, etc.) or window signs are allowed. 
16.  On-site consumption of cannabis or cannabis products is specifically prohibited on the premises at all times. The following information shall be provided on a sign posted in a conspicuous location inside the cannabis dispensary: "Smoking, ingesting or consuming cannabis on this property or within 100 (one hundred) feet of the business is prohibited." 
17.  An adult use license shall not sell cannabis products to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age on its premises, unless such licensee also holds a medicinal license and the licensee holds a CCBP for both adult use and medicinal cannabis. A medicinal licensee may sell cannabis products to and allow on the premises, any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who possesses a valid government issued identification card, and either a valid county-issued identification card under Section 11362.712 of the Health and Safety Code or a valid physician's recommendation for himself or herself or for a person for whom he or she is a primary caregiver. 
18.  Adequate signage shall clearly state that the city has not tested or inspected any cannabis product for pesticides, or other regulated contaminants, distributed at this location. 
19.  No recommendations from a doctor for medical cannabis shall be issued on-site. 
20.  Shipments of cannabis goods may only be accepted during regular business hours. 
21.  There shall be no on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco products, and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol or tobacco by patrons. 
22.  Inventory shall be secured and locked in a room, safe, or vault, and in a manner reasonably designed to prevent diversion, theft, and loss during non-business hours. 
23.  No cannabis product shall be visible from the exterior of the business. 
24.  All required labelling shall be maintained on all product, as required by state regulations, at all times. 
25.  The business shall post signs that spell out the "Prohibited Conduct Involving Marijuana and Marijuana Products" contained in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3 in a conspicuous manner on the business premises for the education of patrons. The city shall develop a standard format and content for such signs. 
26.  The use of vending machines (i.e. a machine that dispenses articles when a coin, bill, or token is inserted) to dispense cannabis is strictly prohibited. 
27.  No drive-through facilities shall be allowed and no cannabis shall be sold through a drive-through facility. 
G.  Additional Regulations for Commercial Cannabis Delivery Services. 
1.  Commercial cannabis deliveries may be made only from a commercial cannabis dispensary permitted by the city in compliance with this section, and in compliance with all state regulations. 
2.  All employees who deliver cannabis shall have valid identification and a copy of the dispensary's commercial cannabis business permit at all times while making deliveries. 
3.  All commercial cannabis businesses shall provide proof of insurance in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any and all vehicles being used to transport cannabis goods. 
4.  Deliveries may only take place during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily. 
5.  A customer requesting delivery shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of the delivery request and shall make it available upon request by the licensing authority and law enforcement officers, only as required by State regulations. 
6.  The following applies to all deliveries of cannabis products: 
a.  May only be made to a physical address in California; and 
b.  A licensed delivery employee shall not leave the State of California while possessing cannabis products. 
7.  A dispensary shall maintain a list of all deliveries, including the address delivered to, the amount and type of product delivered, and any other information and for the duration of time required by state regulations. 
8.  A cannabis business shall only deliver cannabis in aggregate amounts as ordered by the customer. A cannabis business shall ensure compliance with state delivery limits as they regard the amount of cannabis and cannabis products. 
9.  A manifest with all information required in this section shall accompany any delivery person at all times during the delivery process and delivery hours. 
10.  Any delivery method shall be made in compliance with state regulations and as it may be amended, including use of a vehicle that has a dedicated GPS device for identifying the location of the vehicle (cell phones and tablets are not sufficient). 
11.  The maximum limit of any cannabis goods carried by the delivery vehicle may not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) at any time. 
12.  Each delivery request shall have a receipt prepared by the dispensary with the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the licensed dispensary; 
b.  The name of the employee who delivered the order; 
c.  The date and time the delivery request was made; 
d.  The complete delivery address; 
e.  A detailed description of the cannabis goods requested for delivery including the weight or volume, or any accurate measure of the amount of cannabis goods requested; 
f.  The total amount paid for the delivery including any fees or taxes; and 
g.  At the time of the delivery, the date and time delivery was made, and the signature of the person who received the delivery. 
13.  The delivery business shall provide a flyer that spells out the "Prohibited Conduct Involving Marijuana and Marijuana Products" contained in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3 to all delivery customers. The city shall develop a standard format and content for such flyers. 
H.  Additional Requirements for Manufactured Cannabis Businesses. 
1.  A licensed cannabis manufacturing facility may conduct all activities permitted by the state. This includes, but is not limited to, volatile and non-volatile extractions, repackaging and relabeling, and infusions. 
2.  Any manufacturing activity that will be conducted by the licensee shall be included on the application. No additional manufacturing activity can be conducted without applying for and receiving written permission from the city for that additional activity. 
3.  At all times, the cannabis manufacturing facility will be compliant with all state regulations for cannabis manufacturing including Health and Safety Code 11362.775 and as it may be amended. 
4.  Inspections by the city fire chief or designee may be conducting anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
5.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities shall not contain an exhibition or product sales area or allow for retail distribution of products at that location. 
6.  All cannabis manufacturing activities shall occur indoors within a fully enclosed and secured structure and also within a secure fence at least eight (8) feet in height that fully encloses the premises. The fence must include a lockable gate(s) that is locked at all times, except for during times of active ingress/egress. Said fence shall not violate any other ordinance, code section, or provision of law regarding the height, location, materials, or other fencing restrictions and shall not be constructed or covered with plastic or cloth. All screening shall conform to the requirements of applicable area, community, specific and design plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing fencing requirements, the director of development services shall have the discretion to grant an exception in the event fencing which fully encloses the premises is impossible or impractical, and there are other appropriate security measures in place on the premises. Outdoor manufacturing of cannabis is expressly prohibited. 
I.  Additional Requirements for Cannabis Cultivation Businesses. 
1.  The cannabis business shall register with the department of pesticide regulation if using any pesticides. 
2.  From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of marijuana cultivation. 
3.  The building official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including, but not limited, to installation of fire suppression sprinklers. 
4.  Compliance with Section 13149 of Water Code as enforced by the State Water Resources Control Board. 
5.  All outdoor lighting used for security purposes shall be shielded and downward facing. 
6.  The use of generators for cultivation is prohibited, except for temporary use in the event of a power outage or emergency. 
7.  Cannabis plants shall not be visible from offsite or the public right-of-way. All cannabis cultivation activities shall occur within a fully enclosed and secured structure and within a secure fence at least eight (8) feet in height that fully encloses the premises. The fence must include a lockable gate(s) that is locked at all times, except for during times of active ingress/egress. Said fence shall not violate any other ordinance, code section, or provision of law regarding the height, location, materials, or other fencing restrictions and shall not be constructed or covered with plastic or cloth. All screening shall conform to the requirements of applicable area, community, specific and design plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing fencing requirements, the director of development services shall have the discretion to grant an exception in the event fencing which fully encloses the premises is impossible or impractical, and there are other appropriate security measures in place on the premises. Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited. 
J.  Additional Requirements for Cannabis Testing Laboratory Businesses. 
1.  A licensed cannabis testing facility shall comply with all state regulations. 
2.  Any cannabis testing facility shall maintain all certifications required by the state. 
3.  A licensed cannabis testing facility business, its owners and employees may not hold an interest in any other cannabis business except another testing business. 
4.  Inspections by the city fire chief or designee may be conducted anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
K.  Additional Requirements for Cannabis Distribution Businesses. 
1.  A licensed cannabis distribution facility shall comply with all state regulations. 
2.  Any cannabis distribution facility shall provide proof of a bond of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to cover the costs of destruction of cannabis or cannabis products if necessitated by a violation of licensing requirements. 
3.  Inspections by the city police chief or designee may be conducted anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
4.  A distributor shall ensure that all cannabis goods batches are stored separately and distinctly from other cannabis goods batches on the distributor's premises. 
5.  A distributor shall ensure a label with the following information is physically attached to each container of each batch: 
a.  The manufacturer or cultivator's name and license number; 
b.  The date of entry into the distributor's storage area; 
c.  The unique identifiers and batch number associated with the batch; 
d.  A description of the cannabis goods with enough detail to easily identify the batch; and 
e.  The weight of or quantity of units in the batch. 
6.  A distributor shall store harvest batches and edible cannabis products that require refrigeration at thirty-five (35) to forty-two (42) degrees Fahrenheit. In addition, a distributor shall store harvest batches in a darkened area with no more than sixty percent (60%) humidity. 
7.  A distributor shall store medical cannabis goods in a building designed to permit control of temperature and humidity and shall prevent the entry of environmental contaminants such as smoke and dust. The area in which medical cannabis goods are stored shall not be exposed to direct sunlight. A distributor may not store medical cannabis goods outdoors. 
8.  Employee breakrooms, eating areas, changing facilities, and bathrooms shall be completely separated from the storage areas. 
9.  All cannabis distribution activities shall occur within a fully enclosed and secured structure and within a secure fence at least eight (8) feet in height that fully encloses the distribution area. The fence must include a lockable gate(s) that is locked at all times, except for during times of active ingress/egress. Said fence shall not violate any other ordinance, code section, or provision of law regarding the height, location, materials, or other fencing restrictions and shall not be constructed or covered with plastic or cloth. All screening shall conform to the requirements of applicable area, community, specific and design plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing fencing requirements, the director of development services shall have the discretion to grant an exception in the event fencing which fully encloses the premises is impossible or impractical, and there are other appropriate security measures in place on the premises. 
10.  If located in a General Commercial (C-G) zone, 
a.  The cannabis distribution business shall be located on a parcel no less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size; and 
b.  All loading and unloading activities shall take place within the secured fenced area required above. 
L.  Commercial Cannabis Business Permit Selection Process. 
1.  Selection process for dispensaries/retail sales (limited number of permits available). 
a.  The commercial cannabis business permit selection process will be conducted in two (2) phases, Phase 1 and Phase 2. In Phase 1, each applicant interested in operating a commercial cannabis business will pay an application fee in an amount established by the city council by resolution. The application will be reviewed for completeness by the director of development services or designee. 
b.  A pre-application conference with the director of development services is strongly encouraged. A pre-application conference can be scheduled by calling 209-385-6858 during regular city business hours. 
c.  The city has established a merit based scoring system to objectively award permits as described in the application documents in Phase 2 to be used in the event that there are more applications than there are commercial cannabis business permits for a specific license type, such as for retail dispensaries. 
d.  The initial application period shall be twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the applications are released. Should the 21st day fall on a day when city hall is closed, the application period shall be extended to the next open day at 4:00 p.m. Following the application period, the director of development services or designee shall stop accepting applications and review all applications received as described in Phase 1. The director of development services or designee will evaluate the applications received and determine the eligibility of each application. Each application that is complete and in compliance with the application requirements in Phase 1 shall be placed on the "Qualified Commercial Cannabis Business Application List—Dispensaries/Retail Sales" and shall be notified in writing that they are a "Qualified Commercial Cannabis Business Applicant—Dispensaries/Retail Sales." The qualified applicants will be entered into the Phase 2 review process. 
e.  If any of the items listed in the application process are not met, the director of development services shall notify the applicant of the deficiency within thirty (30) calendar days, after which the applicant will have ten (10) calendar days from receipt of notice to correct the deficiency. Should the 10th day fall on a day when city hall is closed, the correction period shall be extended to the next open day at 4:00 p.m. If the deficiency is not corrected within ten (10) calendar days, the director of development services may deny the permit and notify the applicant of this determination in writing within ten (10) calendar days following the director of development services decision. 
f.  Commercial cannabis business permit—dispensaries/retail sales selection—phase 1—initial review. The director of development services or designee(s) shall determine whether each application demonstrates compliance with the minimum requirements and be placed on the "Qualified Applicant List for Dispensaries/Retail Sales" and entered into the Phase 2 review process. These requirements include but are not limited to: 
i.  All application documents required in the city's Phase 1 application package; 
ii.  Application was submitted during the application period; 
iii.  Application forms are filled out completely; 
iv.  Business owner(s)/applicant(s) referenced on the application provide a live scan that was conducted within fourteen (14) days prior to submitting the application; 
v.  Phase 1 application fee is paid; and 
vi.  A signed statement that the proposed location of the commercial cannabis business on the application meets the zoning criteria established in this section including, but not limited to, any and all sensitive use separation criteria required by this section. 
g.  Commercial cannabis business permit-dispensaries/retail sales selection—phase 2—final review and scoring. 
Phase 2 requirements include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Phase 2 application fee is paid and a comprehensive background check of any person or entity holding an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or more, is completed to the satisfaction of the chief of police. Upon completion of the comprehensive background check, the chief of police shall have the discretion to disqualify an applicant if any of the following are discovered: 
a.  Any civil judgment(s) against any owner for torts involving dishonesty, including, but not limited to, fraud, embezzlement, theft, and breach of fiduciary duties; 
b.  Any outstanding liens and/or judgments against any owner for unpaid state, federal, or local taxes; or 
c.  Any material misrepresentation made by the applicant in the application for a commercial cannabis business permit. 
In the event an applicant is disqualified by the chief of police as provided herein, the applicant shall be given written notice of the disqualification within (10) ten days of such decision. Thereafter, the application will be removed from the Phase 2 process. The decision of the chief of police shall be final and there shall be no further right to appeal said decision. 
ii.  The building official or designee has inspected all structures in which the use is located to determine that all applicable standards and requirements are met. If a building permit is required for site improvements, permit issuance will be deferred until a certificate of occupancy or other building permit approval is issued. Additionally, the building official has determined that there are no notices of nuisance or other code compliance issues recorded or on the property. 
iii.  The zoning administrator or designee has issued a provisional zoning clearance documenting compliance with the following: 
a.  The use is permitted in the zoning district; 
b.  The location of the cannabis business meets the distance requirements from sensitive uses; 
c.  All land use permits, if any, have been approved and all conditions of approval have been met or are in good standing; 
d.  No zoning violations exist on the property; 
e.  A planning and/or building permit with a receipt proving payment for processing from the city planning department for the property location the commercial cannabis business will occupy; and 
f.  The provisional zoning clearance shall be subject to final approval by the planning commission. 
iv.  The director of development services or designee, after reviewing the applications approved in Phase 1 and the aforementioned information, will convene a selection panel composed of the city manager, chief of police, and the director of development services, or their designees. The selection panel will review all application documents required in the city's phase 1 application package plus an additional background check of all owners conducted to the satisfaction of the chief of police, and individually score each application in accordance with the merit based scoring system established by resolution of the city council. A complete description of the merit based system and all merit based considerations shall be included with the application forms. An average score for each applicant based upon the merit based scoring of the selection panel shall be calculated and the applications shall be ranked from highest to lowest in accordance with the average score. The applications, in order of ranking, shall then be placed on the qualified commercial cannabis business application list—dispensaries/retail sales in the order of ranking. The selection panel will recommend the highest ranked applicant(s) on the qualified commercial cannabis business application list—dispensaries/retail to the planning commission for the issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit—dispensaries/retail sales. The number of applicants recommended to the planning commission by the selection panel shall be the same number of commercial cannabis business permits dispensaries/retail sales then available. 
a.  The qualified commercial cannabis business application list—Dispensaries/retail that was established on September 20, 2018, shall be valid until September 20, 2019. Should a new commercial cannabis business permit-dispensaries/retail become available, whether by creation of a new permit or by vacancy of an existing permit, before September 20, 2019, the highest ranking applicant on the qualified commercial cannabis business application list—dispensaries/retail shall be recommended to the planning commission for issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit-dispensaries/retail. The qualified commercial cannabis business application list-dispensaries/retail established on September 20, 2018, shall have no further force and effect after September 20, 2019 and the city shall have no further obligations to applicants on said list. 
b.  Should a commercial cannabis business permit—Dispensaries/retail become available after September 20, 2019, whether by creation of a new permit or by vacancy of an existing permit, then a new application period shall be opened as provided in Section 20.44.170(L)(1). 
c.  Except as provided in subsection 20.44.170(L)(1)(g)(iv)(a) above, the qualified commercial cannabis business application list—dispensaries/retail shall be valid for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the last available commercial cannabis business permit—dispensaries/retail is issued by the planning commission. The city shall have no further obligations to applicants on the qualified commercial cannabis business application list-dispensaries/retail after one hundred eighty (180) days have elapsed since the last available commercial cannabis business permit was issued. 
h.  Commercial cannabis business permit-dispensaries/retail sales selection—phase 2—planning commission. 
The planning commission will review the commercial cannabis business permit—dispensaries/retail sales application(s) recommended by the selection panel as provided herein, and all other relevant information, and determine if a CCBP should be granted, granted with conditions, denied, or modified. Prior to issuing a commercial cannabis business permit—dispensaries/retail sales, the planning commission will provide all public notices and conduct a public hearing as described in the City of Merced Municipal Code Section 20.70.010 through Sections 20.70.040. No commercial cannabis business permit—Dispensaries/retails sales shall be issued otherwise. 
2.  Selection process for all other commercial cannabis business permits (no limits on the number of permits available). 
a.  The commercial cannabis business permit—all other cannabis businesses selection process will be conducted in two (2) phases, Phase 1 and Phase 2. In Phase 1, each applicant interested in operating a commercial cannabis business will pay an application fee in an amount established by the city council by resolution. The application will be reviewed for completeness by the director of development services or designee. 
b.  A pre-application conference with the director of development services is strongly encouraged. A pre-application conference can be scheduled by calling 209-385-6858 during regular city business hours. 
c.  The initial application period shall be twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the applications are released. Should the 21 st day fall on a day when city hall is closed, the application period shall be extended to the next open day at 4:00 p.m. Following the application period, the director of development services or designee shall stop accepting applications and review all applications received as described in Phase 1. The director of development services or designee will evaluate the applications received and determine the eligibility of each application. Each application that is complete and in compliance with the application requirements in Phase 1 shall be placed on the "Qualified Commercial Cannabis Business Application List—All Other Cannabis Businesses" and shall be notified in writing that they are a "Qualified Commercial Cannabis Business Applicant—All Other Cannabis Businesses." The qualified applicants will be entered into the Phase 2 review process. The director of development services shall maintain the "Qualified Application List for All Other Cannabis Businesses." 
d.  If any of the items listed in the application process are not met, the director of development services shall notify the applicant of the deficiency within thirty (30) calendar days, after which the applicant will have ten (10) calendar days from receipt of notice to correct the deficiency. Should the 10th day fall on a day when city hall is closed, the correction period shall be extended to the next open day at 4:00 p.m. If the deficiency is not corrected within ten (10) calendar days, the director of development services may deny the permit and notify the applicant of this determination in writing within ten (10) calendar days following the director of development services decision. A new application, with new fees, would then be required for any subsequent consideration of that same or similar proposal at the same location. 
e.  Commercial cannabis business permit—all other cannabis businesses selection—phase 1—initial review. 
The director of development services or designee(s) shall determine whether each application demonstrates compliance with the minimum requirements and be placed on the "Qualified Applicant List for All Other Cannabis Businesses" and entered into the Phase 2 review process. These requirements include, but are not limited to: 
i.  All application documents required in the city's Phase 1 application package; 
ii.  Application was submitted during the application period; 
iii.  Application forms are filled out completely; 
iv.  Business owner(s) I Applicant(s) referenced on the application provides a live scan that was conducted within fourteen (14) days prior to submitting the application; 
v.  Phase 1 application fee is paid; and 
vi.  A signed statement that the proposed location of the commercial cannabis business on the application meets the zoning criteria established in this section including, but not limited to, any and all sensitive use separation criteria required by this section. 
f.  Commercial cannabis business permit—all other cannabis businesses selection—phase 2—final review 
Phase 2 requirements include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Phase 2 application fee is paid and a comprehensive background check of any person or entity holding an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or more, is completed to the satisfaction of the chief of police. Upon completion of the comprehensive background check, the chief of police shall have the discretion to disqualify an applicant if any of the following are discovered: 
a.  Any civil judgment(s) against any owner for torts involving dishonesty, including, but not limited to, fraud, embezzlement, theft, and breach of fiduciary duties; 
b.  Any outstanding liens and/or judgments against any owner for unpaid state, federal, or local taxes; or 
c.  Any material misrepresentation by the applicant in the application for a commercial cannabis business permit. 
In the event an applicant is disqualified by the chief of police as provided herein, the applicant shall be given written notice of the disqualification within ten (10) days of such decision. Thereafter, the application will be removed from the Phase 2 process. The decision of the chief of police shall be final and there shall be no further right to appeal said decision. 
ii.  The building official or designee has inspected all structures in which the use is located to determine that all applicable standards and requirements are met. If a building permit is required for site improvements, permit issuance will be deferred until a certificate of occupancy or other building permit approval is issued. Additionally, the building official has determined that there are no notices of nuisance or other code compliance issues recorded or on the property. 
iii.  The zoning administrator or designee has issued a provisional zoning clearance documenting compliance with the following: 
a.  The use is permitted in the zoning district; 
b.  The use meets the distance requirements from sensitive uses; 
c.  All land use permits, if any, have been approved and all conditions of approval have been met or are in good standing; 
d.  No zoning violations exist on the property; 
e.  A planning and/or building permit with a receipt proving payment for processing from the city planning department for the property location the commercial cannabis business will occupy; and 
f.  The provisional zoning clearance shall be subject to final approval by the planning commission. 
iv.  The director of development services or designee, after reviewing the applications approved in Phase 1 and reviewing the foregoing information will make a recommendation to the planning commission to approve or reject the application for the "commercial cannabis business permit for All Other Cannabis Businesses." 
g.  Commercial cannabis business permit—all other cannabis businesses selection—phase 2—planning commission. 
The planning commission will review the commercial cannabis business applications for all other cannabis businesses recommended by the director of development services and all other relevant information and determine if a CCBP should be granted, granted with conditions, denied, or modified. Prior to issuing a commercial cannabis business permit for all other cannabis businesses, the planning commission will provide all public notices and conduct a public hearing as described in the City of Merced Municipal Code Section 20.70.010 through Sections 20.70.040. No commercial cannabis business permit shall be issued otherwise. 
3.  Minor Modifications to Pending Application for Commercial Cannabis Business Permit (All Types). 
a.  Applicants may make a written request to the director of development services for a minor modification to a commercial cannabis business permit application at any point in the application process. 
b.  The director of development services shall have the discretion to approve minor modifications to the application. Minor modifications to an application include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  A change to the name of the proposed business and/or entity; 
ii.  A change in the organizational structure of a proposed business; 
iii.  A change of owner or ownership interest, provided that any change in ownership affecting a financial interest of five percent (5%) or more shall require a new and separate background investigation, payment of fees for the costs for investigation, and must meet the requirements of Section 20.44.170(E)(1)(e); 
iv.  A change in building elevations, floor plans, or site plans; 
v.  A change in operational procedures or security plans or procedures; 
vi.  Modifications to the parcel upon which the proposed commercial cannabis business will be located, provided that the modifications do not otherwise render the parcel nonconforming to the underlying zoning district standards. 
c.  The director of development services will review any proposed modifications to the application and shall provide a written determination within thirty (30) days from the day the written request is received by the city. The decision of the director of development services shall be final and there shall be no further right to appeal. 
4.  Appeal of Denial of Commercial Cannabis Business Permit (All Types). 
The planning commission will review the commercial cannabis Business applications and all other relevant information, and determine if a CCBP should be granted, as provided in Sections 20.44.170(L)(1)(h) and 20.44.170(L)(2)(g) herein. If the planning commission determines that the permit shall not be granted, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
a.  A written appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a planning commission decision. 
b.  When an appeal has been filed, the matter shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the city council within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. 
c.  Notice of the hearing of the appeal shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
d.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
e.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause. 
f.  The city council's review shall be a de novo review. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council will make its own determination to grant or deny the permit. The decision of the city council shall be the city's final decision in this regard and shall be dispositive of the matter subject to judicial review under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
5.  Commercial Cannabis Business Permit Annual Renewal (All Types). 
a.  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the director of development services at least sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the current permit. Any permittee allowing their permit to lapse or which permit expired during a suspension shall be required to submit a new application, pay the corresponding original application fees and be subject to all aspects of the selection process. 
b.  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of their respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the director of development services who will conduct a review. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by the city council to defray the cost of the review required by this section. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in their original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the director of development services in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed. The development services director, in consultation with the selection panel if they were involved in the original review, will review all commercial cannabis business renewal applications and all other relevant information, and determine if a renewal CCBP should be granted. 
c.  The director of development services or designee may deny the annual renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit if the permittee or the permittee's agent or employee has committed any one (1) of the following acts: 
i.  Any act which would be considered a ground for denial of the permit in the first instance; 
ii.  Violates any other provision of this section or any city or State law, statute, rule or regulation relating to the business's permitted activity; 
iii.  Engages in or permits misconduct substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the permittee; 
iv.  Conducts the permitted business in a manner contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public; 
v.  Fails to take reasonable measures to control patron conduct, where applicable, resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control problems occurring inside of or outside the premises, traffic control problems, or creation of a public or private nuisance, or obstruction of the operation of another business; 
vi.  Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit; or 
vii.  Fails to pay all applicable city, state, or federal taxes and fees. 
6.  Appeal of Denial of Commercial Cannabis Business Permit Renewal (All Types). 
a.  The development services director, in consultation with the selection panel if they were involved in the original review, will review all commercial cannabis business renewal applications and all other relevant information, and determine if a renewal CCBP should be granted. If the development services director determines that the permit shall not be granted, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the receipt of the written denial to correct the reasons for denial and request in writing reconsideration of permit issuance. Following review of the amended permit application, the development services director will approve or deny the permit by providing written notice to the applicant. 
b.  Any decision of the development services director may be appealed to the planning commission. An appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a decision by the director of development services. 
i.  When an appeal has been filed, the matter shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. 
ii.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
iii.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
iv.  The planning commission's review of the appeal shall be limited to review of the development services director decision and shall not be a de novo review. 
v.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause. 
vi.  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
a.  A written appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a planning commission decision. 
b.  When an appeal has been filed, the matter shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the city council within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. 
c.  Notice of the hearing of the appeal shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
d.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
e.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause. 
f.  The city council's review-shall be a de novo review. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council will make its own determination to grant or deny the permit. The decision of the city council shall be the city's final decision in this regard and shall be dispositive of the matter subject to judicial review under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
7.  Modifications to Commercial Cannabis Business Permit (All Types). 
a.  A commercial cannabis permit holder may make a written request to the director of development services for modification of an existing permit at any time. 
b.  The director of development services shall have the discretion to approve minor modifications to the permit. Minor modifications to an application include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  A change to the name of the proposed business and/or entity; 
ii.  A change in the organizational structure of a proposed business; 
iii.  A change of owner or ownership interest, provided that any change in ownership affecting a financial interest of five percent (5%) or more shall require a new and separate background investigation, payment of fees for the costs for investigation, and must meet the requirements of Section 20.44.170(E)(1)(e); 
iv.  A change in building elevations, floor plans, or site plans; 
v.  A change in operational procedures or security plans or procedures; 
vi.  Modifications to the parcel upon which the proposed commercial cannabis business will be located, provided that the modifications do not otherwise render the parcel nonconforming to the underlying zoning district standards. 
c.  Any change to the location of a commercial cannabis business after issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit may require a new application with payment of associated fees, at the discretion of the director of development services. Any change to the location of a commercial cannabis business shall be subject to approval by the planning commission. Prior to approval of a change in location of a commercial cannabis business, the planning commission will provide all public notices and conduct a public hearing as described in the City of Merced Municipal Code Section 20.70.010 through 20.70.040. 
d.  The director of development services will review any requests for modifications to the permit and shall provide a written determination within thirty (30) days from the day the written request is received by the city. The decision of the director of development services shall be final and there shall be no further right to appeal. 
8.  Revocation of Commercial Cannabis Business Permit (All Types). 
a.  The director of development services or designee may suspend or revoke a commercial cannabis business permit when the permittee or the permittee's agent or employee has committed any one (1) or more of the following acts: 
i.  Any act which would be considered a ground for denial of the permit in the first instance. 
ii.  Violates any other provision of this section or any city or state law, statute, rule or regulation relating to the business's permitted activity. 
iii.  Engages in or permits misconduct substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the permittee. 
iv.  Conducts the permitted business in a manner contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
v.  Fails to take reasonable measures to control patron conduct, where applicable, resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control problems occurring inside of or outside the premises, traffic control problems, or creation of a public or private nuisance, or obstruction of the operation of another business. 
vi.  Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
vii.  Fails to pay all applicable city, state, or federal taxes and fees. 
b.  Prior to suspension or revocation of the applicable permit, the director of development services shall conduct a hearing. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid. 
c.  Any decision of the development services director may be appealed to the planning commission. An appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a decision by the director of development services. 
i.  When an appeal has been filed, the matter shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the planning commission within thirty (30) days of receiving the appeal. 
ii.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
iii.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
iv.  The planning commission's review of the appeal shall be limited to review of the development services director decision and shall not be a de novo review. 
v.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause. 
vi.  The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
a.  A written appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a planning commission decision. 
b.  When an appeal has been filed, the matter shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the city council within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. 
c.  Notice of the hearing of the appeal shall be provided to the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
d.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
e.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause. 
f.  The city council's review shall be a de novo review. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council will make its own determination to grant or deny the permit. The decision of the city council shall be the city's final decision in this regard and shall be dispositive of the matter subject to judicial review under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
M.  Limitations on the City's Liability. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this section or the operation of any cannabis facility approved pursuant to this chapter. As a condition of approval of a commercial cannabis business permit as provided in this chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall: 
1.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any claims, damages, injuries or liabilities of any kind associated with the registration or operation of the commercial cannabis facility or the prosecution of the applicant or permittee or its members for violation of federal or state laws; 
2.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and types that are acceptable to the city attorney or designee; 
3.  Name the city as an additionally insured on all city required insurance policies; 
4.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action against the city, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval of a commercial cannabis business permit; and 
5.  Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of a commercial cannabis business permit. The city may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the operator of its obligation hereunder. 
N.  Enforcement. 
1.  A violation of the regulations in this section by an act, omission, or failure of an agent, owner, officer or other person acting in concert with or employed by a permittee within the scope of their employment or office, shall be deemed the act, omission, or failure of the permittee. 
2.  A permitted commercial cannabis business shall notify the police chief or designee of the city upon discovery of any of the following situations: 
a.  A discrepancy of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in inventory over a period of twenty-four (24) hours or three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) over period of seven (7) days. 
b.  A reason to suspect diversion, loss, theft or any other criminal activity pertaining to the operation of the commercial cannabis business. 
c.  The loss or alteration of records related to cannabis goods, registered medical cannabis patients, caregivers or dispensary employees or agents. 
d.  Any other reason to suspect any other breach of security. 
3.  Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the Municipal Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this article shall be subject to injunctive relief, revocation of the business's commercial cannabis business permit, disgorgement and payment to the city of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and state laws for any violations committed by the cannabis business and/or any owner, agent, officer, or any other person acting in concert with or employed by the cannabis business. 
4.  City officials or their designees may enter and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business during normal business hours to ensure compliance with this section. In addition, law enforcement may enter and inspect the location of any cannabis business and the recordings and records maintained as required by this section, except that the inspection and copying of private medical records shall be made available to law enforcement only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order. A person engaging in commercial cannabis business without a permit and associated unique identifiers required by this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties of up to twice the amount of the permit fee for each violation, and the department, state or local authority, or court may order the destruction of cannabis associated with that violation. A violator shall be responsible for the cost of the destruction of cannabis associated with the violation, in addition to any amount covered by a bond required as a condition of licensure. Each day of operation shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
O.  Fees and Taxes. All cannabis operations shall pay applicable fees and taxes, which may include one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Initial Application Fees. The business applicant shall submit a non-refundable fee to cover the cost of processing an initial application for the commercial cannabis business. These fees may be divided into two (2) fees according to initial review (Phase 1) and final review (Phase 2). 
2.  Application Renewal Fees. The business owner shall submit a non-refundable fee to cover the cost of processing an application renewal annually. 
3.  Business License Fee. The business owner shall at all times maintain a current and valid business license and pay all business taxes required by the Merced Municipal Code. 
4.  Commercial Cannabis Regulatory Fee. The business owner shall pay an annual regulatory fee ("regulatory fee") to cover the costs of anticipated enforcement relating to the cannabis operation. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and be supported by the estimated additional costs of enforcement and monitoring associated with the cannabis operation. The regulatory fee shall be due and payable prior to opening for business and thereafter on or before the anniversary date. The regulatory fee may be amended from time to time based upon actual costs. 
5.  All required taxes including sales and use taxes, business, payroll etc. 
6.  Additional cannabis-specific gross receipts, excise, cultivation or any other tax approved by the voters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2480, § 5, 12-4-2017; Ord. No. 2498, § 1, 3-18-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2480, § 5, adopted December 4, 2017, amended the Code by repealing and replacing former § 20.44.170. Former § 20.44.170 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.) adopted September 19, 2016.  
Chapter 20.46 - RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
20.46.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes design standards for residential uses, in addition to regulations set forth in Chapter 20.08 (Residential Zones). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.46.020 - Design standards for single-family dwellings and mobile homes. 
A.  Applicability. The following standards shall apply to all single-family developments and mobile homes. 
B.  Siding. No shiny or reflective exterior siding materials, which are more reflective than semi-gloss paint, shall be permitted. 
C.  Exterior Walls. 
1.  Materials shall extend to the ground where a unit is mounted at grade-level or the top of the solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation where an above-grade foundation is used. 
2.  Materials shall be limited to stucco, wood, brick, stone, glass, or decorative concrete block. No tin or other metallic exterior wall material shall be used. 
3.  Materials shall be the same as or complementary to the wall materials and roofing materials of the dwelling unit. 
D.  Windows. 
1.  All windows, doors, and gable ends shall be architecturally treated with a trim. 
2.  No shiny or reflective materials shall be permitted for trim which are more reflective than semi-gloss paint. 
E.  Roof. 
1.  Roof Pitch Slope. The slope or inclination of a pitched roof shall be no less than a ratio of four (4) inches vertical rise for each twelve (12) inches horizontal run (4:12). 
2.  Projection. Overhanging eves shall be at least twelve (12) inches from the exterior vertical walls. 
3.  Materials. 
a.  Roofs shall be composed of shingles, shake shingles, non-reflective and matte-finish metal, rock or concrete or adobe or composition tile, or other similar materials commonly used in the area. 
b.  Fascia boards shall be used on all sides of the structure to screen exposed elements, like rafters and vents, and to give the roof a finished edge. 
c.  Roofing materials for a garage or carport shall be the same as the wall materials and roofing materials of the dwelling unit. 
4.  Mechanical and Utility Equipment. All mechanical and utility equipment shall be screened from the public right-of-way. 
F.  Parking. Each unit shall have at least two hundred (200) square feet of off-street parking outside of required setback areas. 
G.  Width. Each unit shall have a width of at least twenty (20) feet. 
H.  Location. Each dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a street or permanent means of access to a street by way of a public or private easement other than an alley. Such easements shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width. 
I.  Landscaping. All front yards, and all side yards exposed to public view on corner lots, shall be landscaped with drought-tolerant ground cover, trees, and shrubs, including but not limited to, city street trees. Underground irrigation of the required landscaping shall be required. All shall be installed prior to occupancy. (Refer to Chapter 20.36.) 
J.  Foundation. All homes and mobile homes must be attached to a permanent foundation system that complies with all building codes of the city. 
K.  Addresses. The street address number of the house shall be displayed on the front wall of the house clearly visible from the street and shall be a minimum height of four (4) inches with a ½ inch stroke (or as otherwise required in the California Residential and Fire Codes.) 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.46.030 - General design standards for multi-family dwellings. 
A.  Applicability. The following standards shall apply to all multi-family residential development of three (3) units or more in any zoning district. 
B.  Exterior Treatment. 
1.  Blank walls shall be treated with a variety of textures, use of projecting details that create shade/shadow and contrasting trim materials. 
2.  Any pipes, vents or tubes, etc., on the roof shall be painted or otherwise covered to match roof color or shall be screened. 
3.  Ground-mounted air conditioning units shall be screened from public view, using either landscaping or a combination of landscaping and screening comprised of the same materials as used on the buildings. 
C.  Landscaping. (Also refer to Chapter 20.36.) 
1.  An automatic irrigation system shall be provided to all planting areas within the project. 
2.  Landscaping other than turf shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from any fire hydrant to allow access. 
D.  Parking. 
1.  Parking areas shall be screened from public right-of-way by landscaping, which may include berms or fencing/screening. 
2.  Parking areas shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) tree per every six (6) spaces. 
3.  Parking areas shall be lit at night for security reasons, but the lighting shall not spill over onto adjacent properties. 
E.  Trash Collection Area. 
1.  No trash collection area shall be located within ten (10) feet (horizontal) of the outermost extent allowable for a roof projection on a residential structure. 
2.  Refuse collection areas shall be screened with the same and/or complementary materials and colors used on the main buildings. 
F.  Apartment Unit. 
1.  Each apartment unit shall have unique identification (i.e. numbers, letters, etc.) and all unit identification shall be in proper sequential order. 
2.  Unit identifications shall be six (6) inches to eight (8) inches in height. 
3.  Unit identifications shall be treated so that it is clearly read from a street or access. 
4.  The project "mail directory" required by the postal service shall be located to be only accessible to the postal carrier, and not to the general public. 
G.  Location. Each dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a street or permanent means of access to a street by way of a public or private easement other than an alley. Such easements shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width. 
H.  Safety and Defensible Space. 
1.  Placement of windows and doors should facilitate neighborhood surveillance of their neighbor's entryways. 
2.  The number of apartments that enter their front door from the same hallway or courtyard should be limited to no more than twelve (12) (or as otherwise approved by city staff) so that residents can learn to distinguish fellow neighbors from visitors and/or intruders. 
3.  Apartment common recreational areas should be easily viewed by residents within the units and shall be defined by a physical boundary. 
4.  Physical changes (such as picket fences, porches, decks, or landscape features) to mark and define areas near a dwelling as that unit's "territory" should be installed. 
5.  Keyed access gates and surveillance cameras should be installed to enter common areas. 
I.  Private Outdoor Space. 
1.  Ground Floor Units. Every dwelling unit which is on the ground floor should have a private outdoor usable space, if feasible, of a minimum size of five (5) feet by eight (8) feet. 
2.  Units Above Ground Floor. Every dwelling unit which is above the ground floor should, if feasible, have a useable outdoor balcony space of a minimum size of five (5) feet by eight (8) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.46.040 - Specific design standards for multi-family dwellings. 
A.  All Multi-Family Dwelling in the Planned Development Zoning District and Multi-Family Dwellings with Five (5) or more Units (or Three (3) or more Units on Corner Lots) in Non-Planned Development Zoning Districts. In addition to the standards in Section 20.46.040 above, such units shall comply with the following: 
1.  Building construction shall not exceed the plane established by 1:1 height and setback ratio from any exterior property line of a lot or parcel, for more than fifty (50) percent of the allowable building area at any established distance from said exterior property line. 
2.  A minimum of one (1) tree per three (3) units is required, and foundation plantings with a minimum mean horizontal depth of three (3) feet covering the equivalent of a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the overall horizontal building frontage shall be required in the overall project area. 
3.  Fences. 
a.  Private balconies or patios shall be screened with solid or near-solid fencing/railings. 
(1)  Materials used shall be comparable quality and aesthetics to those used on the rest of the project. 
(2)  The color shall complement or match building trim. 
b.  Patio or Swimming Pool. Following standards exclude perimeter fencing. 
(1)  Fencing shall use the same materials, textures and colors as are used for the main building. 
(2)  Fencing shall not include chain link. 
c.  Chain link may be allowed for tennis courts if it uses vinyl-covered (or equivalent shading) chain link in complementary colors and masonry pilasters with complementary landscaping. 
4.  Parking, Garage, and Carports. 
a.  Carports shall have fascia boards. Materials for the fascia board shall match building material(s) of main structures; both fascia boards and vertical members (supports, screening elements, etc.) shall be painted to match or complement building trim. 
b.  A directory, with a list of all apartment unit identifications and a schematic or other locational device/site plan, shall be required in proximity to each parking lot entrance for use by emergency vehicles or visitors: 
(1)  Materials and color(s) of the directory will match/complement the building(s). 
(2)  City's approval is required for its placement and dimension, including orientation and lighting arrangements. 
5.  Mechanical and Utility Equipment and Trash Collection Area. 
a.  No roof-mounted air-conditioning equipment shall be permitted. 
b.  Trash Collection Areas. 
(1)  The perimeter of trash enclosures shall be planted with landscaping, such as shrubs or climbing evergreen vines, unless otherwise required by the city. 
(2)  Decorative gates shall enclose a trash area; walk-in access for tenants, other than the main gates to the trash area, shall be provided unless otherwise required by the city. 
c.  Utility meters shall not be located within setback nor should they be visible from the public right-of-way, consistent with the following: 
(1)  A three (3)-foot clear space shall be provided in front of the meters; 
(2)  The meters shall be located near the front of the complex, but may be along the side of a unit; 
(3)  The meters may be screened with plants or materials as long as the utility company can still reach the meters to read them; 
(4)  Screening materials shall be the same as used on main buildings and shall be painted to match/complement building colors; and, 
(5)  The meters shall be located away from parking areas where they could be hit or backed into. 
B.  Multi-Family Dwellings in the Planned Development Zoning District. In addition to the standards in Section 20.46.030 and 20.46.040.A above, such units shall comply with the following: No composition roof materials shall be permitted except three-dimensional, architectural grade shingles. 
C.  Multi-Family Dwellings with Three (3) to Five (5) Units in Non-Planned Development Zoning District. In addition to the standards in Section 20.46.030 above, such units shall comply with the following: Roof-mounted air conditioning units are prohibited unless approved by the site plan review committee. If so approved, they shall be: 
1.  Mounted on the side of the building away from the public right-of-way, and, 
2.  Screened (to provide sufficient air circulation) with materials that will blend into the rest of the roof structure and block any view of the unit. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.48 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
 
20.48.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for home occupations to allow residents to conduct businesses in their homes in a manner that minimizes negative impacts on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.48.020 - Categories. 
A.  Minor Home Occupation. A minor home occupation is a business conducted in a home office involving the use of the telephone, computer, mail, and common delivery services only. A minor home occupation does not involve regular visits (more than twice a week) from employees, customers, clients, students, patients, or persons in similar relationships with the office's affairs. 
B.  Major Home Occupation. A major home occupation is a home-based business that does not meet the definition of a minor home occupation described above. A cottage food operation as defined by the California Homemade Food Act (AB 1616) shall be considered a major home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.48.030 - Permits required. 
A.  Minor Home Occupation. A minor home occupation that complies with this chapter is permitted by-right. No special permits or approvals from the Planning Division are required to establish or operate a minor home occupation, except a home occupation certificate and a city business license. 
B.  Major Home Occupation. 
1.  Minor Use Permit. A minor use permit shall be required to establish or operate a cottage food operation. 
2.  Site Plan Review Permit. A site plan review permit shall be required for other major home occupations. A public hearing shall be required in accordance with Section 20.68.050 (Site Plan Review Permits) and Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.48.040 - Standards. 
A.  All Home Occupations. All home occupation shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Size. Home occupations shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Sales and Displays. Products shall not be sold directly to customers within a home occupation. Home occupations may not establish window displays of products to attract customers. 
3.  Advertising. No newspaper, radio, or television service shall be used to advertise the location of business; however, contact information, including phone numbers and email address (but not the location address), shall be allowed on such advertisements. 
4.  Signs. One (1) single, non-illuminated, wall-mounted outdoor sign of not more than one (1) square foot in area is permitted. 
5.  Vehicle Traffic. A home occupation shall not generate vehicle traffic greater than normally associated with a residential use. No more than two (2) vehicles associated with the business shall be parked in the immediate neighborhood. 
6.  Deliveries. Deliveries and pick-ups for home occupations shall not interfere with vehicle circulation, and shall occur only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
7.  Mechanical Equipment. No mechanical equipment shall be permitted that is not normally associated with a residential use. 
8.  Performance Standards. Home occupations shall not generate dust, odors, noise, vibration, or electrical interference or fluctuation that is perceptible beyond the property line. 
9.  Hazardous Materials and Auto Repair Prohibited. The storage of flammable, combustible, or explosive materials is prohibited as is auto repair in either minor or major home occupations. 
B.  Minor Home Occupations. Minor home occupations shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Employees. Employees of a minor home occupation shall be limited to the persons residing in the dwelling unit. 
2.  Clients. No clients or customers are permitted to visit a minor home occupation. 
3.  Outdoor Storage. Goods, equipment, materials associated with a home occupation shall be stored within an enclosed structure or in a manner that is not visible from beyond the property line. 
C.  Major Home Occupations. Major home occupations shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Employees. Major home occupations are allowed one (1) additional employee in addition to those residing in the dwelling unit as long as one (1) additional off-street parking space is provided for such employee. 
2.  Clients. Not more than six (6) clients per day may visit a major home occupation. Hours for visits shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays only, unless otherwise approved by the site plan review committee. 
3.  Outdoor Storage. Goods, equipment, materials associated with a home occupation shall be stored within an enclosed structure or in a manner that is not visible from beyond the property line. 
4.  Cottage Food Operations. An approved cottage food operation permit from the Merced County's Department of Health, along with the required self-certification checklist shall be submitted as part of a minor use permit application for a cottage food operation. Cottage food operations are exempt from the restrictions on customers coming to the home, the sale of goods from the home, and any of the standards in this chapter if in conflict with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.48.050 - Suspension of permit. 
The director of development services may suspend the approval of a home occupation if any of the following applies: 
A.  The home occupation has become: 
1.  Detrimental to public health, safety, welfare, or character of a neighborhood. 
2.  In violation of any city, county and/or state code, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
3.  A hazard or nuisance to pedestrian, vehicular circulation or parking, or the community in general. 
4.  A different form than which the permit was issued. 
B.  The home occupation does not commence within one (1) year of approval; or, 
C.  The home occupation ceases for a period greater than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.50 - TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
20.50.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the establishment and operation of temporary uses and structures. These requirements are intended to allow for temporary uses and structures in Merced while ensuring that they do not negatively impact neighboring properties and the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.50.020 - Temporary uses allowed by right. 
The following temporary uses are permitted by right. No permits or approvals from the planning division are required. 
A.  Garage Sales. Garage sales in residential zoning districts that comply with Chapter 9.54 (Garage Sales) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
B.  Fund Raising Events. Fund raising events when sponsored by a non-profit organization directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts. Fund raising events require property owner permission and shall not involve vehicle sales. 
C.  On-Site Construction Yards. Temporary construction yards and office trailers that are located on-site, less than 1 (1) acre in size, and established in conjunction with an approved project. The construction yard and trailer shall be immediately removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction project or expiration of the building permit. 
D.  Temporary Outdoor Displays of Merchandise in Nonresidential Zones. Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise in nonresidential zones that comply with the following standards. 
1.  Items are displayed in a manner consistent with Section 20.44.100 (Outdoor Displays of Merchandise). 
2.  Items may be displayed for a maximum of seven (7) consecutive days, no more than four (4) times per year on any one (1) property. 
3.  Following the completion of the temporary display, all signs, stands, poles, electrical wiring, or any other fixtures, appurtenances or equipment associated with the display shall be removed from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.50.030 - Temporary uses requiring a permit. 
A temporary outdoor use permit per Section 20.50.050 is required for the following temporary uses, except for farmer's markets which require permits as shown below: 
A.  Farmer's Markets. Farmer's markets for a maximum of three (3) days per week. 
1.  Nonresidential Zoning Districts. A minor use permit shall be required. 
2.  Residential Zoning Districts. A conditional use permit shall be required. To approve a conditional use permit for a farmer's market, the city shall make all of the following findings: 
a.  The market is certified by California Department of Food and Agriculture. 
b.  The market obtained appropriate permits from the fire department. 
c.  Adequate parking is available on-site and within one-fourth (¼)-mile radius. Parking requirement may be reduced upon approval from the director of development services. 
B.  Seasonal Sales. Seasonal sales (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, fireworks) for a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, no more than four (4) times per year on a single property. Seasonal flower sales are allowed up to six (6) times per year by a business on a same parcel. Seasonal sales shall not be permitted on any residentially zoned property and shall not involve vehicle sales. 
C.  Off-Site Construction Yards. Construction yards located off-site in conjunction with an approved project. The construction yard shall be immediately removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction project or expiration of the building permit. 
D.  Employee Trailers. Trailer or commercial modular units used as a work site for employees of a business, for a maximum of twelve (12) months. 
E.  Real Estate Offices. Real estate offices used exclusively for the sale of homes or other real estate for a maximum of three (3) years or within thirty (30) days when the last home is sold, whichever comes first. 
F.  Circuses and Carnivals. Circuses and carnivals that comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use will be open to the public for no longer than seven (7) days. 
2.  Merced County Health Department approval is obtained for food vendors. 
3.  The use is not located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zone. 
4.  Off-street parking is provided as determined necessary by the director of development services. 
5.  A security plan is submitted and approved by the City of Merced Police Department. 
6.  A fire safety plan shall be approved by the Merced Fire Department. The plan shall describe, with appropriate illustrations, all electrical, vehicle ingress, egress, and maximum occupancy of the site. 
7.  A business license is required per Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
8.  The use shall meet all building code and fire code requirements. 
G.  Other Similar Activities. Similar temporary activities determined by the director of development services to be compatible with the applicable zoning district and surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.50.040 - Sidewalk dining. 
Temporary sidewalk dining within the public right-of-way is permitted with the approval of a restaurant encroachment permit as described in Chapter 12.36 (Restaurant Encroachment Permit) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.50.050 - Temporary outdoor use permit. 
A.  Conditions. Upon the approval of the temporary outdoor use permit, the director of development services may attach the conditions relating to the following and any others which are considered reasonably necessary in connection with temporary use: 
1.  Restrictions on hours of operation. 
2.  Maintenance of accessibility for the disabled. 
3.  Protection of fire lanes and access. 
4.  Preservation of adequate on-site circulation. 
5.  Cleanup of the location or premises. 
6.  Use of lights or lighting or other means of illumination. 
7.  Operation of any loudspeaker or sound amplification in order to prevent the creation of any nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of or commercial visitors to adjacent buildings or premises. 
8.  Temporary outdoor use permits are limited to the actual owner or tenant of the premises and must be for the existing use being conducted in an enclosed building on the premises by the owner or tenant. 
B.  Bond. In addition to any other conditions imposed, the Director may require the posting of a cash bond in an amount sufficient to guarantee the removal of any fixtures, equipment, or stands and the cleanup of the location or premises immediately upon the expiration of any such temporary use. 
C.  Appeal. The applicant shall follow the appeal procedure in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals), except: 
1.  The applicant shall appeal the decision of the director of development services to the planning commission within three (3) calendar days of the date of any such action. 
2.  No appeal is allowed for the action of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.52 - NONCONFORMING PARCELS, USES, AND STRUCTURES 
 
20.52.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes regulations for nonconforming parcels, uses and structures. These regulations are intended to: 
A.  Allow for the development and use of legal nonconforming parcels; 
B.  Ensure that nonconforming uses and structures do not adversely impact neighboring properties; 
C.  Allow for the limited enlargement or intensification of nonconforming uses and structures; 
D.  Allow for limited repairs and maintenance to nonconforming structures; and, 
E.  Provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses as appropriate due to abandonment, obsolescence, and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to existing parcels, uses, and structures that do not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located at the time of the effective date of the adoption of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.030 - General. 
A.  Continuation. A nonconforming parcel, use, or structure may be continued if it was legally established in compliance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time it was established. 
B.  Legally Established Defined. To be considered legally established, a legal nonconforming parcel, use, or structure shall have been physically constructed or in existence, not merely contemplated. Conditional use permits, variances, building permits, or other permits not exercised within the required time do not establish the right to a legal nonconformity unless the parcel, use or structure was under construction (with a valid building permit) at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
C.  Burden of Proof. Any person asserting a right to a nonconforming use or structure has the burden of proof to demonstrate that the nonconformity was legally established. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.040 - Nonconforming parcels. 
A.  Development Permitted. Legally established parcels with nonconforming dimensions (e.g., parcel width and depth) shall be permitted all development rights of the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Conformance with Standards. Development on legal nonconforming parcels shall comply with all setback, building coverage, parking, and other standards of the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Adjacent Narrow Parcels. Two (2) or more adjacent parcels in single ownership that are each twenty-five (25) feet or less in width shall be considered a single parcel and may be developed as such. Development on such parcels shall comply with all setback, building coverage, parking, and other applicable standards of the applicable zoning district. 
D.  50-foot Frontages. All other provisions of this title notwithstanding, lots with a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet may be created if they meet the following criteria: 
1.  The lot is in an "R" district and in a block where at least one-half (½) of the existing lots in the same block are fifty (50) feet wide or less. 
2.  All other applicable lot area and yard requirements shall apply after the lot creation takes place. 
3.  Use of the resulting parcel(s) shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) residential unit on each interior lot or a maximum of two (2) residential units on a corner lot where permitted provided that each unit's driveway is accessed from different sides of the lot. 
4.  Vehicle access to the resulting lots shall be through a shared or alley accessed drive when fronting on a collector or higher order street. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.050 - Nonconforming use of land. 
A.  Continuation Permitted. A nonconforming use of land not conducted within a structure may continue so long as: 
1.  The nonconforming use is not enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land; and, 
2.  The nonconforming use is not moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel. 
B.  Cessation of Use. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.060 - Nonconforming use of structures. 
A.  Change in Ownership, Tenancy, or Management. A change in ownership, tenancy, or management of a nonconforming use shall not affect its legal nonconforming status. 
B.  Resuming a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use changed to a conforming use shall not return to a nonconforming use. 
C.  Replacement of a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use may not be replaced by another nonconforming use. 
D.  Intensification of Use. 
1.  The enlargement of a structure or site occupied by a nonconforming use, or the intensification in any way of the operation of a nonconforming use, shall require the approval of a minor use permit. 
2.  To approve a proposed intensification to a nonconforming use, the director of development services shall make all minor use permit findings (Chapter 20.68) in addition to the findings in Section 20.52.090 (Findings). 
E.  Discontinuation of Use. A nonconforming use discontinued for six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period shall not be reestablished and may be replaced only by a conforming use. 
F.  Nonconforming Use of Land and Structure in Combination. Where a property contains a nonconforming use of land and a nonconforming use within a structure, the removal or destruction of the structure shall require the elimination of the nonconforming use of land. 
G.  Grocery Stores in Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  A grocery store located in a residential zoning district may be enlarged, constructed, or reopened after discontinuance or abandonment with the approval of a conditional use permit. 
2.  In considering such an application, the planning commission shall determine whether such approval would adversely impact the established pattern of area development. The planning commission shall consider the traffic generated by the use, the nature of outside storage, loading and parking, and the visual appearance of the use, in addition to considering the location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the use. 
H.  Reconstruction of a Residential Structure. An applicant may reconstruct a single-family home or duplex upon the approval of a minor use permit. Reconstruction shall not deviate from the original development standards, including total floor area, degree of nonconformity of yards, and off-street parking standards. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.070 - Nonconforming structures. 
A.  Voluntary Alterations. 
1.  Alterations Permitted By Right. Alterations to a nonconforming structure that do not increase or exacerbate the nonconforming aspect of the structure are permitted by right, provided the project complies will all other applicable standards and regulations. The proposed project may also require permits and approvals for other reasons not related to its nonconforming status. 
2.  Alterations Requiring a Minor Use Permit. 
a.  Alterations to a nonconforming structure that increase or exacerbate the nonconforming aspect of the structure require the approval of a minor use permit. For example, a project that further increases the floor area of a structure when a floor area ratio that is already greater than allowed in the applicable zoning district would require a minor use permit. 
b.  Alteration to a nonconforming structure shall comply with setback requirement of the applicable zoning district. 
c.  To approve such an alteration, the director of development services shall make all minor use permit findings (Chapter 20.68) in addition to the findings in Section 20.52.090 (Findings). 
3.  Substantial Demolition. 
a.  If a nonconforming structure is "substantially demolished" as part of an alteration or addition, the structure shall be brought into full compliance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance (i.e., legal nonconforming status shall be lost). 
b.  A substantial demolition shall mean the removal or replacement of: 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent or more of the lineal footage of existing interior and exterior walls; or, 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent or more of the area of existing floor, ceilings, and roof structures. 
c.  Determination of a substantial demolition shall include all repairs, alterations, and additions cumulatively made to the property over the preceding five (5) years. 
B.  Involuntary Damage or Destruction. 
1.  Nonconforming structures damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or other calamity may be repaired or reconstructed provided that the nonconforming aspects of the structure are not increased or exacerbated. 
2.  The repair or reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall begin within one (1) year and shall be completed within three (3) years. The director of development services may approve an extension of two (2) additional years to complete reconstruction of the demolished structure if the delay was caused by circumstances over which the applicant has no fault or control. 
C.  Moved Structures. A nonconforming structure that is moved to a new location shall conform to all standards that apply in its new location. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.080 - Maintenance and repair. 
A.  Public Safety. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent compliance with the orders of any city official to strengthen or restore a structure to safe condition. 
B.  Rehabilitation. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the rehabilitation of single-family or duplex units in connection with official city housing division activities. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.52.090 - Findings. 
The director of development services may approve a minor use permit for a nonconforming use or structure if all of the following findings can be made in addition to the findings in Chapter 20.68 (Conditional Use and Minor Use Permits): 
A.  Available evidence indicates that the nonconforming use was legally established; 
B.  The nonconforming use has not resulted in a notable negative impact or nuisance to the surrounding area; 
C.  The nonconforming use is compatible with the general character of the surrounding area; and, 
D.  The proposed action is consistent with the purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.54 - CONDOMINIUMS 
 
20.54.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for common ownership projects involving both new construction and the conversion of existing structures into condominium units. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.54.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Association" or "Home Owners Association" refers to the organization of persons who own a lot, parcel, area, condominium, or right of exclusive occupancy in a residential development. 
B.  "Common ownership" and "common ownership project" include the following: a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, containing two (2) or more condominiums, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code; a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two (2) or more rights of exclusive occupancy; a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two (2) or more rights of exclusive occupancy; and a planned development, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two (2) or more separately owned lots, parcels, or areas. 
C.  "Developer" means to the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the common ownership project, or the person or organization making application under this chapter. 
D.  "Organizational documents" means the declaration of restrictions, articles of incorporation, bylaws, and any contracts for the maintenance, management, or operation of all or any part of a common ownership project. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.54.030 - Conditional use permit. 
A.  Permit Required. 
1.  Approval of a conditional use permit is required prior to the sale, lease, use, or occupancy of any residential building as common ownership. 
2.  A conditional use permit is required regardless of the previous use, occupancy, or tenancy of the building, or whether any physical changes have been made to any portion of the building. 
B.  Application Materials. In addition to the materials required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements), a conditional use permit application for a common ownership project shall include the following: 
1.  The Association's organizational documents. 
2.  A preliminary annual operating budget containing a sinking fund, which is a fund established by setting aside revenue over a period of time to fund a future capital expense or repayment of a long-term debt, reasonably calculated to accumulate reserve funds to pay for major anticipated maintenance, repair, or replacement expenses. 
3.  A list of all names and addresses of persons owning property adjacent to or across from the proposed common ownership project. 
4.  The names and addresses of all tenants presently residing or under contract to reside in the common ownership project. 
5.  One (1) copy of a preliminary title report of the entire property, including a legal description. 
6.  A plan showing landscaped and usable open areas, including areas for private or common use and private space dedicated to each unit. 
7.  Plans showing proposed storage spaces in addition to normal kitchen cabinets, pantries, or clothes closets. 
8.  The location and screening of any proposed storage of vehicles intended for recreation purposes, including land conveyances, vessels, and aircraft. 
9.  A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest control firm. This report shall investigate and assess any pest infestations which could relate to structural damage to the building, thereby affecting the health, safety, and welfare of residents. 
10.  A soils report on new developments and a foundation report on conversions prepared by a licensed soils engineering firm. 
11.  A report by a licensed engineer or architect relative to compliance with zoning, building, housing, and fire codes. 
12.  A description of measures to maintain building security and prevent crime. 
13.  A description of the history of buildings and other improvements, including: 
a.  The date of construction of the various components of the community ownership project; 
b.  A statement as to the current ownership of all improvements and underlying land and property rights; 
c.  A specific list of all major renovation activities since initial construction; and, 
d.  The condition and useful life of roof, foundation, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, structural elements, and permanent appliances of all existing buildings and structures. 
14.  A summary of the rental history of the community ownership project, including size of units, current rental rates over the prior two (2) years, the vacancy rate over the prior two (2) years, and rent increases over the prior two (2) years. 
15.  Preliminary site plans and architectural elevations and signs. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.54.040 - Organizational documents. 
A.  Maintenance and Landscaping. The organizational documents for a common ownership project shall provide that the association is responsible for maintenance and landscaping of all parts of the communal ownership project which are held in common and that such maintenance shall be performed to the standard of maintenance prevalent in the neighborhood. The organizational documents shall contain the following language: 
"The owners of all parcels subject to these covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R's) recognize that proper maintenance of the Common Area is for the benefit of all citizens of the City of Merced, and that the City of Merced is an intended third party beneficiary of these covenants, conditions and restrictions and may, upon notice and hearing as set forth below, exercise the same powers of enforcement as the Association insofar, and only insofar as said covenants, conditions and restrictions pertain to proper maintenance of the Common Area." 
"In the event the City determines that the Association has not adequately maintained the Common Area, then the City of Merced may give written notice to the Association, which notice shall contain the date for a hearing of the matter (which hearing shall be held no sooner than 15 days after mailing of such notice) and in the event after such hearing the City determines to so act, then the City may perform, or cause the performance of, the maintenance of such Common Area. Any and all costs incurred by the City in so maintaining such Common Area shall be a lien against the maintenance fund and the property subject to assessment, and shall be the personal obligation of the members of the Association." 
"The paragraphs above relating to the rights of the City shall not be amended without the consent of the City of Merced." 
B.  Association Control. The organizational documents shall allow the Association to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform management or maintenance duties three (3) months after the association assumes control of the communal ownership project or any time thereafter. 
C.  City Attorney Approval. The organizational documents shall be submitted to the city attorney for a determination that such documents comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.54.050 - Building and site standards. 
A.  All Projects. The following building and site standards shall apply to all common ownership projects. 
1.  Hydrants. Hydrants and fire flow shall meet the requirements of Chapter 15.32 of the Merced Municipal Code and the fire code. 
2.  Open Space. Adequate common and private area (passive and active) open space amenities shall be provided for residents. 
3.  Screening. Adequate screening shall be provided for the storage of vehicles intended for recreation purposes, including land conveyances, vessels, and aircraft. 
4.  Fire Walls and Noise. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies shall comply with fire wall separation and noise standards as specified in the latest adopted edition of the building code. 
5.  Utility Meters. The consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. A water shutoff valve shall be provided for each unit. The requirements of this subsection may be waived by the planning commission for existing structures if not practical. 
B.  New Construction. Proposed new construction in common ownership (i.e., new buildings that have not been previously occupied or used) shall comply with the following standard in addition to those in Section A above. 
1.  Sound Insulation. Wall sound insulation shall comply with the building code. 
C.  Existing Structures. Common ownership projects involving existing buildings which have been previously occupied shall comply with the following standards in addition to those in Section A above. 
1.  Notification of Tenants. The developer shall certify that all tenants in any building or structure have been or will be notified individually and in writing prior to the time of filing of an application under this chapter. 
2.  Tenant's Pre-Emptive Right. The developer shall provide each tenant a pre-emptive right to purchase a unit or right of exclusive occupancy. The right shall be irrevocable for a period of sixty (60) days after the commencement of sales or the issuance of the final public report by the real estate commissioner. 
3.  Property Report. The developer shall submit a property report describing the condition and useful life of the roof, foundations, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and structural elements of all existing buildings and structures. The report shall be prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer, or a licensed general building contractor or general engineering contractor. 
4.  Structural Pest Report. The developer shall submit a structural pest report. The report shall be prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code, relating to written reports on the absence or presence of wood-destroying pests or organisms. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.56 - DENSITY BONUS 
 
20.56.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides incentives for the production of housing for very low-income, low-income, and senior households and for the production of housing for moderate-income households residing in condominium and planned development projects. In enacting this chapter, it is the city's intent to facilitate the development of affordable housing through the granting of density bonuses and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the city's general plan housing element. This chapter is enacted under the authority of Government Code Sections 65915 through 65917.5 and the definitions in Government Code Sections 65915 through 65917.5 are incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.020 - Density bonus; incentives. 
A.  General. 
1.  The city shall grant a density bonus and other incentives to an applicant for a housing development of five (5) or more units if they meet the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  The deed restriction and other applicable documents, approved by city attorney, of a property subject to density bonus shall include a period of continuation of affordability not less than thirty (30) years or a longer period of time. 
3.  Neither the granting of an incentive nor the granting of a density bonus shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning ordinance amendment, or other discretionary approval. 
B.  Density Bonus - Minimum Requirement (Target Units). The city shall grant a density bonus to an applicant for a housing development of five (5) or more units who seeks a density bonus and agrees to construct at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  Very Low-Income. Five (5) percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to very low-income households; 
2.  Low-Income. Ten (10) percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to low-income households; 
3.  Moderate-Income. Ten (10) percent of the total units of a newly constructed condominium project or planned development as target units affordable to moderate-income households, provided all the units are offered for purchase; or, 
4.  Senior. A senior citizen housing development of thirty-five (35) units or more, or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing older persons under Civil Code Section 798.76 or 799.5. 
C.  Density Bonus—Calculation of Bonus Units. 
1.  In determining the number of density bonus units to be granted under Subsection B above, the maximum residential density for the site shall be multiplied by 0.20 for Subsections B.1, B.2 and B.4 above and by 0.05 for Subsection B.3 above, unless a lesser number is selected by the developer. 
a.  Very Low-Income. For each one (1) percent increase above five (5) percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low-income households, the density bonus is increased by two and one-half (2½) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
b.  Lower-Income. For each one (1) percent increase above ten (10) percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus is increased by one and one-half (1.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
c.  Moderate-Income. For each one (1) percent increase above ten (10) percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus is increased by one (1) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
d.  Senior. For senior housing, the density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent of the number of senior housing units. 
2.  The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the number of target units required to qualify for a density bonus. When calculating the required number of target units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded to the next larger number. 
3.  The developer may request a lesser percentage of density bonus than the project is entitled to. Regardless of the number of target units, no housing development is entitled to a density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent. 
D.  Density Bonus Summary. Table 20.56-1 summarizes the density bonus information described in this subsection. 
E.  Incentives. Subject to the findings included in Section 20.56.080 (Application Requirements), when a developer seeks a density bonus, the city shall grant incentives listed in Section 20.56.070 (Modifying Development Standards as an Incentive) as follows: 
1.  One (1) incentive for a project that includes at least ten (10) percent of the total units for low-income households, at least five (5) percent for very low-income households, or at least ten (10) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. 
Table 20.56-1 Density Bonus Summary 
Target Group 	Minimum % Target Units 	Bonus Granted 	Additional Bonus for each 1% Increase in Target Units 	Percent Target Units Required for Maximum 35% Bonus 
Very-Low Income 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	11% 
Lower-Income 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	20% 
Moderate-Income (Condo or Planned Development Only) 	10% 	5% 	1% 	40% 
Senior Citizen Housing Development 	100% 	20% 	- 	- 
 
2.  Two (2) incentives for a project that includes at least twenty (20) percent of the total units for low-income households, at least ten (10) percent for very low-income households, or at least twenty (20) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. 
3.  Three incentives for a project that includes at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for low-income households, at least fifteen (15) percent for very low-income households, or at least thirty (30) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. 
4.  An incentive may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus, except for child care facilities under Section 20.56.040. 
5.  Under no circumstances shall a waiver of development fees or of the installation of the public frontage improvements be granted. 
F.  Incentives - Summary. Table 20.56-2 (Incentives Summary) summarizes the incentives described in this subsection. 
Table 20.56-2 Incentives Summary 
Target Group 	Target Units 
Very-Low Income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Lower-Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate-Income (Condo Or Planned Development Only) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Maximum Incentive(s) 	1 	2 	3 
 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.030 - Land donation. 
A.  General. When an applicant for a housing development donates land to the city as provided for in this section, the applicant is entitled to a fifteen (15) percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the zoning ordinance and general plan land use element for the entire development. For each one (1) percent increase above the minimum ten (10) percent land donation described in Section B.2 below, the density bonus shall be increased by one (1) percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density required by Section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives), up to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent if an applicant seeks both the increase required under this Section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives). When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded to the next larger number. An applicant is not eligible for an increase in density bonus for the donation of land required by the city's parkland dedication ordinance or for any other legally required land dedication. 
B.  Eligibility. A housing development applicant is eligible for the density bonus described in this section if the city makes all of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant will donate and transfer the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. 
2.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount of at least ten (10) percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development, or will permit construction of a greater percentage of units if proposed by the developer. 
3.  The transferred land is at least one (1) acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as very low-income housing, and is now or at the time of construction will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land must also have the appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the very low-income units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development, the transferred land will have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land. 
4.  The transferred land and the affordable units constructed on the land will be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with Sections 20.56.060.B and C, which restriction will be recorded on the property at the time of dedication. 
5.  The land will be transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify a developer of the very low-income units and to require that the land be transferred to that developer. 
6.  The transferred land is within the boundary of the proposed housing development or within a quarter mile of the boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.040 - Child care facilities. 
A.  Incentives. When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that includes target units as specified in Section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives) and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development, the city shall grant either of the following if requested by the developer: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; 
2.  An additional incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
B.  Findings. A housing development is eligible for the density bonus or incentive described in this section if the city makes both of the following findings: 
1.  The child care facility will remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable under Sections 20.56.060.B and C. 
2.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low-income households, low-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low-income households, low-income households, or moderate-income households. 
C.  Necessity. Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city is not required to provide a density bonus or incentive for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.050 - Condominium conversions. 
A.  Incentives. The city shall grant either a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value if the applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums agrees to provide thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project as target units affordable to low- or moderate-income households, or to provide fifteen (15) percent of the total units in the condominium conversion project as target units affordable to low-income households. All such target units shall remain affordable for the period specified in Section 20.56.060. 
B.  Density Bonus Defined. For purposes of this section, a "density bonus" means an increase in units of twenty-five (25) percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. 
C.  Eligibility. No condominium conversion is eligible for a density bonus if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were previously provided under this section or Government Code Section 65915. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.060 - Affordability and development standards. 
A.  Timing of Construction. Target units shall be constructed concurrently with non-restricted units or pursuant to a schedule included in the density bonus housing agreement. 
B.  Continued Affordability-Rent. Target units offered for rent for low-income and very low-income households shall be made available for rent at an affordable rent as defined in state law and shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated income group for a minimum period of thirty (30) years. A longer period of time may be specified if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the housing development. 
C.  Continued Affordability-For Sale. Target units offered for sale to very low-, low-, or moderate income households in condominiums and planned developments shall be sold at an affordable ownership cost as defined in state law. 
1.  The maximum resale price homes to very-low or low-income households shall be the lower of (1) fair market value, or (2) the seller's initial purchase price, increased by the lesser of (i) the rate of increase of area median income during the seller's ownership, or (ii) the rate at which the consumer price index increased during the seller's ownership. The seller of the unit shall retain the market value at the time of sale of any capital improvements made by the seller, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. 
2.  If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. 
D.  Initial Occupants. The initial occupant of the moderate-income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus units in a condominium project or a planned unit development must be persons or families of moderate income. Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, equal to (1) the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sales price to the moderate income household, plus the amount of any down-payment assistance or mortgage assistance ("initial subsidy") plus (2) the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale ("proportionate share of appreciation"). 
E.  Location and Design. Target units shall be built on site and shall be dispersed within the housing development. The number of bedrooms of the target units shall be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-target units of the housing development, except that the developer may include a higher proportion of target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. Housing developments shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this section. 
F.  Parking. 
1.  Upon the request of the applicant, the city may not require a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, of a development meeting the criteria of section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives) that exceeds the ratios in Table 20.56-3 (Maximum Required Parking). 
Table 20.56-3 Maximum Required Parking 
Bedrooms 	Number of
Parking Spaces 
0—1 	1 
2—3 	2 
4 or more 	2.5 
 
2.  If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a development may provide "on-site parking" through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.070 - Modifying development standards as an incentive. 
A.  Eligible Incentives. Incentives requested under Sections 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives) and 20.56.030 (Land Donation) may include the following: 
1.  A reduction of a site development standard or a modification of a zoning ordinance requirement which exceeds the minimum building standards provided in Health and Safety Code Section 18901 and following and which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions, including, but not limited to the incentives shown in Table 20.56-4 (Incentives). 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the city finds that the proposed nonresidential uses are compatible with the housing development and with existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located. (Approval of mixed use zoning is considered six (6) incentives.) 
3.  Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer or the city which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. The city has the right to establish the incentive value for any other incentive proposed by an applicant. 
Table 20.56-4 Incentives 
Reduced minimum parcel size or dimension 	Each reduction of 10 percent is considered one incentive. 
Reduced minimum setback: front or rear 	Reduction in combined front and rear setbacks is considered one incentive, except that the reduction must leave at least a 5-foot setback from both front and rear property lines. 
Reduced side setbacks 	Reduction in combined side setbacks is considered one incentive, except that the reduction must leave at least one 5-foot setback. 
Increased maximum parcel coverage 	Each increase of 10 percent is considered one incentive. 
Reduced open space requirement 	Each decrease of 10 percent in the open space requirement is considered one incentive. 
Increased maximum structure height 	Each additional story in height is considered one incentive, except when the total structure height exceeds four stories. In that case, each additional increase by a partial story is one incentive and each additional increase by a full story is two (2) incentives. 
Waiver of a design standard from the City's Engineering Standards 	Each waiver of a design standard is considered one incentive. (Waivers of General Plan design standards are not permitted, for example: connectivity, community character.) 
 
B.  Necessity. An applicant may seek a waiver or modification of development standards that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives) at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this section. The developer shall show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. The city may retain a consultant to review the financial report with costs borne by the applicant. 
C.  No Waivers Granted. Under no circumstances shall a waiver of development fees or the installation of public improvements be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.080 - Application requirements and review. 
A.  Application. An application for a density bonus, incentive, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard under this chapter shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city, including all applicable fees for processing the application, and shall include at least the following information: 
1.  Site plan showing total number of units, number, and location of target units, and number and location of proposed density bonus units. 
2.  Level of affordability of target units and proposals for ensuring affordability. [See Section 20.56.060 (Affordability and Development Standards)] 
3.  Description of any requested incentives, waivers, or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. 
4.  For all incentives, the application shall include substantial evidence that the requested incentives result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
5.  For waivers or modifications of development standards, the application shall provide substantial evidence to show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and that the development standards, without waiver or modification, will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 20.56.020 (Density Bonus; Incentives) at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this section 
6.  The applicant shall submit a development pro forma in a form prescribed by the city or the city's economic consultant. The applicant shall pay the cost of peer review of the development pro forma. 
7.  If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 20.56.030 (Land Donations) can be made. 
8.  If a density bonus or incentive is requested for a child care facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and provide substantial evidence that each of the findings included in Section 20.56.040 (Child Care Facilities) can be made. 
B.  Approval Body. 
1.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard under this section shall be considered by and acted upon by the city council with authority to approve the housing development. The city council may ask for a recommendation from the planning commission on the project prior to approval. 
2.  Neither the granting of an incentive, waiver, or modification nor the granting of a density bonus shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, variance, or other discretionary approval. 
C.  Findings for Approval. Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive, waiver, or modification, the approval body shall make the following findings: 
1.  The findings included in Section 20.56.030 (Land Donation) if the density bonus is based all or in part on donation of land. 
2.  The findings included in Section 20.56.040 (Child Care Facilities) if the density bonus, incentive, or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a child care facility. 
3.  The findings included in Section 20.56.070 (Modifying Development Standards) if the incentive or concession includes mixed use development. 
4.  If a waiver or modification is requested, the developer has to prove by submitting substantial evidence that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
D.  Findings Required for Denial of Incentive. If a request for an incentive is otherwise consistent with this section, the approval body may deny an incentive if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: 
1.  The incentive is not required to provide for affordable rents or affordable ownership costs. 
2.  The incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon: (i) public health or safety; (ii) the physical environment; or (iii) on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
3.  For the purpose of this subsection, "specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application was deemed complete. 
E.  Findings Required for Denial of Waiver or Modification. If a request for a waiver or modification is otherwise consistent with this section, the approval body may deny the waiver or modification only if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: 
1.  The waiver or modification would have a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
2.  For the purpose of this subsection, "specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions, as they existed on the date that the application was deemed complete 
3.  The waiver or modification would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
F.  Findings Required for Denial of Bonus or Incentive for Child Care Facility. If a density bonus or concession is based on the provision of child care facilities, the approval body may deny the bonus or concession if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the city already has adequate child care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.56.090 - Density bonus housing agreement. 
A.  Agreement Required. An applicant requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement (or affordable housing agreement, or other appropriate title) with the city. The agreement shall be made a condition of each discretionary planning permit for the housing development under this subsection. 
B.  Recordation. The density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcel on which the target units or density bonus units will be constructed. It shall be recorded before or concurrently with final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, before issuance of a building permit for any structure in the housing development. The density bonus housing agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors in interest. 
C.  Contents. The density bonus housing agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The total number of units approved for the housing development, the number, location, and level of affordability of target units, and the number of density bonus units. 
2.  Standards for determining affordable rent or affordable ownership cost for the target units as well as the length of time of affordability restrictions. 
3.  The location, unit size in square feet, and number of bedrooms of target units. 
4.  Provisions to ensure affordability in accordance with Sections 20.56.030 (Land Donation) and 20.56.050 (Condominium Conversions). 
5.  A schedule for completion and occupancy of target units in relation to construction of non-restricted units. 
6.  A description of any incentives, waivers, or reductions being provided by the city. 
7.  A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party. The city may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement. 
8.  Procedures for qualifying tenants and prospective purchasers of target units. 
9.  Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this section. 
D.  For-Sale Housing Provisions. In the case of for-sale housing developments, the density bonus housing agreement shall include the following conditions governing the sale and use of target units during the applicable use restriction period: 
1.  Target units shall be owner-occupied by eligible very low-, low-, or moderate-income households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior citizen housing developments. Target units shall be the purchaser's principal residence. 
2.  The purchaser of each target unit shall execute an instrument approved by the city and to be recorded against the parcel including such provisions as the city may require to insure continued compliance with this section, including restrictions on resale or rental of the unit. 
E.  Rental Housing Provisions. In the case of rental housing developments, the density bonus housing agreement shall provide for the following: 
1.  Procedures for establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for eligible tenants. 
2.  Provisions requiring verification of household incomes. 
3.  Provisions requiring maintenance of records to demonstrate compliance with this subsection. 
F.  Child Care Facility or Land Dedication Provisions. A density bonus housing agreement for a child care facility or land dedication shall ensure continued compliance with all conditions included in Sections 20.56.040 (Child Care Facilities) and 20.56.030 (Land Donation), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.58 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
 
20.58.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for wireless communication facilities. These standards are intended to: 
A.  Minimize adverse aesthetic impacts of wireless communications facilities; 
B.  Provide clear and objective standards for the placement, design, and continuing maintenance of wireless communications facilities; 
C.  Allow for wireless communication providers to improve and expand their systems over time; and, 
D.  Encourage co-location and use of other existing structures instead of construction of new towers. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Antenna Array. One (1) or more wireless communication devices—including omni-directional antenna (whip), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (dish)—that are mounted to a support tower and used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals. For the purposes of this chapter, there are two (2) classifications of antennas or antenna arrays: 
1.  Type A. 
a.  Have aggregate square footage of less than sixty (60) square feet. 
b.  Extends up to five (5) feet above the roofline or is co-located on an existing support tower. 
c.  For arrays, contain less than thirteen (13) antennas. 
2.  Type B. 
a.  Have aggregate square footage of sixty (60) square feet or more. 
b.  Extends five (5) feet or more above the roofline or is not co-located on an existing support tower. 
c.  For arrays, contain thirteen (13) or more antennas. 
B.  Central Computer Switching System. Equipment connecting a call placed by a wireless phone or device to either a conventional telephone or another wireless phone or device. 
C.  Co-Location. The mounting of a wireless communication facility on the same support tower as another wireless communication facility. 
D.  Equipment Shelter. An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed, or box to house batteries, electrical equipment, and other ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility. 
E.  Guyed Tower. A monopole, lattice, or other support tower tied to the ground, another object, or surface by diagonal cables (guy wires). 
F.  Height. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the wireless communication facility. Antenna mounted on a support tower shall be considered part of the facility and shall be included in measurements to determine height. 
G.  Lattice Tower. A self-supporting tower with multiple legs and characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members that stabilize the tower. 
H.  Monopole Tower. A self-supporting tower with a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete, or other material. 
I.  Search Ring. A geographic area identified by the wireless communications service provider within which a wireless communication facility is needed to enhance or expand their service. 
J.  Stealth Wireless Communication Facility. A wireless communications facility designed to blend in with the existing physical environment, whereby support towers and antenna array cannot be easily detected. Examples include but are not limited to: 
1.  Antennas placed on flagpoles, water tanks, electricity transmission towers, freestanding signs, architectural features of a building or other structures; or 
2.  Wireless communications facilities designed to appear as other objects such as a natural feature of the environment, such as a tree or a building's architecture. 
K.  Support Tower. A freestanding structure, other than a building, on which antenna arrays are mounted. 
L.  Wireless Communications. Any personal wireless services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
M.  Wireless Communication Facility. Any facility for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals through electromagnetic energy, including all wireless communications not exempted by Section 20.58.030, usually consisting of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support tower and antenna array used to achieve the necessary elevation, and the transmission and reception devices or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.030 - Exemptions. 
The following facilities are exempt from the standards in this chapter: 
A.  Send-and-receive citizen band radio antennas operated by federally licensed amateur "ham" radio operators. 
B.  Industrial, scientific, and medical equipment as regulated by the FCC in 47 CFR Part 18. 
C.  Facilities used to broadcast television and radio signals. 
D.  Military and government radar antennas and associated communication towers used for navigational purposes as regulated by the FCC by Title 47 CFR Parts 97 and 95. 
E.  Government owned communications facilities utilized for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.040 - Development standards. 
A.  Airport Environs. Notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter, wireless communication facilities shall comply with all requirements of the Merced County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan. 
B.  Setbacks and Siting. 
1.  All equipment shelters or other on-the-ground ancillary equipment shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
2.  Antenna and antenna arrays are exempt from setback requirements. 
3.  Support towers less than or equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the height limit of the zoning district in which they are located shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
4.  Support towers greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the height limit of the zoning district in which they are located shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located or one (1) foot for every ten (10) feet of total tower height, whichever produces the greater setback. 
5.  To the greatest extent possible, support towers should be placed to the rear or side of buildings. 
C.  Support Tower Location. All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the following location requirements: 
1.  Historic Resources. The installation of a support tower on a local, state or national historic resource is prohibited. Applications to attach an antenna or antenna array shall comply with Chapter 17.54 (Historic Preservation) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
2.  Residential Zoning Districts. The installation of a support tower within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zoning district or residential designation as shown on the land use diagram of the Merced General Plan shall require a conditional use permit regardless of the review procedures set forth in Table 20.58-2 (Review Procedures for Support Towers for Wireless Communication Facilities). 
D.  Color. Support towers shall be provided in a color that best allows it to blend into the surroundings. Antennas shall be placed and colored to blend into the architectural detail and coloring of the host structure. 
E.  Display. No signs or display shall be located on a support tower or ancillary facilities except for warning and safety signage. 
F.  Lighting. Except as specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority, support towers shall not be artificially lighted. In order to reduce glare, lighting for on-the-ground ancillary equipment shall be shielded from the community to the extent allowed by the FAA. Equipment shelters may use security lighting that is appropriately down-shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site and to minimize impacts on surrounding properties. 
G.  Screening. All wireless communication facilities shall be screened or stealthed to the maximum extent possible and comply with the following standards: 
1.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall effectively screen views of a wireless communication facility tower site from adjacent properties and be served by an automatic underground irrigation system. 
2.  Buffers. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide at the site perimeter, and fencing. Vegetation shall be used to cover the fence. Use of barbed wire is prohibited. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
H.  Equipment Shelters. Equipment shelters shall be: 
1.  Located in underground vaults; or, 
2.  Designed consistent with the architectural features of the buildings immediately surrounding the site locations; or, 
3.  Camouflaged behind an effective year-round landscape buffer. 
I.  Radio Frequency Radiation. Upon request to construct a wireless communications facility or to mount wireless communication antennas to an existing wireless communication facility, the applicant shall provide certification by a RF engineer, stating the RFR measurements and documenting that they meet FCC radio frequency radiation standards. 
J.  Interference. Wireless communication facilities shall not cause interference with public safety communication equipment. 
K.  Abandoned Wireless Communications Facilities. 
1.  Upon approval of a wireless communications facility, the city may require financial security acceptable to the city attorney from the applicant to ensure that the facility, including the support tower, is dismantled and removed if abandoned. 
2.  Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be deemed abandoned. The owner of the property and owner or lessee of the wireless communication facility shall restore the site to its pre-existing condition within ninety (90) days of abandonment. If removal and restoration does not occur within ninety (90) days, then the city may remove the wireless communication facility and may restore the site to its preexisting condition. 
L.  Maximum Support Tower Height and Height Limits. The maximum height of support towers, excluding stealth facilities, shall be as specified in Table 20.58-1 (Maximum Heights for Support Towers). The "Height Limits" for each Zoning District are also shown below for use with Table 20.58-2. 
Table 20.58-1 Maximum Heights And Height Limits for Support Towers 
Zoning District 	Height Limit 	125% of
Height Limit 	140% of
Height Limit 	Maximum 
Height 
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-MH, R-OV, R-IV, A-G, U-T 	35 feet 	43.75 feet 	49 feet 	55 feet 
R-4 	40 feet 	50 feet 	56 feet 	60 feet 
C-N, C-SC 	35 feet 	43.75 feet 	49 feet 	70 feet 
C-O, C-V, P-OS, P-F 	40 feet 	50 feet 	56 feet 	70 feet 
C-T, C-G, B-P 	40 feet 	50 feet 	56 feet 	100 feet [1] 
C-C, D-O, D-COR, D-CM, P-PK 	60 feet 	75 feet 	84 feet 	100 feet [1] 
I-L, I-H 	40 feet 	50 feet 	56 feet 	150 feet [1] 
P-D 	As permitted by the Site Utilization Plan 
 
Notes: 
[1] The maximum height of support towers with co-location may be increased by an additional twenty (20) feet as part of the permit process in Table 20.58-2. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016) 
20.58.050   Permits required.
A.  Permits Required. 
1.  Type A Antenna Arrays. A proposed Type A antenna array shall be approved administratively by the planning division if it complies with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
2.  Type B Antenna Arrays. 
a.  A proposed Type B antenna array requires the approval of a site plan review permit. 
b.  Any Type B antenna or antenna array considered by the planning division to be a stealth facility may be approved administratively by the planning division if it complies with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
3.  Wireless Communication Facilities with Support Towers. Table 20.58-2 identifies permits required for wireless communication facilities with support towers. Required permits depend on the type of support tower, the height of the facility, and the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
4.  Referral to Planning Commission. The planning division or the site plan review committee may refer any application for a wireless communication facility for review and final decision by the planning commission. In such cases the proposed facility shall require planning commission approval of a conditional use permit. 
5.  State and Federal Regulations. If any provisions of this chapter conflict with any state or federal law, the state or federal law shall prevail over the requirements of this chapter. If an applicant wishes to assert their rights under the federal "shot clock" rule pursuant to FCC Report and Order 14-153 or the State's AB 57, the applicant shall inform the city in writing of such at the time of application and meet all requirements of those regulations and this chapter. 
Table 20.58-2 Review Procedures for Support Towers for Wireless Communication Facilities 
	Stealth Wireless
Communication
Facility and
Antennas	Monopole Tower
and Antennas	Guyed Tower
and Antennas	Lattice
Tower and
Antennas
	Up to 
140% of 
Height Limit 	Over 
140% of 
Height 
Limit 	Up to 
125% of 
Height 
Limit 	Over 
125% of 
Height 
Limit* 	Up to 
125% of 
Height 
Limit 	Over 
125% of 
Height 
Limit* 	Up to the 
Permitted 
Tower 
Height 
Zoning District 							
P-OS, A-G 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-MH, R-IV, R-OV, U-T 	SP 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
C-O, C-N, C-SC, D-O, C-V, P-F 	A 	SP 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 
C-C, D-COR, D-CM, P-PK 	A 	A 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 
C-T, C-G, B-P 	A 	A 	SP 	C 	SP 	C 	C 
I-H, I-L 	A 	A 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 
P-D 	See Section 20.58.070.H 
 
Key 
KA = Administrative approval by Planning Division (Building Permit) 
KSP = Site Plan Review Permit required 
KC = Conditional Use Permit required 
KX- = Prohibited 
K* = Cannot exceed Maximum Height Limits in Table 20.58-1. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016) 
20.58.060   Applications.
A.  Administrative Approvals. 
1.  Wireless communication facilities requiring administrative approval by the planning division shall be reviewed as part of the building permit process. 
2.  The applicant shall submit all information needed by the planning division to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter as part of the building permit application. 
B.  Site Plan Review and Conditional Use Permits. An application for a proposed wireless communication facility that requires a site plan review or conditional use permit shall submit the following information in addition to the materials required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements). 
1.  Visual Impact Study. A graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower, antennas, and ancillary facilities from at least five (5) points within a one-mile radius. Such points shall be chosen by the applicant with review and approval by the director of development services to ensure that various potential views are represented. 
2.  Co-location Information. Evidence demonstrating co-location or that co-location is impractical for reasons of: 
a.  Lack of existing support structures. 
b.  Structural support capabilities. 
c.  Electromagnetic interference that cannot be corrected. 
d.  Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing support tower or to adapt an existing support tower for sharing are unreasonable (e.g. costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable). 
e.  Failing to meet service coverage area needs. 
f.  Other limiting factors that render existing support towers unsuitable. 
3.  Capacity Information. A report documenting the anticipated capacity of the proposed support tower, including the number and types of antennas. 
4.  Coverage Map. Within a three-mile radius of the proposed facility, a map with locations and boundaries of the coverage areas and search ring analysis for all of the applicant's anticipated tower sites. 
5.  Engineer's Statement. A statement from a qualified radio engineer documenting the reasons for the location, design, and height of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016) 
20.58.070   Findings.
To approve a wireless communication facility requiring a site plan review or conditional use permit, the review authority must make the following findings (if applicable) in addition to the findings required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements) for the applicable permit: 
A.  For a proposed lattice tower located in other than an industrial district, the applicant has demonstrated that there is no feasible alternative to use of a lattice tower at the proposed site or within the search ring. 
B.  The proposed wireless communication facility is designed at the minimal functional height. 
C.  The location for the wireless communication facility minimizes the visibility of the facility from residentially zoned property and minimizes the obstruction of scenic views from residentially zoned property. 
D.  Projection of the antenna or antenna array has been minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
E.  In the case of an application for use of a new site for wireless communication facilities, all reasonable opportunities to locate the facility or to co-locate the facility on an existing structure have been exhausted by the applicant and are not feasible. 
F.  Support towers located in an agricultural zoning district are located and designed to minimize dangers to aerial sprayers. 
G.  Sites near the project area, which are poorly suited for other forms of development, are unavailable for use by the wireless communication facility. 
H.  For planned developments, the underlying land use designation permits and would not be adversely affected by the proposed type of wireless communication facility. For example: in an industrial planned development, a lattice tower may be found to be acceptable while in a residential planned development, a stealth facility or monopole may be found to be acceptable, but a lattice tower would not. To determine the effect of the proposed wireless communication facility on the land use designation and the permit process required, use Table 20.58-2. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.050 - Permits required. 
A.  Permits Required. 
1.  Type A Antenna Arrays. A proposed Type A antenna array shall be approved administratively by the planning division if it complies with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
2.  Type B Antenna Arrays. 
a.  A proposed Type B antenna array requires the approval of a site plan review permit. 
b.  Any Type B antenna or antenna array considered by the planning division to be a stealth facility may be approved administratively by the planning division if it complies with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
3.  Wireless Communication Facilities with Support Towers. Table 20.58-2 identifies permits required for wireless communication facilities with support towers. Required permits depend on the type of support tower, the height of the facility, and the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
4.  Referral to Planning Commission. The planning division or the site plan review committee may refer any application for a wireless communication facility for review and final decision by the planning commission. In such cases the proposed facility shall require planning commission approval of a conditional use permit. 
5.  State and Federal Regulations. If any provisions of this chapter conflict with any state or federal law, the state or federal law shall prevail over the requirements of this chapter. If an applicant wishes to assert their rights under the federal "shot clock" rule pursuant to FCC Report and Order 14-153 or the State's AB 57, the applicant shall inform the city in writing of such at the time of application and meet all requirements of those regulations and this chapter. 
Table 20.58-2 Review Procedures for Support Towers for Wireless Communication Facilities 
	Stealth Wireless
Communication
Facility and
Antennas	Monopole Tower
and Antennas	Guyed Tower
and Antennas	Lattice
Tower and
Antennas
	Up to 
140% of 
Height Limit 	Over 
140% of 
Height 
Limit 	Up to 
125% of 
Height 
Limit 	Over 
125% of 
Height 
Limit* 	Up to 
125% of 
Height 
Limit 	Over 
125% of 
Height 
Limit* 	Up to the 
Permitted 
Tower 
Height 
Zoning District 							
P-OS, A-G 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-MH, R-IV, R-OV, U-T 	SP 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
C-O, C-N, C-SC, D-O, C-V, P-F 	A 	SP 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 
C-C, D-COR, D-CM, P-PK 	A 	A 	SP 	C 	X 	X 	X 
C-T, C-G, B-P 	A 	A 	SP 	C 	SP 	C 	C 
I-H, I-L 	A 	A 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP 
P-D 	See Section 20.58.070.H 
 
Key 
KA = Administrative approval by Planning Division (Building Permit) 
KSP = Site Plan Review Permit required 
KC = Conditional Use Permit required 
KX- = Prohibited 
K* = Cannot exceed Maximum Height Limits in Table 20.58-1. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.060 - Applications. 
A.  Administrative Approvals. 
1.  Wireless communication facilities requiring administrative approval by the planning division shall be reviewed as part of the building permit process. 
2.  The applicant shall submit all information needed by the planning division to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter as part of the building permit application. 
B.  Site Plan Review and Conditional Use Permits. An application for a proposed wireless communication facility that requires a site plan review or conditional use permit shall submit the following information in addition to the materials required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements). 
1.  Visual Impact Study. A graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower, antennas, and ancillary facilities from at least five (5) points within a one-mile radius. Such points shall be chosen by the applicant with review and approval by the director of development services to ensure that various potential views are represented. 
2.  Co-location Information. Evidence demonstrating co-location or that co-location is impractical for reasons of: 
a.  Lack of existing support structures. 
b.  Structural support capabilities. 
c.  Electromagnetic interference that cannot be corrected. 
d.  Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing support tower or to adapt an existing support tower for sharing are unreasonable (e.g. costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable). 
e.  Failing to meet service coverage area needs. 
f.  Other limiting factors that render existing support towers unsuitable. 
3.  Capacity Information. A report documenting the anticipated capacity of the proposed support tower, including the number and types of antennas. 
4.  Coverage Map. Within a three-mile radius of the proposed facility, a map with locations and boundaries of the coverage areas and search ring analysis for all of the applicant's anticipated tower sites. 
5.  Engineer's Statement. A statement from a qualified radio engineer documenting the reasons for the location, design, and height of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.58.070 - Findings. 
To approve a wireless communication facility requiring a site plan review or conditional use permit, the review authority must make the following findings (if applicable) in addition to the findings required by Chapter 20.68 (Permit Requirements) for the applicable permit: 
A.  For a proposed lattice tower located in other than an industrial district, the applicant has demonstrated that there is no feasible alternative to use of a lattice tower at the proposed site or within the search ring. 
B.  The proposed wireless communication facility is designed at the minimal functional height. 
C.  The location for the wireless communication facility minimizes the visibility of the facility from residentially zoned property and minimizes the obstruction of scenic views from residentially zoned property. 
D.  Projection of the antenna or antenna array has been minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
E.  In the case of an application for use of a new site for wireless communication facilities, all reasonable opportunities to locate the facility or to co-locate the facility on an existing structure have been exhausted by the applicant and are not feasible. 
F.  Support towers located in an agricultural zoning district are located and designed to minimize dangers to aerial sprayers. 
G.  Sites near the project area, which are poorly suited for other forms of development, are unavailable for use by the wireless communication facility. 
H.  For planned developments, the underlying land use designation permits and would not be adversely affected by the proposed type of wireless communication facility. For example: in an industrial planned development, a lattice tower may be found to be acceptable while in a residential planned development, a stealth facility or monopole may be found to be acceptable, but a lattice tower would not. To determine the effect of the proposed wireless communication facility on the land use designation and the permit process required, use Table 20.58-2. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.60 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES 
 
20.60.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community-wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult entertainment businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult entertainment businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult businesses in certain areas. 
This chapter identifies permitted locations for adult entertainment businesses within the City of Merced. Additional permit requirements for adult entertainment business can be found in Chapter 5.58 (Adult Entertainment Businesses) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.60.020 - Definitions. 
See Chapter 5.58 (Adult Entertainment Businesses) for definitions of adult entertainment businesses and related activities used in this Chapter as well as the following definitions: 
A.  Church. The term "church," as used in this article, is a structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
B.  School. The term "school" is any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.60.030 - Location. 
A.  Zoning Districts. Adult entertainment businesses shall be established or located only within the light industrial (I-L) or heavy industrial (I-H) zoning districts. 
B.  Distance Requirements. 
1.  An adult entertainment business shall not be established or located within: 
a.  One thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult business; or 
b.  One thousand (1,000) feet from any residential zone or use, park, religious facility, or school. 
2.  Minimum distances shall be measured as a direct line from the primary entrance of the adult entertainment business to the nearest property lines of the uses identified above. 
C.  Establishment Defined. The establishment of an adult entertainment business (as defined in Chapter 5.58 or any other business with similar operating characteristics or where "specified anatomical areas" as defined in Chapter 5.58 are regularly depicted, described, or displayed) shall mean: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an existing adult business, to any adult entertainment business defined in the Chapter 5.58 (Adult Entertainment Businesses); 
3.  The addition of any new activities associated with an adult entertainment business as defined in the Chapter 5.58 (Adult Entertainment Businesses) to any existing adult entertainment business; or, 
4.  The relocation of any adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.62 - SIGNS 
 
20.62.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards relating to the permitted type, size, height, placement, number, and design of signs in addition to the provisions in Chapter 17.36 (Signs). The intent of these standards is to: 
A.  Support economically viable businesses serving city residents, workers, and visitors. 
B.  Allow for signage that identifies businesses in a fair and equitable manner. 
C.  Protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the city. 
D.  Minimize hazards to motorists and pedestrians resulting from excessive, confusing, and distracting signs. 
E.  Allow for a simple and streamlined sign permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.62.020 - Applicability. 
The standards contained in this chapter apply to all signs within the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.62.030 - General standards. 
The following general standards apply to all signs: 
A.  Signs shall be appurtenant to any permitted use on the lot. 
B.  All signs shall comply with Chapter 17.36 (Signs) in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.62.040 - Specific standards by zoning district. 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  One (1) unlighted sign is allowed within all residential zoning districts subject to the following standards: 
a.  For signs containing only the name and title or occupation of the occupant, the sign area shall not exceed one (1) square foot. For R-4 zoning district, the sign area shall not exceed two (2) square feet. 
b.  For signs advertising the premises for sale, lease, or rent, the sign area shall not exceed four (4) square feet. Such signs shall not be located not nearer than ten (10) feet to adjoining premises, nearer than five (5) feet to a street line, or within the public right-of-way. The sign must be parallel with the face of the building and no more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the building. 
2.  For the R-MH zoning district, following additional standards apply: 
a.  No exterior advertising or sign shall be permitted except for: 
(1)  Directional signs. 
(2)  One (1) flush wall or fence-mounted sign identifying the name of the mobile home park. 
(3)  Other similar signs approved by director of development services. 
(4)  Outdoor advertising structure (e.g. billboards) shall be prohibited. 
b.  Signs shall not move or flash, and shall be indirectly lit so that the lighting is directed away from adjacent streets and residences. 
c.  Signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. 
d.  Signs shall be designed in harmony with parking and fencing. 
e.  Signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area for any social/recreational center. 
f.  Directory signs shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  A directory sign containing a map of the total park, the location, and identification of each lot shall be provided within the fenced area and not visible from the exterior of the park. 
(2)  The directory sign shall have an appropriate size and be located near the vehicular entrance to avoid having the driver leave his/her vehicle or detour from his/her entry route. 
(3)  The directory sign shall be illuminated for night usage. 
(4)  Additional directory signs, including content, size, and location, shall be approved by the development services department when a park has more than one (1) point of access from adjoining public streets. 
3.  Formal Gateways. Formal gateways in districts where permitted shall conform to the following requirements unless increased by conditional use permit: 
a.  Any such gateway shall be located entirely on private property. 
b.  Construction shall be of solid maintenance-free material in accordance with City specifications. 
c.  No such gateway shall be located closer than forty (40) feet from the nearest driveway or intersecting street. 
d.  The city shall incur no responsibility for present or future maintenance of such gateways. 
e.  Such gateway may contain two (2) solid corrosion-resistant plaques permanently mounted thereon designating the name of the subdivision or neighborhood. 
f.  No such gateway shall exceed six (6) feet in height above sidewalk or finished grade. 
B.  Commercial Zoning Districts. 
1.  For the C-O zoning district, the following standards shall pertain to all signs visible from exterior property lines. 
a.  Nameplates and other directory signs appurtenant to any permitted use are allowed. 
b.  The sign area shall not exceed four (4) square feet for each building, or four (4) square feet plus one (1) square foot per tenant for aggregated area for signs in any one (1) building. 
c.  Signs shall only be illuminated with indirect lighting. 
d.  No excessive content shall be allowed on signs other than the names, professions, location or any identification required by state or federal agencies of the occupants of any buildings on site. 
e.  An Administrative Conditional Use Permit, per Section 17.36.795 (Administrative Conditional Use Permit), is required for a single occupant sign exceeding the allowable area, but less than fifty (50) square feet per lot. 
f.  No exterior display or advertising allowed for incidental services, such as restaurants, pharmacies, and retail sales which serve occupants and patrons of the principal permitted use only. 
2.  The following standards shall apply to signs in the C-N and C-SC zoning districts: 
a.  Signs shall pertain only to a use conducted on the property. 
b.  Signs shall only be parallel with the wall of a neighborhood shopping center that has a 200-foot frontage. 
c.  Signs shall face the major street and any minor street. 
d.  No sign attached to a building shall project beyond the limits of the structure as shown on the architectural or engineering plan elevation of the building facing the property line abutting the street toward which the sign faces. 
e.  Sign areas shall be limited to one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building width as shown on an elevation plan of the building. 
f.  No sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
g.  Freestanding directional and off-street parking control signs shall be located at each entrance or exit servicing off-street parking and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
h.  Freestanding shopping center identification signs shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Sign shall be erected on a neighborhood shopping center with at least a 200-foot frontage on a major or minor street. 
(2)  Signs shall be permitted adjacent to each major street or each minor street on which the shopping center has at least two hundred (200) feet of property frontage. 
(3)  The area of signs only containing the name of the shopping center shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per face up to two (2) faces. 
(4)  Signs with names of businesses in the shopping center are allowed an additional two (2) square feet per listing per face. 
(5)  For shopping centers with less than two hundred (200) feet of property frontage on a minor street, signs shall be limited to one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building; provided that no sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
i.  Signs pertaining to the use of the building shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Signs shall only be erected parallel with the wall of the building most nearly facing the major street and any minor street on which a neighborhood shopping center has more than two hundred (200) feet of property frontage. 
(2)  No sign attached to the building shall project beyond the limits of the structure as shown on the architectural or engineering plan elevation of the building facing the property line abutting the street toward which the sign faces. 
(3)  The area of signs attached to the face of the building shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches from the face of the building. 
(4)  Signs perpendicular to the face of the building attached under a marquee or other similar structural permanent extension from the building shall be no greater than eight (8) inches in height and five (5) feet in length. Such signs shall be placed at least seven and one-half (7½) feet above the sidewalk level and shall not project beyond the limits of the marquee or roof. 
(5)  A sign that is on, under, or in front of the marquee shall be located not more than eighteen (18) inches from the edge of the marquee, no greater than eighteen (18) inches in height, and shall be placed at least seven and one-half (7½) feet above the sidewalk level. 
(6)  A sign is allowed at rear or side of a building if it is less than two hundred (200) feet on a minor street and at least fifty (50) feet from adjacent residential areas. 
j.  Lighted signs shall conform to following regulations: 
(1)  Lighted signs with direct or reflected lighting, any part of which flashes, blinks, turns off and on or which has mechanical or electrical movement of any kind, are prohibited. 
(2)  Red, amber or green signs may not be placed in any manner conflicting with traffic signals or which, in the opinion of the traffic safety committee, may confuse or tend to confuse drivers or operators of vehicles using the streets of the city. 
(3)  Exterior signs may be illuminated until 10:00 p.m. or the end of the business day, whichever is later. 
(4)  Spotlights or other illuminating devices may not be directed toward adjacent residentially zoned property. 
k.  Time and temperature signs shall be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit. 
(1)  Only the words or abbreviation of "time" and "temperature," and the electronically controlled figures indicating time and temperature shall be allowed. 
(2)  The area of the sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per face. 
3.  The following standards shall apply to signs in the C-C, C-G and C-T zoning districts: 
a.  The total sign area shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet per lot. 
b.  Except for the C-C zoning district, all signs adjacent to or across the street from a residential zoning district shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, unless the planning commission approves a conditional use permit for up to five hundred (500) square feet of total sign area per lot. 
c.  In C-T zones only, shopping centers located on a lot of ten (10) acres or larger and having at least two (2) street frontages may be allowed additional sign area over five hundred (500) square feet, but not more than one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage with a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission. 
d.  In addition, traffic safety committee approval is required for signs moving or containing flashing lights that might be mistaken for traffic control. 
4.  In the B-P zoning district, the total sign area of the sign shall not exceed one and one-half (1-½) square feet for each lineal foot of frontage of the property on which the use is located. 
C.  Industrial Zoning Districts. All signs within an industrial zoning district shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Signs shall be appurtenant to any permitted use on the property 
2.  The total sign area shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet per lot, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
3.  For the I-L zoning district, signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of frontage of the property on which the sign is located. 
4.  For the I-H zoning district, a conditional use permit is required for signs in excess of the allowable limit but not to exceed an additional five hundred (500) square feet of sign area per lot. 
D.  Standards for Other Zoning Districts. 
1.  In the P-PK zoning district, the total sign area shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet per lot. 
2.  In the A-G zoning district, signs shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  One (1) unlighted single-faced or double-faced sign shall be permitted. 
b.  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per face. 
c.  Signs shall pertain only to the sale, lease or hire of the premises, or products from the premises. 
d.  Signs may be able to advertise products produced upon the premises but they shall not be located any nearer than twenty (20) feet to adjoining premises or any nearer than ten (10) feet to a street line. 
e.  One (1) sign containing only the name and title or occupation of the occupant shall be allowed. Such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and shall be located no less than twenty (20) feet from adjoining premises or ten (10) feet from a street line. 
E.  Standards for Planned Development Zoning Districts. For neighborhood shopping centers (i.e. shopping center where a supermarket is a major tenant) in planned development zones, sign regulations shall not be less restrictive than those established for the C-N zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.62.050 - Specific standards by use. 
A.  Service Stations, Public Garages, and Parking Lots. 
1.  Only one (1) temporary or portable sign shall be permitted on the premises. 
2.  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
3.  Advertising of any product, service, or use other than the principal product, service, and use of the premises is prohibited, unless the advertising is otherwise permitted as a principal use in the district in which the use is located. 
4.  Beacons, pennants, flags or other attention-getting devices are prohibited. 
B.  Home Occupation and Commercial Use of Historic Buildings 
1.  Signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
2.  Signs may only display name and occupation or profession of the occupant. 
3.  Signs shall be only illuminated by non-flashing, non-scintillating reflected light. 
C.  Nonconforming Parcels, Uses, and Structures. 
1.  All nonconforming signs, billboards, or commercial advertising structures may be continued for a period of five (5) years after the date of enactment of this title. The nonconforming signs shall be either changed to conform to appropriate sign regulations or be removed at the end of this period. 
2.  With a conditional use permit, signs may be attached to a nonconforming use of a structure, with the same regulations that apply to the C-N zoning district.  
PART 4 - PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 20.64 - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY 
 
20.64.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of the city council, planning commission, site plan review committee, and director of development services in the administration of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.64.020 - Planning agency. 
The city council, the planning commission, the site plan review committee, and the director of development services shall function as the planning agency and as the advisory agency in compliance with Government Code Section 65100. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.64.030 - City council. 
The role of the city council in the administration of the zoning ordinance includes: 
A.  Serving as the review authority on legislative actions as shown in Table 20.64-1; and, 
B.  Reviewing appeals filed from planning commission decisions. 
Table 20.64-1 Review and Decision-Making Authority 
Type of Action 	Role of Authority [1] 
	Director of 
Development 
Services [2] 	Site Plan 
Review 
Committee 	Planning 
Commission 	City Council 
Legislative Actions 				
Annexations/Prezoning 	Recommend 		Recommend 	Decision 
Development Agreements 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
General Plan Amendments 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
Zoning Ordinance Amendments (Map & Text) 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
Permits 				
Conditional Use Permit 	Recommend 	- 	Decision 	Appeal 
Design Review/Historic Preservation Permit 	Recommend 	- 	Decision 	Appeal 
Minor Use Permit 	Decision 	- 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Site Plan Review Permit 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Special Project Permit 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
Variance 	Recommend 	- 	Decision 	- 
Other Approvals 				
Density Bonus 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
Interpretations/Determinations 	Decision 	- 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Minor Modification 	Decision 	- 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Reasonable Accommodations 	Decision 	- 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Site Utilization Plan Revisions (P-D Zone) 	Recommend 	- 	Recommend 	Decision 
Subdivision Map—Tentative 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 
Subdivision Map—Final 	Recommend 			Decision 
 
Notes: 
[1] "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body. 
[2] The director of development services may defer action and refer the request to the planning commission for consideration and final action. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.64.040 - Planning commission. 
The role of the planning commission in the administration of the zoning ordinance includes: 
A.  Serving as the review authority on permit and approval applications as shown in Table 20.64-1; 
B.  Reviewing appeals filed from site plan review committee decisions on site plan review permit applications; 
C.  Reviewing appeals filed from development services director decisions on discretionary permit applications; and, 
D.  Providing recommendations to the city council on legislative actions as shown in Table 20.64-1. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.64.050 - Site plan review committee. 
A.  Membership. 
1.  The site plan review committee shall consist of three (3) members holding the positions of the chief building official, director of development services, and the city engineer or their respective designees. 
2.  In the event any of these positions are vacant for more than thirty (30) days, the city manager may designate another city employee as a temporary substitute during the vacancy. 
B.  Role. The role of the site plan review committee in the administration of the zoning ordinance includes: 
1.  Serving as the review authority on site plan review applications; and, 
2.  Referring action as needed on any Site Plan Review Permit to the Planning Commission for review and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.64.060 - Director of development services. 
The role of the director of development services in the administration of the zoning ordinance includes: 
A.  Serving as the review authority on permit and approval applications shown in Table 20.64-1; 
B.  Interpreting the zoning ordinance as specified in chapter 20.04 (interpretation of the zoning ordinance); and, 
C.  Referring action as needed on any permit, approval, or interpretation to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.66 - PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW 
 
20.66.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, and initial processing of permit applications required by the Zoning Code. The term "permit" when used in this chapter refers to any action, permit, or approval listed in Table 20-64-1. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.020 - Application preparation and filing. 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. 
1.  The city encourages prospective applicants to request a pre-application conference with the development services department (planning division) before completing and filing a permit application. 
2.  The purpose of a pre-application conference is to: 
a.  Inform the applicant of city requirements as they apply to the proposed project; 
b.  Review the city's review process, possible project alternatives and conditions, or modifications; and, 
c.  Identify information and materials the city will require with the application, and any necessary technical studies and information relating to the environmental review of the project. 
3.  Information and materials provided by city staff to the applicant at the pre-application conference shall not be construed as a recommendation for either approval or denial of the proposed project. 
4.  Failure by city staff to identify at a pre-application conference all studies or application requirements shall not constitute a waiver of those studies or requirements. 
B.  Application Contents. 
1.  All permit applications shall be filed with the development services department on an official city application form or approved digital format. 
2.  The application shall be filed with all required fees, deposits, information, and materials as specified by the development services department. 
C.  Eligibility for Filing. 
1.  An application may only be filed by the owner of the subject property or the property owner's authorized agent. 
2.  The application shall be signed by either: 
a.  The owner of the subject property; or 
b.  The property owner's authorized agent with written authorization from the owner filed concurrently with the application. 
D.  Rejection of Application. If the development services department determines that an application is substantially incomplete and needs more information before it can be processed by the city, the development services department shall not accept the application for processing. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.030 - Application fees. 
A.  Fee Schedule. Application fees required for any permit application shall be paid as established by the most current City of Merced Planning and Development Application Fee Schedule. Application fees allow the recovery of costs incurred by the city in the processing and review of permit applications. 
B.  Timing of Payment. Permit applications shall not be deemed complete until all required application fees have been paid. 
C.  Refunds and Withdrawals. Processing fees cover city costs for public hearings, mailings, staff and consultant time, and other activities involved in processing permit applications. Consequently, no refund due to denial shall be provided. In the case of an application withdrawal, the development services department may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to-date and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. 
D.  Fee Adjustments. The director of development services shall have the discretion to lower or increase the fee amount in any individual case, not to exceed the actual cost of staff time, or waive payment for another governmental agency, or non-profit, tax exempt organization, or where good cause appears. If the director elects to increase the fee, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing within five (5) business days of application submittal and the applicant shall have ten (10) business days from that notice to pay the increased fee or withdraw the application. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.040 - Application review. 
A.  Review for Completeness. 
1.  Initial Review. The development services department (planning division) shall review each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being complete and officially filed. 
2.  Basis for Determination. The development services department acceptance shall be based on the city's list of required application contents and any additional written instructions provided to the applicant in a pre-application conference or during the initial application review period. 
3.  Notification of Applicant. Within thirty (30) calendar days of application acceptance, the development services department shall inform the applicant in writing if the application is incomplete and that additional information is required. If no such written notice is issued, then the application is deemed to be complete. 
4.  Submittal of Additional Information. When the development services department determines that an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness for resubmitted materials shall occur. The additional required information shall be submitted in writing or in a form deemed acceptable by the planning division. 
5.  Environmental Information. After the city has accepted an application as complete, the development services department may require the applicant to submit additional information for the environmental review of the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
B.  Referral of Application. At the discretion of the development services department, or where otherwise required by the Zoning Code, state, or federal law, an application may be referred to any public agency that may have an interest in the proposed project. 
C.  Multiple Applications. If a proposed project requires multiple permit approvals by both the planning commission and the development services department, the planning commission shall act upon all required permits as part of a single application. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.050 - Project evaluation and staff reports. 
A.  Staff Evaluation. Development services department staff shall review all applications to determine if they comply with the Zoning Code, other applicable provisions of the city code, the general plan, and other applicable city policies and regulations. 
B.  Staff Report. Development services department staff shall provide a written recommendation to the planning commission or city council, as applicable, as to whether the application should be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
C.  Report Distribution. Each staff report shall be furnished to the applicant at the same time it is provided to the review authority before action on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.060 - Environmental review. 
A.  CEQA Review. After acceptance of a complete application, planning staff shall review the project in compliance with CEQA to determine whether: 
1.  The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA; 
2.  The proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA; 
3.  A negative declaration may be issued; 
4.  A mitigated negative declaration may be issued; or 
5.  An environmental impact report (EIR) is required. 
B.  Compliance with CEQA. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of appropriate environmental documents, shall be in compliance with CEQA and any adopted city CEQA Guidelines or requirements. 
C.  Special Studies Required. Special studies for traffic, air quality, biology, etc., paid for in advance by the applicant, may be required to supplement the city's CEQA compliance review. Administrative processing fees for environmental reviews are also required per the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.66.070 - Applications deemed withdrawn. 
A.  Response Required. If an applicant does not provide any information within six (6) months of being requested by the development services department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn without any further action by the city. 
B.  Refund of Fees. Any remaining fees submitted with the project application shall be returned to the applicant in the event that an application is deemed withdrawn. Refunds can only be given within one (1) year after application submittal due to budgeting constraints. 
C.  Resubmittal. After the expiration or withdrawal of an application, future city consideration shall require the submittal of a new complete application and associated fees. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.68 - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
20.68.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies the purpose, thresholds for review, and findings for approval for each planning permit required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.020 - Conditional use and minor use permits. 
A.  Purpose. A conditional use or minor use permit is required for uses that are generally appropriate within a zoning district but potentially unsuitable in a particular location or in large numbers. A conditional use or minor use permit is a discretionary action that enables the city to ensure that a proposed use is consistent with all general plan goals and policies and will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
B.  Application Submittal and Review. Application for a conditional use or minor use permit shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  Conditional Use Permits. The planning commission shall take action on all conditional use permit applications. 
2.  Minor Use Permits. 
a.  The director of development services shall take action on all minor use permit applications. 
b.  The director of development services may refer any minor use permit application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. 
1.  Public notice and hearing for a conditional use permit shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearing). 
2.  No public notice or hearing is required for a minor use permit although all records relating to the permit shall be public records and shall be available for review upon request. 
E.  Findings for Approval. The review authority may approve an application for a conditional use or minor use permit application only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed use is consistent with the purpose and standards of the zoning district, the general plan, and any adopted area or neighborhood plan, specific plan, or community plan. 
2.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity of the subject property. 
3.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
4.  The proposed use is properly located within the city and adequately served by existing or planned services and infrastructure. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. The review authority may attach conditions to the approval of a conditional use or minor use permit as needed to ensure compliance with the general plan, zoning ordinance, Merced Municipal Code, city design standards, or any applicable specific plan, community plan, or area plan, policy, or ordinance adopted by the city. 
G.  Appeals. Decisions on conditional use and minor use permits may be appealed as provided for in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
H.  Post-Decision Procedures. Procedures and requirements relating to effective dates, time limits, changes to approved projects, resubmittals, and permit revocation shall apply to conditional and minor use permits as provided in Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
I.  Time Limits. If not exercised within five (5) years of approval, the conditional use permit shall expire. Time extensions of up to two (2) years may be approved by the director of development services. (Refer to Section 20.72.060(B) and (C) for definition of "exercised" and time extension procedures.) 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.030 - Design review permit. 
A.  Purpose. A design review permit is required for most types of development in portions of downtown Merced and areas directly west of the downtown area, see Figure 20.68-1 (Design Review Boundaries). A design review permit is a discretionary action that enables the planning commission and staff to ensure high quality development that enhances the visual qualities of Merced and creates and supports the city's economic development objectives. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A design review permit shall be required for the establishment of all new structures and modifications to existing structures within area identified in Figure 20.68-1, except for: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
b.  Structures accessory to single-family detached dwellings; and, 
c.  Structures located in the I-L and I-H zoning districts, which are subject to site plan review permits (Section 20.68.050) instead. 
2.  A legal description of the area subject to design review permit approval can be found in City Council Ordinance No. 2409 approving Zoning Ordinance Amendment No. 13-01 on June 17, 2013. 
Figure 20.68-1 Design Review Boundaries
 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  Planning Commission. The planning commission shall take action on all design review permit applications except as specified in Sections 2 and 3 below. 
2.  Development Services Department. Development services department staff shall take action on design review permit applications for the following projects: 
a.  Change in exterior wall paint color. 
b.  Installation of new signage and maintenance of existing signage, including new copy, painting, repair, and replacement of defective sign parts that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
c.  Any items referred to staff following planning commission review. 
d.  Minor modifications to design review permits approved by the planning commission or site plan review committee which do not alter the basic design or structure of the project. 
e.  Façade improvements to existing structures which do not increase the floor area of the structure by more than five (5) percent. 
f.  New structures less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet that are deemed by the director of development services to be minor in nature. 
3.  Staff Referral. The director of development services may choose to refer any design review permit application for review and final action by the planning commission. 
D.  Application Submittal and Review. Application for a design review permit shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). 
E.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing for a design review permit shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearing). Public hearings are only required for those Design review permits which go to the planning commission for approval, not staff-level reviews. 
F.  Features to Consider. When reviewing a design review permit application, the city may consider, but is not limited to, the following features of the project design: 
1.  The location of all structures on the property and compatibility with surrounding uses. 
2.  Proposed and existing landscaping, fencing, and other screening materials. 
3.  Design of all circulation, parking and loading facilities for vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and transit. 
4.  Screening of refuse facilities, utility meters, and mechanical equipment. 
5.  Building and site design, including exterior colors and architecture style. 
6.  Design and location of public infrastructure including curb cuts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sidewalk design, drainage, and fire hydrants. 
7.  Location, design, and intensity of all onsite exterior lighting. 
8.  Location and design of address system and graphics for mail delivery system. 
9.  Design of all open space areas. 
10.  Design, placement, dimension, and color of all signs and exterior graphics, including sign materials, lighting, sign intensity, and temporary signs. 
11.  Review of design and placement of facilities for physically handicapped or persons with disabilities. 
G.  Design Review Principles. When reviewing design review permit applications, the planning commission or city staff may consider the following design review principles: 
1.  Review of architectural character shall not be so restrictive that individual initiative is stifled in the design of any particular building or site. Rather, review exercised shall be the amount necessary to achieve the overall purpose and objective of the design review process. 
2.  Good architectural character is based upon the suitability of a building and site for its purposes; upon the appropriate use of sound materials, good relationship with other structures, and the character of the city; and upon the principles of harmony, preparation and design in the elements of the building and site. 
3.  Review of sign graphics shall be based upon suitability of the sign colors, placement, design to overall building design, and adjacent sign themes. The planning commission or city staff shall consider the extent, design and location of all temporary signs as well as permanent signs in the review of sign graphics. 
H.  Findings. The review authority may approve an application for a design review permit application only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed project is consistent with the general plan, and any adopted area, community, specific, or neighborhood plan. 
2.  The proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Code and Municipal Code. 
3.  The design and layout of the proposed project will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of existing and future neighboring properties and structures. 
4.  The proposed building design makes use of appropriate materials, texture and color, and will remain aesthetically appealing and appropriately maintained. 
5.  The proposed design will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity of the proposed project. 
I.  Conditions of Approval. The review authority may attach conditions to the approval of a design review permit as needed to ensure compliance with the general plan, Zoning Ordinance, Merced Municipal Code, city design standards, or any applicable specific plan, community plan, or area plan, policy, or ordinance, adopted by the city. 
J.  Appeals. Decisions on design review permits may be appealed as provided for in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
K.  Post-Decision Procedures. Procedures and requirements relating to effective dates, time limits, changes to approved projects, resubmittals, and permit revocation shall apply to design review permits as provided in Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.040 - Minor modification. 
A.  Purpose. A minor modification allows for small deviations from development standards to accommodate projects which meet the needs of property owners, are consistent with the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance and general plan, and do not negatively impact neighboring properties or the community at large. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Permitted Modifications. A minor modification may be granted to allow for a maximum ten (10) percent deviation from a physical development standard that applies to the subject property. Types of physical development standards eligible for a minor modification include: 
a.  Maximum height of buildings, fences, walls, and other structures; 
b.  Minimum and maximum setbacks from property lines; 
c.  Maximum lot coverage; 
d.  Dimensional standards for parking spaces, driveways, parking lots, and loading areas; and, 
e.  Other similar dimensional standards as determined by the director of development services. 
2.  Excluded Modifications. Minor modifications shall not be granted for: 
a.  Lot area, width, or depth; or, 
b.  Minimum number of off-street parking spaces; or, 
c.  Maximum residential density. 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  The director of development services shall take action on requested minor modifications. 
2.  The director of development services may choose to refer any minor modification application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
D.  Application Submittal and Review. An application for a minor modification shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified by the development services department, together with all required application fees. 
E.  No Public Notice and Hearing. No public notice and hearing shall be required for a minor modification application although all records relating to the modification shall be public records and shall be available for review upon request. 
F.  Findings for Approval. To approve a minor modification application, the director of development services shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The modification will be compatible with adjacent structures and uses and is consistent with the character of the neighborhood or district where it is located. 
2.  The modification will not adversely impact neighboring properties or the community at large. 
3.  The modification is necessary due to unique characteristics of the subject property, structure, or use. 
4.  Unique characteristics necessitating the modification generally do not apply to other properties in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. 
5.  There are no feasible design alternatives that meet the project objectives while eliminating the need for the requested modification. 
6.  The modification will be consistent with the purpose of the zoning district, the general plan, and any adopted area, community, or neighborhood plan. 
7.  The modification will not establish an undesirable precedent. 
G.  Conditions of Approval. The granting of a minor modification for approval by the director of development services may include such conditions as deemed reasonable and necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter, the Zoning Code, Merced Municipal Code, and the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.050 - Site plan review permit. 
A.  Purpose. A site plan review permit is a discretionary action that enables the city to determine a project's compliance with the zoning ordinance and ensure that it will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
B.  Applicability. The following uses and structures require a site plan review permit: 
1.  All uses as shown in Part 2 (Zoning District Standards), and, 
2.  All proposed uses and structures within the light industrial (I-L) and heavy industrial (I-H) zoning districts. 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  The site plan review committee shall take action on all site plan review permits. 
2.  The site plan review committee may refer any site plan review permit application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
D.  Application Submittal and Review. Application for a site plan review permit shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). 
E.  Public Notice and Hearing. No public notice and hearing for a site plan review permit shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearing), except for: 
1.  Those properties that are directly adjacent to any residentially zoned property in the city; or, 
2.  Site plan review permits required for interface (Chapter 20.32). 
In those cases, public notice shall be given to those adjacent properties at least ten (10) days prior to the site plan review meeting. 
F.  Findings for Approval. The site plan review committee may approve an application for a site plan review permit only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed project is consistent with the general plan, and any adopted area, specific, community, or neighborhood plan. 
2.  The proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and Municipal Code. 
3.  The design and layout of the proposed project will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of existing and future neighboring properties and structures. 
4.  The proposed architectural design makes use of appropriate materials, texture and color, and will remain aesthetically appealing and appropriately maintained. 
5.  Any proposed landscaping design, including color, location, size, texture, type, and coverage of plant materials, as well as provisions for irrigation, maintenance, and protection landscaping elements, will complement structures and provide an attractive environment. 
6.  The proposed design will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity of the proposed project. 
G.  Appeals. Decisions on site plan review permits may be appealed as provided for in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
H.  Post-Decisions Procedures. Procedures and requirements relating to effective dates, time limits, changes to approved projects, resubmittals, and permit revocation shall apply to site plan review permits as provided in Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.060 - Special project permit. 
A.  Purpose. The special project permit allows for high quality development that deviates from development standards required by the applicable zoning district. The special project permit is intended to promote creativity in building design and innovation in development concepts in a manner consistent with the general plan. The special project permit provides applicants with enhanced flexibility to take advantage of unique site characteristics to develop projects that will provide public benefits and enhance the quality of life in Merced. 
B.  Applicability. A special project permit may be granted in any zoning district provided that: 
1.  The proposed project is located on a minimum three (3)-acre parcel; and, 
2.  The proposed land uses are consistent with the applicable general plan land use designation. 
C.  Review Authority. The city council shall take action on all special project permits with a recommendation from the planning commission. 
D.  Adjustment of Standards. With approval of a special project permit, the city may allow for adjustment, up to fifty (50) percent unless otherwise provided for in the code, to all physical development standards that apply to the subject property, with the exception of an increase to the allowable residential density or intensity. Examples of physical development standards include height, setbacks, open space, lot coverage, and off-street parking requirements. 
E.  Application Submittal and Review. Application for a special project permit shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). 
F.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing for a special project permit shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearing). 
G.  Findings for Approval. The city may approve an application for a special project permit only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The proposed project is consistent with the purpose of the zoning district, the general plan, zoning ordinance, Merced Municipal Code, and any adopted area, specific, community, or neighborhood plan. 
2.  The proposed project will produce a development with greater public benefits than what might otherwise result from using the standard development regulations. 
3.  Public benefits provided by the proposed project are commensurate with the requested deviation from the standard development regulations. 
4.  The subject property is adequate in terms of size, shape, topography, and circumstances to accommodate the proposed development. 
5.  The proposed project will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity of the subject property. 
H.  Post-Decision Procedures. Procedures and requirements relating to effective dates, time limits, changes to approved projects, resubmittals, and permit revocation shall apply to special project permits as provided in Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.68.070 - Variance. 
A.  Purpose. A Variance is a discretionary permit that allows for deviation from physical development standards contained in the zoning ordinance. A Variance may be granted only when the strict application of development standards creates a unique hardship due to an extraordinary situation or circumstance associated with the property. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Allowable Variances. A Variance may be granted to allow for deviation from any physical development standard that applies to the subject property. Examples of physical development standards include height, setbacks, open space, lot coverage, and off-street parking requirements. 
2.  Variances Not Allowed. A variance shall not be granted to allow: 
a.  A land use that is prohibited in the applicable zoning district; 
b.  Deviation in excess of fifty (50) percent of a measurable requirement of the zoning ordinance; 
c.  Deviation from general plan policies; or, 
d.  Deviation from sign requirements in Chapter 17.36 (Signs) or Section 20.62 (Signs). 
C.  Review Authority. The planning commission, acting as the board of zoning adjustment, shall take action on all variance applications. 
D.  Application Submittal and Review. Application for a variance shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). 
E.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing for a variance shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearing). 
F.  Findings for Approval. The planning commission may approve an application for a variance only if all of the following findings can be made: 
1.  There are unique circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, that do not generally apply to other properties in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. Unique circumstances required for approval of a variance shall not include conditions created by any act of the property owner or occupant; personal, family, or financial conditions; loss of prospective profits; or neighboring violations. 
2.  The strict application of the zoning ordinance requirements would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. 
3.  The variance is necessary to preserve a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. 
4.  The variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. 
5.  The variance does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property. 
6.  The variance complies with applicable standards in the zoning ordinance, other city ordinances, the general plan and any other applicable community, neighborhood, specific, or area plan adopted by the city. 
G.  Precedent. The approval of a variance shall not set the precedent for the granting of any future variances. Each application shall be considered only on its individual merits. 
H.  Appeals. Decisions on variances, as quasi-judicial permits, may only be appealed to a court of law. 
I.  Post-Decision Procedures. Procedures and requirements relating to effective dates, time limits, changes, resubmittals, and permit revocation shall apply to variances as provided in Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.70 - PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARINGS 
 
20.70.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides procedures for public hearings required by the zoning ordinance. When a public hearing is required, advance notice of the hearing shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted, in compliance with this chapter and applicable state law. In the event of any conflict between these provisions and requirements of state law, state law shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.020 - Notice of hearing. 
When the zoning ordinance requires a noticed public hearing before a decision on a permit, or for another matter, the public will be provided notice of the hearing as required by this chapter. 
A.  Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include all of the following information, as applicable. 
1.  Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the hearing body; and the phone number and street address of the development services department where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information. 
2.  Project Information. The name of the applicant, the city's file number assigned to the application, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, a general description of the location of the subject property, and any recommendation from a prior hearing body. 
3.  Statement on Environmental Document. A statement that the proposed project is determined exempt under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), or that a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report has been prepared for the project. The hearing notice shall state that the hearing body will consider approval of the CEQA determination or document prepared for the proposed project. 
B.  Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing shall be given as follows: 
1.  Mailing. Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days (or as otherwise provided by CEQA) before the scheduled hearing to the following recipients: 
a.  Project Site Owners and the Applicant. The owners of the subject property or the owners' authorized agent, and the applicant. 
b.  Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide roads, schools, wastewater, streets, water, or other essential facilities or services to the subject property, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
c.  Affected Owners. All owners of real property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property. The department of development services may distribute notice to additional properties as needed to ensure adequate public notification of the proposed project. 
d.  Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the department of development services. 
e.  Other Persons. Any other person whose property might, in the judgment of the department of development services, be affected by the proposed project. 
2.  Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with Subsection 1 above is more than one thousand (1,000), the department of development services may choose to provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) page in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation in Merced at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
3.  Publication and Posting. If notice is mailed or delivered as described in Subsection 1 above, the notice shall also be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Merced at least ten (10) days before the scheduled hearing and posted to the city's website. 
4.  Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the department of development services may provide any additional notice, including the posting of signs, and content deemed necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.030 - Scheduling of hearing. 
After the completion of any environmental document required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), a development services department staff report, and any additional materials required to render a decision, a matter requiring a public hearing shall be scheduled on the next available agenda reserved for public hearings, but no sooner than any minimum time period established by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.040 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  General. Hearings shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the procedure adopted or endorsed by the hearing body. 
B.  Time and Place of Hearing. A hearing will be held at the date, time, and place for which notice was given, unless the required quorum of hearing body members is not present. 
C.  Continued Hearing. Any hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice; provided that the chair of the hearing body announces the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the adjournment or recess of the hearing. 
D.  Motion of Intent. The hearing body may announce a tentative decision, and defer its action on a final decision until appropriate findings and conditions of approval have been prepared. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.050 - Recommendation by planning commission. 
After a public hearing resulting in a planning commission recommendation to the city council, the development services department shall forward the recommendation to the city council. A copy of the recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. If at least four (4) members of the planning commission do not vote to recommend approval or denial, then that action shall be deemed a recommendation of denial. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.060 - Decision and notice. 
A.  Date of Action. With the exception of appeals to the city council, the hearing body shall take action on the matter being considered following the close of the public hearing. The hearing body shall also take action on projects within the following timeframe as required by the California Environment Quality Act (CEQA): 
1.  Within sixty (60) days of the date a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration has been adopted for project approval, the city shall take action on the accompanying discretionary project. 
2.  Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the decision-making authority certifies a final environmental impact report (EIR), the city shall take action on the accompanying discretionary project. 
B.  Decision. 
1.  The hearing body may announce and record its decision on the matter being considered at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing, or make a motion of intent and continue the matter to a later meeting agenda. 
2.  At the conclusion of a hearing conducted by the development services director, the development services director may choose to refer the matter to the planning commission for review and final decision. Referral to the planning commission may be chosen in cases of unusual public sensitivity, controversy, or complexity relating to a requested approval. 
C.  Conditions of Approval. The review authority may attach conditions to the approval of a discretionary permit, approval, or legislative action as needed to ensure compliance with the Merced Municipal Code, general plan, or any applicable specific plan, community plan, or area plan adopted by the city council. 
D.  Notice of Decision. Following a final decision, the city will provide notice of its final action to the applicant and to any person who specifically requested notice of the final action. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.70.070 - Effective date of decision. 
A.  Development Services Director's or Planning Commission's Decision. The decision of the director of development services or planning commission is final and effective after 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5 th ) business day following the date the decision is rendered, when no appeal to the decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
B.  City Council Decision. A decision of the city council is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.72 - POST-DECISION PROCEDURES 
 
20.72.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements that apply following a city decision on a permit or other approval required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.020 - Issuance of permits. 
Permits shall not be issued until the effective date, provided no appeal of the review authority's decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 20.76 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.030 - Performance guarantees. 
A.  Security Required. The director of development services may require an applicant to provide adequate security to guarantee the proper completion of any approved work or compliance with any conditions of approval. 
B.  Form of Security. The security shall be in the form of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or a performance bond executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in California and approved by the city. 
C.  Amount of Security. The director of development services shall determine the amount of the security necessary to ensure proper completion of the approved work or compliance with applicable conditions of approval. 
D.  Duration of Security. The security shall remain in effect until all work has been completed and conditions fulfilled to the satisfaction of the director of development services or until a specified warranty period has elapsed. 
E.  Release of Security. The security deposit shall be released upon completion of the approved work or compliance with applicable conditions of approval. 
F.  Failure to Comply. 
1.  Upon failure to complete any work or comply with conditions, the city may complete the work or fulfill the condition, and may collect from the applicant or surety all costs incurred, including administrative, engineering, legal, and inspection costs. 
2.  Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the funding source. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.040 - Legislative action agreement. 
A.  Agreement Required. Approval of a general plan amendment, zoning ordinance amendment (text or map), conditional zoning, annexation/prezoning, or other legislative action is subject to the applicant entering into a written agreement with the City of Merced known as a legislative action agreement. 
B.  The legislative action agreement shall state the applicant agrees to: 
1.  Comply with all conditions of the legislative action. 
2.  Pay all required fees, taxes, and assessments in effect when any subsequent permits or approvals are issued, including, but not limited to, public facilities impact fees, regional traffic impact fees, and Mello-Roos taxes. Payment shall be submitted at the time of building permit issuance for each phase of development unless the city requires payment at a different time. 
C.  The city council shall approve the legislative action agreement with the applicant at the same meeting at which the related legislative action is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.050 - Changes to an approved project. 
An approved project shall be established only as approved by the review authority, except when changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Request for a Change. 
1.  An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall submit appropriate supporting materials, an explanation of the reasons for the request, and applicable processing fees. 
2.  Changes may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use. 
B.  Notice and Hearing. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing for the requested change, except as allowed by Subsection C (Minor Changes) and shall give notice in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
C.  Minor Changes. The director of development services may authorize minor changes to an approved project if the changes comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The requested changes are consistent with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  The requested changes are consistent with the spirit and intent of the original approval. 
3.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for findings in a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report for the project. 
4.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for conditions of approval for the project. 
5.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a specific consideration by the review authority in granting the approval. 
6.  The requested changes do not involve any expansion or intensification of the use or structure by no more than ten (10) percent. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.060 - Time limits and extensions. 
A.  Expiration of Permit. A permit or approval not exercised within two (2) years after the date of approval shall be eligible for revocation as provided in Section 20.72.070 (Permit Revocation) below, except where an extension of time is approved as allowed by Subsection C (Extension of Time). 
B.  Exercised Defined. A permit or approval shall be considered exercised when: 
1.  A building permit is issued and construction has commenced; or, 
2.  A certificate of occupancy is issued; or, 
3.  A business license is issued; or, 
4.  The use is established. 
C.  Extension of Time. The director of development services may approve an extension to a permit or approval in the following manner: 
1.  The applicant shall submit to the development services department a written request for an extension of time no later than ten (10) days before the expiration of the permit or approval. 
2.  The director of development services may extend the permit or approval for an additional one (1) year period if the applicant has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in efforts to exercise the permit or approval in a timely manner. 
3.  The burden of proof is on the applicant to demonstrate that the permit should be extended. 
4.  The director of development services may choose to refer any extension of time requests to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.070 - Permit revocation. 
Any discretionary permit may be revoked, or conditions of approval modified, as provided for in this section. 
A.  Review Authority. 
1.  A permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally approved the permit. 
2.  In instances where the director of development services was the approval authority, the director of development services may choose to refer any action to revoke or modify a permit to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
B.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing for any action to revoke or modify a permit shall be provided in full compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
C.  Findings. The review authority may revoke or modify a permit only if one (1) or more of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The applicant or property owner has altered the circumstances under which the permit was granted to a degree that one (1) or more of the findings required to grant the original permit can no longer be made. Altered circumstances include, but are not limited to, the modification of the business, a change in scope, emphasis, size, or nature of the business, or the expansion, alteration, reconfiguration, or change of use. 
2.  Permit issuance was based on misrepresentation by the applicant, either through the omission of a material statement in the application, or in public hearing testimony. 
3.  One (1) or more conditions of approval have been violated, or have not been complied with or fulfilled. 
4.  The use or structure for which the permit was granted no longer exists or has been discontinued for a continuous period of at least twelve (12) months. 
5.  The applicant or property owner has failed or refused to allow inspections for compliance. 
6.  Improvements authorized by the permit are in violation of the zoning ordinance or any law, ordinance, regulation, or statute. 
7.  The use or structure is being operated or maintained in a manner which constitutes a nuisance. 
8.  The permit was not exercised within two (2) years after the date of approval. 
D.  Effect of Revocation. The revocation of a permit shall have the effect of terminating the approval and denying the privileges granted by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.080 - Resubmittals. 
A.  Resubmittals Prohibited. For a period of twelve (12) months following the denial or revocation of a permit, no application for approval of the same or substantially similar project shall be submitted, unless the denial or revocation was made without prejudice, and so stated in the record. 
B.  Determination. The director of development services shall determine whether the new application is for a project which is the same or substantially similar to the previously denied or revoked permit. 
C.  Appeal. The determination of the director of development services may be appealed to the planning commission, in compliance with Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.72.090 - Permits to run with the land. 
Permits and approvals issued in compliance with the zoning ordinance remain valid upon change of ownership of the site, structure, or use that was the subject of the permit application, unless revoked by the city in accordance with Section 20.72.070 (Permit Revocation). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.74 - APPEALS 
 
20.74.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for the appeal of decisions made by the planning commission, the site plan review committee, and the director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.74.020 - Appeal subjects and jurisdiction. 
A.  Director of Development Services and Site Plan Review Committee Decisions. Any decision by the director of development services and site plan review committee on discretionary permits and approvals may be appealed to the planning commission. 
B.  Planning Commission Decisions. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.74.030 - Filing and processing of appeals. 
A.  Eligibility. Any person or persons may submit an appeal of a decision by the director of development services, site plan review committee, or planning commission. 
B.  Timing of Appeal. An appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a planning commission decision, and five (5) business days (excluding official city holidays) following a decision by the director of development services or site plan review committee. 
C.  Form of Appeal. 
1.  An appeal shall be submitted in writing in a form acceptable to the city together with all required application fees. 
2.  The appeal application shall specifically state the pertinent facts and the basis for the appeal. 
3.  The whole decision or part of the decision may be appealed. If an appellant chooses, an appeal may be taken solely from any finding, action, or condition. 
D.  Effect of Appeal. Once an appeal is filed, any action on the associated project is suspended until the appeal is processed and a final decision is rendered by the review authority. 
E.  Report and Noticed Hearing 
1.  When an appeal has been filed, the development services department shall prepare a report on the matter, including all of the application materials in question, and schedule the matter for a public hearing by the appropriate review authority within ninety (90) days of receiving the appeal. 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
3.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
4.  All appeals on a single project shall be considered together at the same hearing. 
F.  Hearing and Decision. 
1.  During the appeal hearing, the review authority may take action on the specific basis for the appeal, or may reconsider the project in its entirety ("de novo" review). The review authority shall make its own decision supported by findings. In doing so, it may: 
a.  Affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action that is the subject of the appeal; or, 
b.  Adopt additional conditions of approval that address the matter appealed; or, 
c.  Remand the appeal for further review, recommendation, or action to the previous review authority. 
2.  The review authority's action shall be based upon findings of fact about the particular case. The findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the appeal and verify the compliance of the subject of the appeal with the zoning ordinance. 
3.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause (e.g., additional CEQA review is required). 
4.  If the hearing body is unable to reach a decision on the matter appealed, the decision of the previous review authority shall remain in effect. 
G.  Effective Date of Appeal Decision. 
1.  City Council Decisions. A decision of the city council is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
2.  Planning Commission Decisions. A decision of the planning commission is final and effective after 5:00 p.m. five (5) business days following the date the decision is rendered, when no appeal to the decision has been filed in compliance with this chapter. In the event the completion of the appeal period falls on a weekend or holiday, the decision shall become effective after 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.74.040 - Judicial review. 
No person may seek judicial review of a city decision on a permit or other matter in compliance with the zoning ordinance until all appeals to the planning commission and city council have been first exhausted in compliance with this article.  
Chapter 20.76 - COVENANTS FOR EASEMENTS 
 
20.76.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides procedures for obtaining a covenant for an easement, pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65870 to 65875. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.76.020 - Applicability. 
A.  General. This chapter shall apply to all development projects approved by the city, and acts independently from any other authority or method for the city to require an easement. 
B.  Limitations. 
1.  The provisions of this chapter shall only apply when the covenant for easement is for: 
a.  Parking; or, 
b.  Ingress, egress, or emergency access; or, 
c.  Light or air access; or, 
d.  Landscaping; or, 
e.  Open space purposes. 
2.  At the time of recording the covenant of easement, all the real property benefited or burdened by said covenant shall be in common ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.76.030 - Procedures. 
A.  Record of Covenant. Whenever the planning commission, director of development services, or city council determines that a covenant of easement is needed for one (1) or more of the purposes identified in Section 20.76.020 (Applicability), the approval shall not become effective unless or until said covenant of easement is recorded and applicable city fees are submitted. 
B.  Preparation of Covenant. Whenever a covenant of easement is required, the covenant shall be either: 
1.  In a form and manner approved by the city attorney based upon the advice of the city engineer and director of development services; or, 
2.  Prepared by the city attorney. Whenever the city attorney prepares a covenant of easement, the city shall be entitled to reimbursement from the applicant for all associated costs. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.76.040 - Content of covenant. 
A covenant of easement required by this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
A.  Identification of Owner. Identification of the owner or owners of the real property to be burdened, including a statement that both the burdened and benefited parcels are under common ownership. 
B.  Consent. A consent to the covenant of easement and its recording by the record owner or owners to the covenant. 
C.  Identification of Property. Identification and legal description of the real property to be benefited and to be burdened by the covenant. 
D.  Covenant as Easement. 
1.  A statement that said covenant shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, including an express statement that the easement and covenant of easement shall not merge into any other interest in real property pursuant to California Government Code Section 65871(b). 
2.  A statement that the covenant of easement shall run with the land, be binding upon all successors in interest to the burdened real property, inure to all successors in interest to the real property benefited, and be subject to California Civil Code Section 1104. 
3.  A statement of the purpose of the easement (i.e. for access, parking, etc.). 
E.  Identification of Approval. Identification of the approval, permit, or designation granted which required the covenant. 
F.  Release Statement. A statement identifying the Merced Municipal Code section which sets forth the procedure for release of the covenant. 
G.  Execution. An appropriate section for execution of the covenant of easement by the record owner of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.76.050 - Release of covenant. 
A.  Applicability. Any person may request that the city make a determination as to whether the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement is still necessary to achieve the city's land use goals. The determination of the need for the covenant of easement shall be made by the review authority that took final action on the original application. A person shall be entitled to only one such determination in any twelve (12) month period. 
B.  Request for Determination. To obtain a determination as mentioned above, a "Request for Determination" application shall be made and filed with the planning division or city clerk. The application shall include a fee as set by city council resolution. 
C.  Public Hearing and Notice. Upon receipt of a completed application, the planning division or city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, in a manner consistent with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
D.  Decision. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the review authority shall determine and make a finding, based upon substantial evidence in the record, whether or not the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement is still necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city. If the review authority determines that the covenant for easement is still required, the review authority shall by resolution determine that the need still exists. 
E.  Approval of Release. If the review authority finds that the covenant of easement is no longer necessary, the review authority shall by resolution make the determination and finding and direct the city attorney to prepare a release thereof and transmit the same to the city clerk for recording. 
F.  Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. Planning commission action on the continuing need for the covenant of easement is subject to appeal by following the procedure set forth in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
G.  Finality. The city council's determination shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.78 - CONDITIONAL ZONING 
 
20.78.010 - Purpose. 
Conditional zoning is a discretionary action that enables the city to ensure that proposed zoning map amendments do not create negative impacts to the community or public service provision. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.78.020 - General. 
A.  Imposition of Conditions. Upon the establishment of zoning for any property newly annexed, or upon any rezoning of property within the City of Merced, the city council may impose conditions deemed necessary to: 
1.  Protect the community against potentially negative effects of uses permitted in the zoning district regulations; or, 
2.  Facilitate meeting the community's public service demands created or affected by use of such parcel of land as permitted by the zoning district regulations. 
B.  Zoning Map Notation. Imposition of conditions pursuant to this chapter shall be indicated by appropriate designation on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.78.030 - Initiation of development. 
Three (3) years after the approval of conditional zoning, the planning commission may review the conditional zoning district to determine development progress. If at that time no progress has been made towards the development for which the conditional zoning was obtained, the planning commission may recommend to the city council that the conditional zoning be revoked and the land revert to its original zoning designation. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.78.040 - Amendments to conditions. 
A.  General. Any amendments or changes to approved conditions shall be approved by the city council. The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing for the requested change in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
B.  Minor Changes. Minor changes to conditions may be approved by the director of development services, provided that the changes comply with the criteria in Section 20.72.050 (Minor Changes). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.78.050 - Subsequent zone changes. 
A.  Zone Changes Permitted. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or a portion of a property subject to conditional zoning to another zoning district. 
B.  Effect of Zone Change. When a property subject to conditional zoning is rezoned to a different zoning district, the conditions imposed under the former zoning designation shall cease to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.78.060 - Compliance and enforcement. 
A.  Compliance Required. All uses and development established on a property subject to conditional zoning shall comply with the conditions imposed by the city as part of the rezoning. 
B.  Violations. Any failure to comply with a condition shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance and shall be corrected in a manner consistent with Title 1 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
C.  Rezoning. If a violation of a condition is not corrected, the city may revoke the conditional zoning and rezone the property to any other zoning district as deemed appropriate. Such rezoning shall occur in a manner consistent with Chapter 20.80 (Zoning Ordinance Amendments). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.80 - ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 
 
20.80.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for amending the zoning ordinance text and map. All amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be processed as set forth in Government Code Section 65853 et seq. and as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.80.020 - Initiation. 
A.  Zoning Map Amendment or Zone Change. A request for an amendment to the zoning map may be initiated by: 
1.  The city council; or, 
2.  The planning commission (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
3.  The director of development services (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
4.  One (1) or more owners of the property for which the amendment is sought. 
B.  Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment. A request for an amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance may be initiated by: 
1.  The city council; or, 
2.  The planning commission (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
3.  The director of development services (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
4.  Any resident, property owner, or business owner in the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.80.030 - Application. 
An application for a zoning ordinance amendment shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified by the development services department, together with all required application fees. For amendments submitted by a resident, property owner, or business owner, it is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 20.80.060 (Findings and Decision). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.80.040 - Planning commission hearing and action. 
A.  General. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed zoning ordinance amendment in compliance with Chapter 20.72 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
B.  Recommendation of Approval. The planning commission may recommend to the city council the approval or conditional approval of the proposed zoning ordinance amendment, based upon the findings specified in Section 20.80.060 (Findings and Decision) below. The development services department shall forward the planning commission's recommendation, and the reasons for the recommendation, to the city council within ninety (90) days after the date the hearing was closed to the public. A recommendation for approval shall be made by a majority vote of the total membership of the planning commission. 
C.  Denial. 
1.  The planning commission may recommend denial of the proposed zoning ordinance amendment based upon the findings specified in Section 20.80.060 (Findings and Decision) below. 
2.  If at least four (4) members of the planning commission do not vote to recommend approval or denial, then the action shall be deemed a recommendation of denial. 
3.  For a zoning map amendment, if the action of the planning commission is to recommend denial, the city council is not required to take further action on the proposed amendment unless an interested party requests a hearing in writing (along with applicable fees) with the city clerk or planning division within five (5) business days after the planning commission recommendation is filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.80.050 - City council hearing and action. 
A.  General. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation of approval on the proposed zoning ordinance amendment, the city council shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). If the planning commission recommends denial or their action was deemed a recommendation of denial, then the city council shall not be required to take any further action on the amendment unless an interested party requests a hearing by filing a written request with the city clerk or planning division within five (5) business days after the planning commission files its recommendations with the city council. 
B.  Approval or Denial. The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed zoning ordinance amendment. The city council shall approve zoning ordinance amendments by ordinance. 
C.  Finality of Action. The action by the city council shall be by a majority vote of the entire Council and shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  Referral to Commission. If the city council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the zoning ordinance amendment not previously considered by the planning commission, the proposed modification may be first referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
E.  Failure to Report. Failure of the planning commission to report back to the city council within sixty (60) days following the referral, or within the time set by the city council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.80.060 - Effective dates. 
A zoning ordinance amendment becomes effective thirty (30) calendar days following the second reading and adoption of the ordinance by the city council at the first regular council meeting following the introduction of the ordinance at the conclusion of the public hearing. (See Government Code Section 36937). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.82 - GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS 
 
20.82.010 - Purpose. 
This article establishes procedures for amending the general plan. All amendments to the general plan shall be processed as set forth in Government Code Section 65350 et seq. and as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.020 - Initiation. 
A.  Land Use Map Amendments. A request for an amendment to the general plan land use map may be initiated by: 
1.  The city council; or, 
2.  The planning commission (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
3.  The director of development services (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
4.  One (1) or more owners of the property for which the amendment is sought. 
B.  Text Amendments. A request for an amendment to the text of the general plan may be initiated by: 
1.  The city council; or, 
2.  The planning commission (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
3.  The director of development services (with the concurrence of the city council); or, 
4.  Any resident, property owner, or business owner in the City of Merced. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.030 - Application. 
An application for a general plan amendment shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified by the development services department, together with all required application fees. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.040 - Planning commission hearing and action. 
A.  General. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed general plan amendment in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
B.  Recommendation. After the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a written recommendation on the general plan Amendment. A recommendation for approval shall be made by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total membership of the planning commission. If at least four (4) members of the planning commission do not vote to recommend approval or denial, then that action shall be deemed a recommendation of denial. The planning commission shall send its recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.050 - City council hearing and action. 
A.  General. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation of approval, the city council shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). If the planning commission recommends denial or their action was deemed a recommendation of denial, then the city council shall not be required to take any further action on the general plan amendment unless an interested party requests a hearing by filing a written request (along with any applicable fees) with the city clerk or planning division within five (5) business days after the planning commission files its recommendations with the city council. 
B.  Approval or Denial. The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. The city council shall approve the general plan amendment by resolution. 
C.  Finality of Action. The action by the city council shall be by a majority vote of the entire council and shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  Referral to Commission. If the city council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the general plan amendment not previously considered by the planning commission, the proposed modification may be first referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
E.  Failure to Report. Failure of the planning commission to report back to the city council within sixty (60) days following the referral, or within the time set by the city council, shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.060 - Effective dates. 
A general plan amendment becomes effective immediately following the adoption of the resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.82.070 - Timing of amendments. 
There shall be no limit on the number of times the general plan may be amended in a single calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.84 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS 
 
20.84.010 - Purpose. 
In accordance with federal and state fair housing laws, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide reasonable accommodations in the city's zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. A reasonable accommodation is typically an adjustment to physical design standards to accommodate the placement of wheelchair ramps or other exterior modifications to a dwelling in response to the needs of a disabled resident. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.84.020 - Review authority. 
A.  The director of development services shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny all applications for a reasonable accommodation. 
B.  If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another city staff-level discretionary permit or approval, then an applicant may request that the director of development services hear the request for a reasonable accommodation at the same time as the other discretionary permit or approval is heard. If the applicant does not request a simultaneous hearing, then the request for a reasonable accommodation shall not be heard until after a final administrative decision has been made regarding the other discretionary permit or approval. 
C.  If the project for which the request for a reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval that is subject to planning commission action, the applicant may elect to have the planning commission hear the request for a reasonable accommodation and act as the review authority at the same time as the other discretionary permit or approval is heard. If the applicant does not request a simultaneous hearing, then the request for a reasonable accommodation shall not be heard until after a final decision has been made by the city regarding the other discretionary permit or approval. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.84.030 - Application submittal and review. 
A.  Applicant. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with a disability. A reasonable accommodation may be approved only for the benefit of one (1) or more individuals with a disability. 
B.  Application. An application for a reasonable accommodation from a zoning regulation, policy, or practice shall be made in writing in a form acceptable to the development services department. No fee shall be required for a request for reasonable accommodation, but if the project requires another discretionary permit, then the prescribed fee shall be paid for all other discretionary permits. 
C.  Other Discretionary Permits. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit or approval, then the applicant may file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit or approval. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation and the discretionary permit. 
D.  Required Submittals. In addition to materials required under other applicable provisions of this code, an application for reasonable accommodation shall include the following: 
1.  Documentation that the applicant is: 
a.  An individual with a disability; or, 
b.  Applying on behalf of one (1) or more individuals with a disability; or, 
c.  A developer or provider of housing for one (1) or more individuals with a disability. 
2.  The specific exception or modification to the Zoning Code provision, policy, or practices requested by the applicant; 
3.  Documentation that the specific exception or modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one (1) or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling; and, 
4.  Any other information that the director of development services reasonably concludes is necessary to determine whether the findings required by Section 20.86.040 (Decision), hereof, can be made, so long as any request for information regarding the disability of the individuals benefited complies with fair housing law protections and the privacy rights of the individuals affected. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.84.040 - Decision. 
A.  Hearing Officer Action. 
1.  The director of development services shall issue a written determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation, and the modification or revocation thereof in compliance with subsection B below. 
2.  The reasonable accommodation request shall be heard with, and subject to, the notice, review, approval, and appeal procedures prescribed for a minor use permit (Section 20.68.020). 
3.  The standard of review on appeal shall not be de novo and the planning commission or city council, as applicable, shall determine whether the findings made by the hearing officer are supported by substantial evidence presented during the evidentiary hearing. 
4.  The planning commission or city council, as applicable, acting as the appellate body, may sustain, reverse, or modify the decision of the hearing officer or remand the matter for further consideration, which remand shall include specific issues to be considered or a direction for a de novo hearing. 
B.  Findings. 
1.  The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval: 
a.  The requested accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of one (1) or more individuals with a disability protected under the fair housing laws. 
b.  The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one (1) or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
c.  The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city as "undue financial or administrative burden" is defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law. 
d.  The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's zoning program, as "fundamental alteration" is defined in fair housing laws and interpretive case law. 
e.  The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
2.  In making these findings, the decision maker may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant. 
C.  Criteria for Decision. 
1.  The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one (1) or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling: 
a.  Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of life of one (1) or more individuals with a disability. 
b.  Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent the accommodation. 
c.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and market participants. 
d.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing supply of facilities of a similar nature and operation in the community is sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to live in a residential setting. 
2.  The city may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of Merced's zoning regulations: 
a.  Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking. 
c.  Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the city's general plan or an applicable specific plan. 
d.  In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation. 
D.  Rules While Decision is Pending. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
E.  Effective Date. No reasonable accommodation shall become effective until the decision to grant such accommodation shall have become final by reason of the expiration of time to make an appeal. In the event an appeal is filed, the reasonable accommodation shall not become effective unless and until a decision is made by the planning commission or city council as, applicable, on such appeal, under the provisions of Chapter 20.74 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.84.050 - Post-decision procedures. 
A.  Expiration. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall expire within twenty-four (24) months from the effective date of approval or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval unless: 
1.  A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced; 
2.  A certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
3.  The use is established; or, 
4.  A time extension has been granted. 
B.  Time Extension. The hearing officer may approve a time extension for a reasonable accommodation for good cause for a period or periods not to exceed three (3) years. An application for a time extension shall be made in writing to the director of development services no less than thirty (30) calendar days or more than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration date. 
C.  Notice. Notice of the hearing officer's decision on a time extension shall be provided as required for a minor use permit (Section 20.68.020). All written decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth in subsection D below. 
D.  Appeal of Determination. A time extension for a reasonable accommodation shall be final unless appealed to the city council within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of mailing of the determination. An appeal shall be made in writing and shall be noticed and heard pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 20.74 (Appeals), as modified by Section 20.84.040 (Decision). 
E.  Violation of Terms. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this code may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith. 
F.  Discontinuance. A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar days. If the persons initially occupying a dwelling vacate, the reasonable accommodation shall remain in effect only if the director of development services determines that: 
1.  The modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with the code; and, 
2.  The accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling. 
3.  The director of development services may request the applicant or his or her successor-in-interest to the property to provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within ten (10) business days of the date of a request by the city shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the city of a previously approved reasonable accommodation. 
G.  Revocation. Procedures for revocation shall be as prescribed by Chapter 20.72 (Post-Decision Procedures). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.84.060 - Amendments. 
A request for changes in conditions of approval of a reasonable accommodation, or a change to plans that would affect a condition of approval shall be treated as a new application. The director of development services may waive the requirement for a new application if the changes are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or addition to the plan or the conditions of approval, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
Chapter 20.86 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
20.86.010 - Purpose. 
A development agreement is a contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Government Code Section 65864 et seq. The purpose of a development agreement is to: 
A.  Facilitate development projects for which there is significant applicant contribution toward infrastructure, public facilities, open space or other amenities, or other programs of benefit to the city and its residents. 
B.  Assure the applicant that upon approval of the subject project, the project may proceed in accordance with existing city policies, rules, and regulations in place at the time of development agreement approval. 
C.  Encourage private participation in comprehensive planning and provision of public facilities, including, but not limited to, streets, sewage, transportation, potable water, schools and utilities. 
D.  Provide a net benefit to the city and its residents not otherwise obtainable through other processes. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The city may enter into a development agreement with any person or their authorized agent who has legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of the property. 
B.  The procedures and regulations of this chapter are not meant to preclude or limit the power of the city to approve and implement development agreements by other means. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.030 - Review authority. 
A development agreement is a legislative act. The city council shall take action on all development agreement applications after considering the recommendation of the planning commission and city staff. Procedures for considering development agreements are spelled out in this chapter and in city council Resolution No. 1995-06, adopted on February 6, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.040 - Application submittal and review. 
An application for a development agreement shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 20.66 (Permit Application and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified by the development services department, together with all required fees. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.050 - Public notice and hearings. 
Public notice and hearing for an application for a development agreement shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 20.70 (Public Notice and Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.060 - Planning commission action. 
After the public hearing on a development agreement application, city staff shall forward a written recommendation of the planning commission. The recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council within ninety (90) calendar days after the date the hearing was closed to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.070 - City council action. 
A.  Approval or Denial. 
1.  Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation on a development agreement application, the city council shall conduct a public hearing and take action on the application. 
2.  The action by the city council shall be by a majority vote of the entire council and shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  Referral to Commission. 
1.  If the city council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the development agreement not previously considered by the planning commission, the proposed modification may be first referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
2.  Failure of the planning commission to report back to the city council within sixty (60) calendar days following the referral or other such time set by the council shall be deemed an approval by the planning commission of the proposed modification. 
C.  Adoption by Ordinance. If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by adoption of an ordinance. The effective date of the development agreement shall be the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.080 - Finding. 
The city council may approve an application for a development agreement only if the development agreement is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific or community plan. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.090 - Conditions of approval. 
The city council may attach conditions to the approval of a development agreement as needed to ensure compliance with all applicable policies, standards, and regulations in the general plan, zoning ordinance, and other titles of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.100 - Content of the development agreement. 
A.  Mandatory Contents. All development agreements shall specify all of the following: 
1.  The specified duration of the development agreement. 
2.  The permitted uses of the subject property. 
3.  The permitted density or intensity of development of the subject property. 
4.  The maximum permitted height and size of proposed structures. 
5.  Provisions for the dedication or preservation of land for public purposes, if applicable. 
B.  Optional Contents. Development agreements may specify any of the following: 
1.  The conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, as long as such provisions do not prevent development of the land for the uses and the density or intensity as set forth in the agreement. 
2.  Requirements that construction be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase of the project be completed within a specified time. 
3.  Terms and conditions related to applicant financing of necessary public facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.110 - Recordation. 
A.  Within ten (10) calendar days after the city enters a development agreement, the city clerk shall record the agreement with the county recorder. 
B.  The city clerk shall record with the county recorder if at any time the development agreement is amended, cancelled, terminated, or modified. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.120 - Effect of development agreement. 
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations, and official policies governing allowed uses of the land, density, design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement are the rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.130 - Periodic review. 
A.  The city may perform a periodic review of the development agreement at any time that the city considers to be appropriate, but no more than once every twelve (12) months, at which time the property owner shall demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. The review shall be limited in scope to compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. 
B.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall begin the review by giving notice to the property owner that the city intends to undertake a review of the development agreement. The planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing to assess compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. Public notice shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the day the planning commission will be conducting the review. 
C.  The costs of notice and related costs incurred by the city for review shall be borne by the property owner. 
D.  If the planning commission finds the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded. 
E.  Failure of the city to conduct a periodic review shall not constitute a waiver by the city of its rights to enforce the provisions of the development agreement. The property owner shall not assert any defense to the enforcement of the development agreement by reason of the failure of the city to conduct a periodic review. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.140 - Amendment or termination. 
A.  General. 
1.  Either the property owner or the city may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of an existing development agreement. 
2.  Except as specified in Section B below, the procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement. 
B.  Amendment or Termination Following Periodic Review. If, as a result of review under Section 20.86.130 (Periodic Review), the city determines that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement, the city may modify or terminate the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.86.150 - Pre-annexation development agreements. 
A.  Pre-Annexation Development Agreement Required. Prior to annexation into the City of Merced, the owner of any property located in unincorporated Merced County shall enter into a pre-annexation development agreement with the city in a manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter and city council Resolution No. 2005-101, adopted on September 6, 2005. 
B.  Operative Date. A pre-annexation development agreement established prior to annexation shall not become operative unless annexation proceedings are completed by the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) within the period of time specified by the agreement. If the annexation is not completed within the time specified in the agreement or any extension of the agreement, the agreement is null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
PART 5 - GLOSSARY (DEFINITIONS)  
Chapter 20.90 - GLOSSARY (DEFINITIONS) 
 
20.90.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in the zoning ordinance that are technical or specialized, or which may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with others in the Municipal Code, these definitions shall control for only the provisions of this Zoning Code. If a word is not defined in this chapter or in other chapters of the zoning ordinance, the director of development services shall determine the appropriate definition. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016)  
20.90.020 - Definitions. 
1.  Accessory Structure . A structure that is subordinate to a primary structure such as a single-family dwelling or an allowed use within a zone. The use of an accessory structure is incidental to that of the primary structure or a use allowed by a zone. Excluded from this definition are trash enclosures, planter boxes with a maximum height of forty-two (42) inches, small-animal pet shelters, playground equipment, small sheds not subject to a building permit, and similar structures. 
2.  Accessory Use. A use subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same premises and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the primary use. 
3.  Addition. A structural expansion that is physically connected to a previously existing building. 
4.  Adult Entertainment Businesses. See Merced Municipal Code Chapter 5.58 (Adult Entertainment Businesses). 
5.  Agricultural Processing. The cooking, dehydrating, refining, milling, pressing, or other treatment of agricultural products that changes the naturally grown product for consumer use or for further processing, and receiving agricultural products from other growers for such processing. Examples of agricultural processing uses include cold storage houses; wineries, hulling operations for on-site or off-site products; fruit dehydrators; dryers, and the sorting, cleaning, packing, bottling, storing, or warehousing, pruning and sale of orchard and farm wood, and the wholesaling, transportation and distribution of agricultural products. 
6.  Airports and Heliports. A specified area designed and used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including airplanes and helicopters. 
7.  Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) . A master plan prepared in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 21670 et seq. which provides for the orderly growth of airports and provides measures for mitigating the public's exposure to excessive noise and safety hazards within areas around public airports. 
8.  Alcoholic Beverage Sales . A facility selling alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption with the sale of alcoholic beverages constituting its primary source of revenue. 
9.  Alley. A roadway no wider than twenty-two (22) feet that functions as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
10.  Animal Keeping. The keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, or other livestock on farms, rangeland, or pasture. This definition excludes slaughterhouses and animal product production uses. 
11.  Automobile Repair. See "Vehicle Repair." 
12.  Bail Bond Business . A commercial establishment that provides funds to a defendant to guarantee that the defendant will appear in court at a scheduled time. 
13.  Banks, Retail. Financial institutions providing on-site banking services to customers. This definition includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of money, but excludes check-cashing establishments. 
14.  Bars. Any area devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Bars in restaurants shall not include the restaurant dining area. This definition includes cocktail lounges, lounges, taverns, and other similar uses. 
15.  Base Zoning District . The primary zoning, as distinguished from an overlay zone, that applies to a parcel of land as shown on the zoning map. 
16.  Bed and Breakfast . A structure with one (1) or more managers in permanent residence and from one (1) to six (6) guest rooms without individual cooking facilities rented for overnight lodging, and serving at least (1) meal per day. This definition excludes hotels and motels, but includes hostels. See Section 20.44.030. 
17.  Beginning of Construction. Incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of the buildings. 
18.  Billboard . Any sign or sign structure not devoted to use of the property upon which it is located. 
19.  Boarding or lodging house. A dwelling or part where meals and/or lodging are provided, for compensation, for persons not transients. 
20.  Building. Any structure having a permanent foundation and a roof supported by columns, or by walls. 
21.  Building Coverage. All of the area of any building site occupied by any main building or accessory buildings, which is calculated by adding the areas computed from the outside dimension of buildings. 
22.  Building Supplies and Home Improvement Stores. A retail establishment selling primarily home improvement products and/or building supplies. Generally, stores are very large carrying various building and home improvement supplies, including lumber, building materials, paint, garden supplies, hardware, flooring, and plumbing materials. 
23.  Business Support Services. An establishment that provides services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis. This definition includes computer rental and repair, catering, printing and duplicating services, outdoor advertising services, package delivery services, equipment rental and leasing, and other similar land uses. 
24.  By-Right. Permitted without any form of discretionary approval. 
25.  Cardroom. A gaming establishment that exclusively offers card games for play by the public in accordance with Chapter 9.08 (Gaming). This definition excludes casino related establishments. 
26.  Caretaker's Home. A permanent residence that is provided as an accessory use to a nonresidential use, and is used to house an owner, operator, guard or caretaker, and his or her family, to provide around-the-clock service, support, care or monitoring of the use and/or site. 
27.  Cemeteries and Mausoleums. A place used for the interment of human or animal remains or cremated remains. This definition includes burial parks, crematoriums, mausoleums, columbarium, associated sales and maintenance facilities, and other similar land uses. 
28.  Centerline. The right-of-way centerline for a street or alley, as established by official survey. 
29.  Check Cashing/Payday Loan Establishments. A business, other than a bank or similar financial institution, which cashes checks for a fee or provides payday loans as a principal business activity. 
30.  City Council. The city council of the City of Merced. 
31.  Cocktail Lounges. See "Bars." 
32.  Colleges and Trade Schools. A private or public institution that provides full-time or part-time education beyond high school and grants associate, bachelor, or similar higher degrees. This definition includes trade and vocational schools, which provides vocational training for people beyond high school. This definition also includes specialized instructional establishments that provide on-site training of business, commercial, or trade skills. 
33.  Commercial Recreation, Indoor. An establishment that provides entertainment activities or services in an indoor setting for a fee or admission charge. This definition includes bowling alleys, electronic game arcades, billiard halls, pool halls, sports clubs, fitness centers, commercial gymnasiums, dancehalls, and movie theatres. Establishments such as a restaurant or laundromat that offer less than six (6) game machines to its customers as an accessory use are excluded from this definition. 
34.  Commercial Recreation, Outdoor. An establishment that provides entertainment activities or services outside of a building for a fee or admission charge. This definition includes golf driving ranges, water parks, amusement parks, fairgrounds, commercial sports centers, commercial camps and campgrounds, and other similar uses. 
35.  Community Assembly. A facility that provides meeting space for public gatherings. This definition includes places of worship, community centers, club meeting space, social halls, and other similar public or quasi-public uses. 
36.  Community Garden. An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or ornamental crops for personal or group use, consumption, or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members. 
37.  Conditional Use Permit. A discretionary permit approved by the planning commission to ensure that a proposed use is consistent with all general plan goals and policies and will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
38.  Conditional Zoning. A discretionary action approved by the city council to ensure that proposed zoning changes do not create negative impacts to the community or public service provision. See Chapter 20.78 (Conditional Zoning). 
39.  Condominium. An undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. 
40.  Construction and Material Yards. A large structure or area that stores materials used in new construction. 
41.  Corner Triangle. The triangular area created by a line connecting points along the front and side lot lines, which points are established forty (40) feet in distance from the intersection of the extension of such front and side lot lines within the street right-of-way, and by a line connecting points along the front lot line and driveway apron, which points are established ten (10) feet in distance from the intersection of the extension of such front lot line and driveway apron within the perpendicular to the street right-of-way. (See Section 20.30.030). 
42.  Crop Cultivation. The growing and harvesting of agricultural produce for food and fiber. This definition includes farms (including farmworker housing), orchards, groves, greenhouses, lath houses, horticultural nurseries, and nurseries primarily engaged in growing crops, plants, vines, or trees and their seeds. This definition excludes growing of marijuana and any onsite sale of products. 
43.  Cultural Institution. A public or nonprofit institution that engages in cultural, scientific, and/or educational enrichment. This definition includes libraries, museums, art galleries, performing art centers and theatres, and other similar uses. 
44.  Curb Cut . The length of the opening along a street curb providing access to a driveway from an abutting street. 
45.  Dancehall. See "Nightclubs." 
46.  Day Care Center. A facility that provides non-medical care and supervision of minors for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours. This definition includes nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, infant day care centers, cooperative day care centers, and similar uses. 
47.  Day Care Home Facilities. A facility providing daytime supervision and care for adults, children, or elderly located in the provider's own home. Day care home facilities serve fourteen (14) persons or less. 
48.  Day Care Home Facilities, Large Family. A day care home facility with nine (9) to fourteen (14) children, including children under ten (10) years of age who reside in the home. 
49.  Day Care Home Facilities, Small Family. A day care home facility with eight (8) children or less, including children under ten (10) years of age who reside in the home. 
50.  Decorative Wall. A wall that serves as a component of the site or landscape design, or a wall that functions as a connection between buildings to screen parking lots or mechanical equipment, or as a retaining wall or an architectural or landscape feature. 
51.  Density Bonus. An increase in the maximum number of residential dwelling units that are allowed on a site, granted in exchange for affordability restrictions and one (1) or more concessions that constitute a specified public benefit. See Chapter 20.56 (Density Bonus). 
52.  Density, Residential. The number of dwelling units per acre. 
53.  Development. Any human-caused change to land that requires a permit or approval from the city. 
54.  Development Agreement. A contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, approved by the city council. (See Chapter 20.86.) 
55.  Development Standards. Regulations that limit the size, bulk, or placement of structures or other improvements and modifications to a site. 
56.  Director of Development Services. The director of development services (or "development services director") for the City of Merced who serves as a review authority on permit and approval applications as shown in Table 20.66-1 (Review and Decision-Making Authority), and refers action on permits, approvals, or interpretations, as needed to the planning commission. 
57.  Discretionary Approval. An action by the city by which individual judgment is used as a basis to approve or deny a proposed project. 
58.  Drive-in Restaurant. A commercial establishment whose primary business is serving food to the public for consumption on the premises by order from and service to vehicular passengers outside the structure. 
59.  Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales. A facility where a customer is permitted or encouraged, either by the design of physical facilities or by the service procedures offered, to be served while remaining seated within a vehicle. This definition includes drive-through restaurants, drive-in restaurants, fast-food restaurants with drive-through driveway, coffee shops, pharmacies, banks, automatic car washes, and other similar land uses. 
60.  Drive-through Restaurant. A commercial establishment engaged primarily in the business of preparing food and purveying it on a self-service or semi self-serve basis and which includes a window designed to accommodate automobile traffic that obtains food on a take-out basis. 
61.  Duplex Home. A residential structure that contains two (2) dwelling units, each with its own entrance. Each unit within a duplex home provides complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
62.  Dwelling or Dwelling Unit. A building or a portion of a building (not including tents, cabins, or trailers) containing one (1) or more habitable rooms used or designed for occupancy by one (1) or more persons for living and sleeping purposes, including kitchen and bath facilities. Arrangements characterized by apartment-like subunits in individual interior bedrooms within a dwelling unit are prohibited, such as, for example, keyed locks or deadbolts on interior room doors; separate entrance or access from street, side yard, or backyard to interior rooms; or separate cooking facilities in individual rooms, including, but not limited to, cooking range and oven. 
63.  Dwelling Group. Dwelling group means a group of two (2) or more detached single, duplex, or multiple dwellings located on a parcel of land in one (1) ownership. 
64.  Dwelling, Multiple-family. Multiple-family dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed for or used by three (3) or more households with separate housekeeping facilities for each. 
65.  Dwelling, Single-family. Single-family dwelling means a building designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by one (1) household. 
66.  Dwelling, Two-family or Duplex. See "Duplex Home." 
67.  Easement. A space on a parcel of land, indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed restriction, where the owner has granted one (1) or more property rights to a person, corporation, public agency, or other entity. 
68.  Emergency Shelter. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
69.  Equipment Sales and Rental. Businesses selling or renting tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar equipment. Equipment sales and rental uses may include the storage, maintenance, and servicing of such equipment. 
70.  Farmers Market. A market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, locally produced arts and crafts items but excludes second-hand goods. Food and beverages dispensed from booths located on site is permitted as an accessory use. 
71.  Farmworker Housing. Employee housing consisting of no more than thirty-six (36) beds in a group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designated for use by a single family or household. Employee housing shall be deemed an "agricultural" use of property and is subject only to the same requirements than all other agricultural uses in each zoning district. Employees do not have to work on the property where the employee housing is located. 
72.  Fast-food Restaurant. A commercial establishment engaged primarily in the business of preparing food and purveying it on a self-service or semi self-serve basis. Customer orders and/or service may be by means of a walk-up counter or window designed to accommodate automobile traffic. 
73.  Fence. A structure connected by boards, masonry, rails, panels, wire, or any other acceptable building material for the purpose of enclosing space or separating parcels of land. This definition also includes gates and hedges. 
74.  Flea Market. An open market that opens on a regular schedule where people rent spaces to sell or exchange merchandise on trucks or temporary stands. 
75.  Floor Area. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a structure, measured from the interior faces. 
76.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The gross floor area of a building, including the garage area, divided by the total lot area of the parcel on which the building is situated. 
77.  Foster Family Homes. A home where the caregiver, in their own home, provides care and supervision for foster children and the caregiver has control of the property. This also includes sibling care for up to eight (8) children provided the requirements of Section 1505.2 of the Health and Safety Code are met. 
78.  Foster Family Homes, Large. A foster family home with more than six (6) persons. 
79.  Foster Family Home, Small. A foster family home with six (6) persons or fewer. 
80.  Freight Terminal. A facility where goods and cargo are stored, unloaded, and loaded as part of a process for shipment and distribution. 
81.  Front/Frontage. A portion of a lot or building which faces a street. 
82.  Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of the human dead. This definition includes areas for assembly services and living quarters for the funeral parlor manager. 
83.  Gas and Service Stations. Any facility used primarily for the retail sale and dispensation of motor fuels, lubricants, and motor vehicle accessories. Included in this definition are incidental food and beverage sales (also widely known as convenience market) and car wash facilities. 
84.  Golf Courses. An area of land used for the playing of golf, consisting of at least nine (9) holes, and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. This definition includes accessory uses such as driving ranges, pro shops, restaurants, and other similar uses. 
85.  Government Offices. A place of employment occupied by governmental agencies and their employees. This definition includes offices for administrative, clerical, and public contact functions; post offices; and other similar land uses. 
86.  Grading . The act of excavation, cutting, or filling or combination thereof or any leveling to a smooth horizontal or sloping surface on a property. 
87.  Group Housing . Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or semi-transient residents on a weekly or longer basis. This definition includes rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, transitional and supportive housing, farmworker housing, and other types of organizational housing. Excludes facilities included in hotels and motels, extended stay hotels, or fraternity or sorority homes. 
88.  Guest House . A detached habitable structure, which does not contain kitchen facilities and which is designed for and used to house nonpaying transients, visitors, or guests of the occupants of the primary dwelling. 
89.  Habitable Structure. A structure that meets the requirements of the California Building Code for habitable living area. 
90.  Hazardous Waste. Any refuse or discarded material that cannot be handled by routine waste management techniques because it poses a threat to human health or other living organisms because of its chemical, biological, or physical properties. 
91.  Hearing Officer. "Hearing officer" means a person designated by the city council to conduct hearings as set forth in Chapter 20.98 of this code. A hearing officer shall be selected in a manner that avoids the potential for pecuniary interest or other bias. The compensation, if any, of the hearing officer shall be paid by the city and shall not be conditioned on achieving a particular result or outcome. 
92.  Height, Building. The vertical distance from the average level of the ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the building, excluding chimneys and other building accessories as specified in Chapter 20.24 (Height Measurement and Exceptions). 
93.  Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property. Generally, home occupations do not create additional traffic impact by employees or customers, and any other impact associated with businesses. 
94.  Home Occupation, Major . Home occupation businesses that creates minor increase in traffic and other impacts, such as employees, parking, deliveries, and, therefore, require additional review before approval. Types of major home occupations include photo/art studios, one-on-one instruction such as tutoring, music or swim lessons, small offices w/employee(s), and other similar uses. 
95.  Home Occupation, Minor . Home occupation with no additional traffic, employees, or other impact, such as customers coming to the home. Types of minor home occupations include professional offices for accountants, architects, computer programmer, engineers or other similar profession; telephone and online sales and survey; and other domestic services, including cottage food, laundry, ironing, and sewing. 
96.  Hookah Lounge. A commercial establishment where groups of people gather around a table with hookah pipes to smoke flavored tobacco. 
97.  Hospital. A medical facility engaged primarily in the provision of diagnostic services and extensive medical treatment, including surgical services and in-patient beds. 
98.  Hotels and Motels. A facility containing guestrooms where lodging is provided for a fee, with or without cooking facilities in individual rooms or suites. Included in this definition are meeting facilities, personal services, recreational facilities, small food service areas, and retail sales that are incidental to guestroom facilities and intended to primarily serve hotel or motel guests. Includes extended stay hotels. 
99.  Household. Household means one (1) or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption, sharing a dwelling unit and using a single common cooking facility in a living arrangement usually characterized by sharing living expenses, such as rent or mortgage payments, food costs and utilities, as well as maintaining a single lease or rental agreement for all members of the household. 
100.  Impervious Surface . Any surface that does not permit the passage of water. Impervious surfaces include buildings, parking areas, and all paved surfaces. 
101.  Instructional Services. A commercial establishment providing specialized programs in personal growth and development such as music, martial arts, vocal, fitness, gymnastics, and dancing instruction. 
102.  Intensity . The amount of an area that is developed as measured by a variety of means, including lot coverage, building massing, floor to area ration (FAR), or building square footage. 
103.  Interior remodel. A change or alteration in only the interior of a building that does not increase its net square footage. 
104.  Kennels. Any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot, or area in or on which six (6) or more dogs, cats, or other similar household pets not owned by the kennel operator and of at least four (4) months of age are kept, harbored, or maintained. This definition includes pet day care facilities and animal shelters, but excludes pet shops and animal hospitals that provide twenty-four (24)-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services. 
105.  Landscaping. The planting and maintenance of living plant material, including the installation, use, and maintenance of any irrigation system for the plant material, as well as nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials). 
106.  Laundry Plant. A central processing facility for cleaning of clothing and fabrics collected from and returned to patrons and to dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
107.  Legislative Action Agreement. A contract between the city and an applicant for legislative actions, approved by the city council. See Section 20.72.040 (Legislative Action Agreement). 
108.  Live/Work Unit. A building or space within a building that is used jointly for commercial and residential purposes. Applies to caretakers of visitor-serving properties. 
109.  Loading Space. A space or berth that is on the same site with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, that is designed for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials, and that can be accessed from a street or alley. 
110.  Lot. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as required in this title. Such lots shall have frontage on public street, and may consist of: a) a single lot of record; b) a portion of a lot of record; c) a combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or d) a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title. Notwithstanding the above, where a shopping center, multiple-use building, or one (1) tenant, business or enterprise and any accessory use(s) occupies two (2) or more contiguous lots, such lots shall be considered as one (1) lot for purposes of signage limitations. (See also, "Parcel.") 
111.  Lot Area. The total computed area contained within the property lines of a parcel of land. 
112.  Lot, Corner. Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street. If the angle of intersection is more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot is an "interior lot." The point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines or the extension of the lines to a point is the corner. 
113.  Lot Coverage. The area of a lot occupied by buildings, structures, and required parking areas unobstructed from the ground upward. Lot coverage does not include fences, walls, hedges, swimming pools or uncovered patios. 
114.  Lot Depth. The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front and rear property lines. For irregularly shaped lots, the parcel depth shall be as determined by the director of development services. 
115.  Lot, Flag, or Panhandle Lot. A lot connected to the street with a narrow access portion less than forty (40) feet wide and more than twenty feet long and situated so that another lot is located between the main portion of the flag lot and the street. 
116.  Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
117.  Lot Line. The property line bounding a lot. 
118.  Lot Line, Exterior. Any lot line separating a lot from a street. 
a.  Front Lot Line. The shortest exterior lot line on any lot. 
b.  Side Street Lot Line. Any exterior lot line other than the front line (corner lot). 
119.  Lot Line, Interior. Any lot line not an exterior lot line. 
a.  Rear Lot Line . The interior lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. 
b.  Side Lot Line . Any interior lot line other than the rear lot line. 
c.  Alley Lot Line . Any lot line separating a lot from an alley. 
120.  Lot, Reverse Corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot. 
121.  Lot, Through. A lot with frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
122.  Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side property lines, measured at right angle to the side property lines at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. For irregularly shaped lots, the parcel width shall be as determined by the director of development services. 
123.  Maintenance and Repair Services . Businesses which provide construction, maintenance and repair services off-site, but which store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or similar work on-site. This definition includes off-site plumbing shops, general contractors, contractor's storage yards, appliance repair, janitorial services, electricians, pest control, heating and air conditioning, roofing, painting, landscaping, septic tank service, and other similar uses. 
124.  Manufacturing and Processing, General. Any establishment engaged in any of the following activities within enclosed structures: manufacturing or compounding of raw materials, agriculture product and food processing, manufacturing of finished products or parts from predominantly previously prepared materials, fabrication, assembly, processing, or distribution. 
125.  Manufacturing and Processing, Heavy. An establishment engaged in manufacturing or processing that necessitates the storage of large volumes of potentially flammable, toxic, explosive, or unsightly materials, or which produce dust, smoke, fumes, odors, or noise at levels that would affect surrounding uses. 
126.  Manufacturing and Processing, Light. The manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing and custom manufacturing. 
127.  Massage Establishments. A facility that offers massage as defined in Chapter 5.44 (Massage Establishments) of the Merced Municipal Code. 
128.  Medical Offices and Clinics . A facility where medical, mental, dental, or other personal health services for humans are provided on an outpatient basis using specialized equipment. This definition includes offices providing medical services and containing medical professionals such as physicians, dentists, optometrists, or other similar medical professionals. Hospitals are excluded from this definition. 
129.  Minor Use Permit. A discretionary permit approved by the director of development services to ensure that a proposed minor use is consistent with all general plan goals and policies and will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
130.  Mixed Use. Two (2) or more different land uses located in one (1) structure or on one (1) parcel or development site. 
131.  Mobile Home. A housing structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, designed and equipped to be used with or without a foundation system, certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S. Section 5401 et seq). Mobile home does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory built housing as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code. All mobile homes are required to be on a permanent foundation and to be hooked up to city's water and sewer. 
132.  Mobile Home Park. A residential development designed and developed for occupancy by mobile homes and manufactured housing. 
133.  Mobile Food Vendors. Businesses selling food or non-alcoholic drink from temporary and semi-permanent structures or mobile equipment, like food trucks or pushcarts. Examples include food trucks, refreshment stands, roadside stands, and push-carts. Regulations on hours of operation, time limits on parking, etc., are outlined in Chapter 5.54 (Street and Sidewalk Vendors). Mobile food vendors that park in a permanent location are regulated under Section 20.44.020 (Food Trucks Parked in Fixed Locations). 
134.  Mobile Home Sales. A facility selling pre-manufactured homes, such as mobile homes or trailers, to customers. This definition includes facilities displaying multiple mobile homes or trailers on-site, or offices with storage of homes in a separate location. 
135.  Mobile Vendors (Non-Food). Businesses selling non-food items or services (dog-grooming, auto glass, etc.) from temporary and semi-permanent structures or mobile equipment. Such uses shall be subject to the same zoning standards and regulations as similar uses that are non-mobile. 
136.  Multiple-Family Dwellings. A residential structure that contains three (3) or more dwelling units. Each unit within a multiple-family dwelling provides complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. Examples include apartment buildings, residential condominiums, attached townhouses, fraternity or sorority houses, and boarding homes. 
137.  New construction. A new building not physically connected to a previously existing building. 
138.  Nightclubs. A commercial establishment that serves alcohol for onsite consumption and which provides live music, music videos, and/or disk jockeys, as well as area to dance or participate in regularly featured entertainment activities and events that include, but not limited to, drinking games. This definition also includes a commercial establishment catering to adult patrons that are eighteen (18) years of age and older that does not serve alcohol for consumption on the premises, but provides live music, music videos, or disk jockeys, as well as a place for dancing, like a dance hall. 
139.  Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was lawfully constructed, but that no longer conforms with the development standards of the zone in which it is located. 
140.  Nonconforming Use. A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the time the use was established, but that no longer conforms with the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
141.  Nonhabitable residential structure. A building on a residential property that is not legally habitable, such as a garage or shed. 
142.  Nonresidential. A structure that does not meet the definition of residential. 
143.  Nursing and Convalescent Homes. An establishment providing long-term and 24-hour nursing and personal care for the elderly or for other individuals incapacitated in some manner for medical reasons. 
144.  Office, "Back". Offices principally used for clerical, data processing, phone or internet sales, or support staff functions and related services, which do not serve customers in person. 
145.  Office, Professional. A place of employment occupied by businesses providing professional services. This definition includes offices for accountants, advertising agencies, insurance agents, commercial art and design services, non-retail financial institutions, real estate agents, news services, photographers, engineers, employment agencies, real-estate agents, and other similar professions. 
146.  Overlay Zoning District . An additional zoning district as shown on the zoning map that prescribes special regulations to a parcel in combination with the base zone. 
147.  Owner. The person or persons in which title is vested or a duly authorized agent of such owner. 
148.  Parcel. An area or a lawfully created parcel containing the minimum square footage and frontage as required by the zone at the time the parcel was created. 
149.  Parking Facilities . A facility used for the parking and storage of vehicles as the primary use on the lot. 
150.  Parking Lots . An open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of vehicles and available to the public whether for a fee, free, or as an accommodation of clients or customers. Off-street parking required by this title to serve an on-site land use is excluded from this definition. 
151.  Parks and Recreational Facilities. A non-commercial public facility that provides active or passive recreational opportunities. This definition includes community parks, regional parks, community centers, urban plazas, ball fields, tennis courts, indoor and outdoor swimming pools, gymnasiums, and other similar facilities. Limited service commercial activity that is directly related to the recreation activity conducted on site is also included in this definition. 
152.  Pawn Shop . A retail establishment that not only buys and sells items but also offers secured loans to people, with items of personal property used as collateral. 
153.  Permit. The approval by the city authorizing the applicant to undertake certain land use activities. 
154.  Permitted Use. A permitted use as set forth under Part 2 of the zoning ordinance may be a use allowed by right with no discretionary review and approval, administratively permitted, or conditionally permitted in its applicable zone. 
155.  Personal Services. An establishment that provides services to individuals and that may provide accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. This definition includes beauty salon, barber shops, pet grooming services, veterinary clinics, tanning salons, nail salons, tailors, laundromats, dry cleaners, and other similar land uses. 
156.  Photovoltaic Energy Systems. An arrangement of components designed to supply usable electric power for a variety of purposes using the sun as the power source. 
157.  Planning Commission. The planning commission of the City of Merced that approves or recommends to the city council regarding certain land uses. 
158.  Primary Frontage. The frontage on a lot or building that has the highest traffic volume (See 17.36.380). 
159.  Primary Structure . A structure that accommodates the primary use of the site. 
160.  Primary Use . The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which activities occur. 
161.  Public/Mini Storage . A structure or group of structures with controlled access that contains individual and compartmentalized stalls or lockers for storage of customers' goods. 
162.  Public Right-of-Way. An area of land that is dedicated for public use to accommodate a transportation system or necessary public utility infrastructure (including, but not limited to, roadways, water lines, sewer lines, power lines, and gas lines). 
163.  Public Safety Facility. A facility operated by a governmental agency for the purpose of protecting public safety. This definition includes fire stations and other fire-fighting facilities, police stations, public ambulance dispatch facilities, and other similar land uses. 
164.  Reasonable Accommodation. An adjustment to a provision within the zoning ordinance to accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities. See Chapter 20.84 (Reasonable Accommodations). 
165.  Recycling Collection Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. 
166.  Recycling, Small Collection Facility. A collection facility that occupies an area five hundred (500) square feet or less. May include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machines, or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than five (5) square feet, kiosk type units which may include permanent structures, or unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
167.  Recycling, Large Collection Facility. A collection facility with attendant that occupies an area of more than five hundred (500) square feet and may include permanent structures. 
168.  Recycling Processing Facility. A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. 
169.  Rehabilitation Centers. A facility that provides therapy and/or training for rehabilitation. This definition includes drug and alcohol rehabilitation centers, methadone rehabilitation center, therapeutic and rehabilitation offices, and other similar uses. 
170.  Remodel. A change or alteration in a building that does not increase its net square footage. 
171.  Renewable Energy Structure. A structure or installation such as a windmill, solar collecting array, or geothermal system, which is designed and intended to produce energy from natural forces such as wind, sunlight, or geothermal heat. 
172.  Research and Development . A business that engages in research, testing, and development of commercial products or services in technology-intensive fields. Research and development land uses do not involve the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale of consumer products, and do not produce dust, smoke, fumes, odors or noise at levels that would affect surrounding uses. Prototype development and product testing may be included as part of a research and development land use. Examples of research and development land uses include bio-technology laboratories, alternative energy technology development, agricultural research, and aviation and aerospace technology development. 
173.  Residential. A structure that is single-family, an accessory dwelling unit, or a multi-family residence. 
174.  Residential Care Facility. A state-licensed residential facility providing social and personal care for residents. Examples include children's homes, homes for the elderly, orphanages, self-help group homes, and transitional and supportive housing for homeless individuals. Excludes facilities where medical care is a core service provided to residents, such as nursing and convalescent homes. 
175.  Residential Care Facility, Large. A residential care facility for seven (7) or more persons. 
176.  Residential Care Facility, Small. A residential care facility for 6 or fewer persons. 
177.  Residential Mixed Use. A development mixed with different types of residential uses, from single-family dwellings to multiple-family dwellings. 
178.  Restaurant. A retail business that primarily sells cooked or hot ready-to-eat food or beverages, including bakeries, delis, caterers, as well as sit-down and take-away food restaurants. This definition excludes facilities included in the Drive-Through and Drive-Up Sales definitions, including drive-in restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and fast-food restaurants. 
179.  Restaurant, Full-Service. A restaurant where customers order their food on table and pay after eating. Kitchen should be equipped with appropriate tools to prepare food on-site. A restaurant may include sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
180.  Restaurant, Limited-Service. A restaurant where customers order and pay before eating. Limited number of tables and seating may be provided. Food or beverages can be consumed on- and off-site (take out). 
181.  Retail, General . Stores and shops selling merchandise to the general public. This definition includes drug stores, general merchandise stores, convenience shops, pet stores, department stores, and other similar retail establishments. 
182.  Retail, Grocery. A retail or wholesale store that primarily sells food, including canned and frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and raw and prepared meats, fish, and poultry. 
183.  Reverse Vending Machine. An automatic mechanical device which accepts at least one (1) or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state; or any automatic mechanical device which accepts money for goods or services. Examples include recycling kiosks, water machines, and Red Box DVD rentals. It is only permitted as an ancillary use to principal uses. 
184.  Review Authority. The city official or city body that is responsible, under the provisions of the zoning ordinance, for approving or denying a permit application or other request for official city approval. 
185.  Schools, Public or Private . Facilities for education, including elementary, junior high, and high schools, both public and private. 
186.  Second Units or Secondary Dwelling Units. Attached or detached accessory residential dwelling units, which provide complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons. Secondary dwelling units provide permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel occupied by a primary dwelling. A single attached suite of rooms (consisting of living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation facilities) but with unimpeded access to the rest of the dwelling unit, no separate address, lease, or utility service, and still functioning as one "household" per 20.90.020(99) may not be considered to be a second unit. See Chapter 20.42 (Second Units). 
187.  Setback. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference such as a street right-of-way to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a building or structure as defined in this chapter. Location points of measurement on buildings or structures are subject to the exceptions in Chapter 20.26 (Setback Measurement and Projections). 
188.  Sign, Area of . The total surface area of that part of a sign, sign structure, wall, or window that carries any sort of written or graphic material or in any way conveys a message. 
189.  Sign, Directory . A sign containing no pictorial matter and only the minimum amount of reading matter necessary to identify the names, professions, and locations of the occupants of the building to which the sign is appurtenant. 
190.  Shopping Center. A group of businesses which function as an integral unit on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels and which utilize common off-street parking and access (Refer to Section 17.36.400-Signs). 
191.  Single-Family Dwelling. A residential structure designed for occupancy by one (1) household. A single-family home provides complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
192.  Single-Room Occupancy. A residential facility where living accommodations are individual secure rooms, with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room, rented to one- or two-person households for a monthly period of time. This definition does not include hotels and motels, but does include college dormitories. 
193.  Site. A parcel or adjoining parcels that are under single ownership or single control, and that are considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use. 
194.  Site Area. The total area included within the boundaries of a site. 
195.  Site Plan Review Committee. A three (3) member committee made up of the director of development services, the city engineer, and the chief building official or their designees that acts as the review authority for site plan review applications and provides recommendations on special project permit applications. 
196.  Site Plan Review Permit. A discretionary permit approved by the site plan review committee to ensure a project complies with the zoning ordinance and does not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
197.  Social Assistance Services. A facility that provides social services directly to persons in need. This definition includes food banks, soup kitchens, crisis centers, rescue missions, and other similar land uses. 
198.  Solid Wall or Fence . A continuous, nontransparent vertical surface. A chain link fence with a single layer of insert (slats) shall not be considered as a solid wall or fence. 
199.  Special Project Permit. A discretionary permit (see MMC 20.68.060) approved by the planning commission to facilitate the ease of implementation of general plan land use goals and to encourage the use of high quality, innovative methods to meet general plan land use goals. 
200.  Sports Stadium or Arenas. A large facility primarily designed for sports and entertainment venues, including various sports and concerts and shows, and large gatherings or meetings. The facility generally provides seating for a large audience. The facility may be open air or covered by either a fixed or a retractable roof. 
201.  Story. A portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
202.  Street . The surface of and the space above any public street, road highway, thoroughfare, way, court, parkway, drive, or other such interest or place over which there is public control or direction as to the use or occupancy thereof, which now or hereafter shall exist with the city, but shall exclude alleys or sidewalks. 
203.  Structure. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences, less than six (6) feet in height. Structures must be joined by a common wall. 
204.  Structures, Primary. A structure that accommodates the primary land use of the site. 
205.  Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
206.  Tattoo Parlor. An establishment providing permanent tattoos, piercings, and other permanent body art to paying customers. 
207.  Taverns. See "Bars." 
208.  Temporary Structure. A structure that is erected for a limited period of time, typically no longer than one hundred eighty (180) days, and that does not permanently alter the character or physical facilities of a property. 
209.  Temporary Use. A short-term activity that may or may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zone, but that occurs for a limited period of time, typically less than twelve (12) months and does not permanently alter the character or physical facilities of a property. 
210.  Tenants. A business establishment or organization which occupies a building space for the purpose of performing a service or providing a commodity. 
211.  Tobacco Paraphernalia. Materials which include cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, or any other item designed for smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
212.  Tobacco Product. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body (including cigarettes, e-cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, etc.), but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the use of treating tobacco or nicotine dependence. 
213.  Tobacco Retailer. Any person or business who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
214.  Transitional Housing. Rental housing that provides extended shelter and supportive services to homeless individuals and households with the goal of helping them live independently and transition into permanent housing. Transitional housing operates under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance at predetermined time no less than six (6) months and up to two (2) years from the start of assistance. 
215.  Transportation Terminal. A facility or station where freight either originates, terminates, or is handled in the transportation process. This definition includes transportation operating facilities for commercial motor carriers and public transit agencies. 
216.  Utilities, Major . Large scale infrastructure facilities necessary to support development within Merced and the larger region. This definition includes electrical distribution lines thirty-five (35) kilovolts or greater, sewage treatment plants, power generation plants, gas metering stations, electrical substations, telephone exchanges, water towers, sewer and water pumping stations, and other similar facilities. 
217.  Utilities, Minor . Infrastructure facilities that are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and that involve only minor structures. This definition includes a station where electric power is transformed to a distribution voltage level or where water is pumped into a local or neighborhood distribution system. 
218.  Variance. A discretionary permit approved by the planning commission that allows for deviation from specific and limited physical standards contained in the zoning ordinance. 
219.  Variance, Minor. A discretionary permit approved by the development services director that allows for deviation from specific and limited physical standards contained in the zoning ordinance. 
220.  Vehicle Parts and Accessories Sales. A store or shop that primarily sells vehicle parts and/or accessories. 
221.  Vehicle Rentals . An establishment for the rental of new or used vehicles. 
222.  Vehicle Repair and Maintenance . An establishment for the repair, alteration, restoration, or finishing of any vehicle, including body repair, collision repair, painting, tire and battery sales and installation, motor rebuilding, tire recapping and retreading, and towing. Repair shops that are incidental to a vehicle sales or rental establishment on the same site are excluded from this definition. 
223.  Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major. An establishment for general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, automobiles, or trailers. This definition includes collision services, including body, frame, or fender straightening, or repair; and overall painting or paint shop. Repair shops that are part of a vehicle sales or rental establishment on the same site are excluded from this definition. 
224.  Vehicle Repair and Maintenance Minor. An establishment providing limited vehicle repair and maintenance services. This definition includes upholstering, replacement of parts, and motor services to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1-½) tons capacity. This definition excludes any operation under Automobile Repair, Major . 
225.  Vehicle Sales . An establishment for the retail sales of new or used vehicles. This definition includes the sale of vehicle parts and vehicle repair, provided that these activities are incidental to the sale of vehicles. 
226.  Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution . An establishment used primarily for the storage, selling, or distributing of goods to retailers, contractors, commercial purchasers or other wholesalers, or to the branch or local offices of a company or organization. This definition includes vehicle storage, moving services, general delivery services, refrigerated locker storage facilities, coil and fuel storage, feed storage, and other similar land uses. 
227.  Wholesale Horticultural Nurseries. A nursery that does not allow the direct on-site sale of plants and trees to visiting customers but only to businesses, including other nurseries or commercial gardeners. 
228.  Wireless Communications Facility. A facility that transmits or receives electromagnetic signals for the purpose of transmitting voice or data communications. 
229.  Wrecking or Salvage Establishments . A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled, including auto-wrecking yards, house-wrecking yards, used-lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, the sale of used cars in operable condition, or the use of salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations. 
230.  Yards. The minimum distance by which a structure must be separated from a property line or other site feature. 
231.  Yards, Exterior. Any yard adjacent to an exterior lot line. 
232.  Yards, Front. An open space extending the full width of the lot measured between the building closest to the front lot line and the front lot line, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified in Chapter 20.26 (Setback Measurement and Projections). The minimum distance shall be measured at all elevations from the right-of-way line of the fronting street. If the proposed location of the right-of-way line of the fronting street adopted by the city differs from that of the existing street, then the required front yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line of the street as adopted. 
233.  Yards, Interior. Any yard adjacent to an interior lot line. 
234.  Yards, Interior Side. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the building closest to the nearest interior side lot line and the interior side lot line, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as specified in Chapter 20.26 (Setback Measurement and Projections). The required interior side yard shall be measured at all elevations from the nearest interior side lot line. 
235.  Yards, Rear . An open space extending the full width of the lot between the building closest to the rear lot line and the rear lot line, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified in Chapter 20.26 (Setback Measurement and Projections). 
236.  Yards, Street Side. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the building closest to the nearest street side lot line and the street side lot line, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as specified in Chapter 20.26 (Setback Measurement and Projections). The required street side yard shall be measured at all elevations from the nearest street side lot line, and from the right-of-way line of the existing street. If the existing street line differs from the one adapted by the city, then the required street side yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line of the street as adopted. 
237.  Zoning District. A portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of Part 2 (Zoning Districts, Land Uses, and Development Standards) of the Merced Zoning Ordinance. Where certain uses are required to be a specified distance from any R district, the term "any R district" includes any district or portion thereof designated for future residential uses in the Merced General Plan. 
238.  Zoning Map. The official map and its underlying Geographic Information System (GIS) data, adopted by the City of Merced, that serves to delineate the boundaries of each base and overlay zone as established in the zoning ordinance. The official zoning map resides at, and is maintained by, Merced Development Services Department. 
239.  Zoning Ordinance. The zoning ordinance is adopted to implement the City of Merced General Plan and to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of Merced residents. See Chapter 20 of the Merced Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2465, § 2(Exhs. A., B.), 9-19-2016) 
