PREFACE 
The Martinez, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1975, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 9, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this Code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of the City Attorney. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 9, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific Code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1412 C.S., passed December 6, 2017. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633  
TITLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the Martinez Municipal Code, reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 1, 1985: Ord. 833 C.S. § 1, 1975.)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Martinez Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Martinez Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Martinez Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Martinez Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 2, 1975.)  
1.01.030 - Codification Authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 3, 1975.)  
1.01.050 - Reference Applies To All Amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "Martinez Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 5, 1975.)  
1.01.060 - Title, Chapter and Section Headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 6, 1975.)  
1.01.070 - Reference to Specific Ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 7, 1975.)  
1.01.080 - Effect of Code on Past Actions or Obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal of amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, of the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 8, 1975.)  
1.01.090 - Effective Date. 
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code as the Martinez Municipal Code shall become effective. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 9, 1975.)  
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 833 C.S. § 10, 1975.)  
CHAPTER 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Martinez, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" means the City of Martinez, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Martinez, California, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
C.  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Martinez, California. "All its members" or "all Councilmembers" means the total number of Councilmembers provided by the general laws of the State of California. 
D.  "County" means the County of Contra Costa. 
E.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City of Martinez, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder and to their successors. 
F.  "May" is permissive. 
G.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
H.  "Must" and "shall." Each is mandatory. 
I.  "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
J.  "Ordinance" means a law of the City; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may be in the form of a resolution. 
K.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or a part of such building or land. 
L.  "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
M.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
N.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
O.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
P.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Q.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
R.  "State" means the State of California. 
S.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
T.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
U.  "Title of office". Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City. 
V.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, or photocopied. 
W.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
X.  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such other as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Z.  When an act is required by an ordinance the same being that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 806 C.S. § 1, 1975.)  
1.04.020 - Grammatical Interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City: 
A.  Gender. Designation in the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
D.  Use of words and phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Ord. 806 C.S. § 2, 1975.)  
1.04.030 - Prohibited Acts Include Causing, Permitting, Etc. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the City, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 806 C.S. § 3, 1975.)  
1.04.040 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 806 C.S. § 4, 1975.)  
1.04.050 - Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 806 C.S. § 5, 1975.)  
CHAPTER 1.08 - RIGHT OF ENTRY 
 
1.08.010 - Procedure. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any authorized official of the City may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent to the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24 hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. 808 C.S. § 1, 1975.)  
CHAPTER 1.12 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
1.12.010 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Municipal Code of the City. Any person violating any of the mandatory requirements of the Municipal Code of the City is guilty of a misdemeanor unless specified an infraction. 
1.  Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Municipal Code of the City, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
2.  An infraction is punishable by (a) a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (b) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year; (c) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. Each day that a violation of this Code is committed or continues is a separate offense and is punishable as a distinct and separate offense. 
B.  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation any of the provisions of the Municipal Code of the City shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this City, summarily abated as such under the procedures described in Chapter 1.13, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. 1273 C.S. § 1, 2000: Ord. 1084 C.S. § 2 (part), 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 3 & 4, 1985: Ord. 965 C.S. § 1, 1982: Ord. 807 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 1200.)  
1.12.020 - Violations—Citations. 
A.  If any person is arrested for a violation of the ordinances of the City, and the person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as provided by the Penal Code of the State, or its successor, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of the person, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where the person shall appear in court. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least 5 days after the arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be: 
1.  Before a judge of a justice court or a municipal court judge within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed and who has jurisdiction of the offense and who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made; or 
2.  Upon demand of the person arrested, before a judge of a justice court or municipal court judge having jurisdiction of the offense at the county seat; or before a judge in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or 
3.  Before an officer authorized by the county to receive a deposit of bail. 
The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person in order to secure release must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. The arresting officer shall then forthwith release the person arrested from his custody. 
As soon as practicable, the officer shall file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. The magistrate shall then fix the amount of bail which in his judgment, in accordance with Section 1275 of the Penal Code of the State, or its successor, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant, and shall endorse on the notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code of the State, or its successor. The defendant, before the date on which he promised to appear in court, may deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in the case. 
On the making of the order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution under Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the State, or its successor. 
No warrant shall issue on the charge for the arrest of the person who has given his written promise to appear in court, unless and until he has violated the promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
B.  Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested. 
C.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided herein, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution, a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after his failure to appear as promised, or if the person promised to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within 20 days after the delivery of the written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
When a person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
D.  Pursuant to Section 1.12.010, a separate citation for a separate offense may be issued for every day that a violation continues or is committed. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 5 & 6, 1985: Ord. 807 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 1201.)  
1.12.030 - Violations—Infractions. 
A.  Violation of the following provisions of the Municipal Code and any terms or conditions imposed by the City on a permit or approval issued under the below-specified provisions of the Municipal Code are declared to be public offenses and infractions enforced and punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within 1 year; (3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within 1 year. 
1.  Title 5. Business Taxes and Regulations 
2.  Title 8. Health and Safety 
Chapter 8.08—Trees and Shrubs—Planting and Maintenance 
Chapter 8.16—Garbage Disposal 
Chapter 8.20—Junked or Abandoned Vehicles 
Chapter 8.24—Park and Recreation Area Regulations 
3.  Title 9. Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Section 9.52.010—Consumption and Possession of Alcoholic Beverages 
4.  Title 12. Public Rights-of-Way 
Chapter 12.28—Obstruction of Sidewalks 
Chapter 12.36—Marina Regulations 
5.  Title 13. Utilities 
Section 13.04.040—Unauthorized Use of Water 
6.  Title 16. Sign Code 
7.  Title 17. Swimming Pool Code 
8.  Title 21. Subdivision 
(Ord. 1346 C.S. § 3, 2008: Ord. 1273 C.S. § 2, 2000: Ord. 1186 C.S. § II, 1992; Ord. 1074 C.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 1069 C.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 7, 1985: Ord. 965 C.S. § 2, 1982.)  
1.12.040 - Violations—Denial of Permit. 
All departments, commissions, councils, officials and public employees of the City which are vested with the duty or authority to issue and/or approve permits or licenses pursuant to the provisions of the Martinez Municipal Code may withhold the approval and/or issuance of such permits or licenses where a violation of the Martinez Municipal Code exists on the parcel for which such license or permit is sought. Licenses and permits which may be withheld include, but are not limited to, building permits, business licenses, zoning clearance on building permits, certificates of occupancy, conditional use permits, precise development plans, variances, lot line adjustment, subdivisions, and rezonings. When the said violation(s) has been physically abated, permits withheld pursuant to this section may be released. Approval of any discretionary permit may be conditioned upon the physical abatement or elimination of a violation of said Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1164 C.S. § 1, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 1.13 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
1.13.010 - Purpose. 
Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38871 et. seq., the City Council hereby establishes the procedures set forth in this Chapter for the purpose of the abatement of public nuisances. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all properties or portions thereof, in the City of Martinez, whether developed or undeveloped, occupied or unoccupied, for the purpose of providing minimum standards to promote public health, safety, peace, prosperity and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.020 - Public Nuisances Included. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to any nuisance heretofore or hereafter defined as a nuisance by any ordinance of the City, section of the Martinez Municipal Code, resolution of the City Council, or statute of the state. A public nuisance further includes any unlawful obstruction or encroachment upon any public property, including but not limited to any public street, highway, right-of-way, park or building. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.030 - Abatement by Civil Action. 
A civil action may be brought in the name of the people of the state to abate a public nuisance by the City Attorney or by the District Attorney or County counsel of Contra Costa County, and each of said officers shall have concurrent right to bring such action for a public nuisance within this City. The City Attorney shall bring such action when directed to do so by the City Council. Such civil action may be brought at any time, and may be instituted before, in lieu of, after, or in combination with the procedures specified herein below. Except in emergency abatements, the decision to proceed by way of legal action and/or by following the procedures set forth below, shall be made by the City Council. In any civil action brought in the name of the People of the State or the City to abate a public nuisance by the City Attorney or by the District Attorney or County Counsel of Contra Costa County, the court may award reasonable attorneys' fees to the prevailing party in such action. (Ord 1159 C.S. 1990: Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.040 - Abatement by Proceedings Before Planning Commission. 
A.  The Planning Commission may, and is hereby empowered to, abate public nuisances by order and/or resolution. 
B.  If the public nuisance is to be abated by resolution and/or order of the City Planning Commission, the hereinafter prescribed procedures shall be followed. 
C.  Written notice of appearance before the Planning Commission shall be given to the owner, or owners, of the property on which the nuisance is occurring or to the person who is creating the nuisance at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing before the Planning Commission. Service of the notice shall be made either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail to such person to be notified at the address shown upon the last tax roll or as shown upon some other public record pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
D.  A copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property on which the nuisance exists, or in any other location on the property wherein it will be most likely to give notice to the owner or owners, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
E.  A notice shall direct the owner or owners of the property on which the nuisance exists to appear before the Planning Commission at a stated time and place, and show cause why the nuisance should not be abated as herein provided. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.050 - Form of Notice. 
The notice provided for by Section 1.13.040 shall be substantially in the following form: 
"ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE RE: 
ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE: 
TO: ____________ 
You are hereby notified to appear before the Planning Commission of the City of Martinez on the ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ , at City Hall, 525 Henrietta Street, Martinez, California, at the hour of ____________ o'clock ____________ .m., or as soon thereafter as the matter can be heard, and show cause, if any you have, why that certain ;daterule; should not be condemned as a public nuisance and said nuisance be abated by its removal or ____________ , and why the cost of such abatement should not be assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is abated, such cost to constitute a lien upon such property until paid. 
DATED this ____________ day of ;daterule;, 19 ____________ . 
_____
DEPUTY CITY CLERK" 
 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.060 - Hearing. 
At the time stated in the notice, the Planning Commission shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the proposed abatement of the public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time. After final action is taken by the Planning Commission on the disposition of any protests or objections which are received, the Planning Commission may declare, by resolution, that a public nuisance exists, and may order an appropriate City Officer to abate the nuisance, or direct the City Attorney (with the concurrence of the City Council) to commence an action to abate the nuisance found, at the hearing, to exist. The Planning Commission may further order that the cost of any such abatement will be assessed upon the property from which the nuisance is abated, and that such costs shall constitute a lien upon such property until paid. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.065 - Appeal. 
A.  The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and conclusive unless the person and/or owner of the property against whom the decision is made files with the City Clerk within ten calendar days after the aforesaid decision is rendered, a written appeal to the City Council. 
B.  The City Clerk will agendize a hearing on the appeal before the City Council within thirty days of the Clerk's receiving the written appeal. The hearing conducted by the City Council shall be governed by the provisions contained in Section 1.13.060. 
C.  During the pendency of any appeal properly and timely filed in accordance herewith, no action may be taken to enforce the decision of the Planning Commission rendered in accordance with Section 1.13.060. 
D.  The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive unless the owner or owners file, within fifteen days after the aforesaid decision of the City Council is rendered, an action and/or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.067 - Burden of Proof. 
The owner or other person against whom abatement is sought shall have the burden of proof on all issues at all proceedings conducted before the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.070 - Further Proceedings by Authorized City Officer. 
A.  At any time within thirty days after the passage of any resolution (not stayed pursuant to Section 1.13.065(C) directing the abatement of a nuisance, the City Officer authorized to abate the nuisance shall serve and post a copy thereof in the manner of giving notice as prescribed in Section 1.13.040. 
B.  Furthermore, if the Planning Commission or City Council, at the aforesaid hearing determines that the abatement of the nuisance is likely to cause a significant depreciation in the value of the property upon which the nuisance is located, the Planning Commission or City Council may order that all mortgagees and/or beneficiaries under any deeds of trust of record on the property be served a copy of the resolution in the manner prescribed in this section. 
C.  At any time following a period of five days after the serving and posting of a copy of the resolution ordering abatement as required above, the City Officer may abate the nuisance, as directed by the Planning Commission or City Council. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.080 - Actual Abatement. 
The City Officer designated in Section 1.13.070 may direct any officer, or his/her assistant, deputy, employee, contracting agent or other representative, to enter upon private property for the purpose of abating the public nuisance. Should it be practicable to sell or salvage any material procured from the aforesaid abatement, it may be sold at private or public sale at the best price obtainable, and an itemized account of the proceeds shall be maintained by the authorized City Officer. Such proceeds, if any, shall be deposited in a general fund of the City and shall be credited against the cost of abatement as provided for herein. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.090 - Cost Account. 
A.  The officer abating the nuisance shall keep an account of the cost of abatement, and shall render an itemized, written report to the City Council, showing the cost of removing and/or abating the nuisance. 
B.  Before the report is submitted to the City Council, a copy shall be posted for at least 3 days on the bulletin board of the City Hall, with a notice of the time when the report will be submitted to the City Council for confirmation. A copy of the account and notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the property, at the address shown on the last tax roll, at least 10 days prior to submission to the City Council. 
C.  At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the City Council shall hear it and any objections by the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abatement. Thereupon the City Council may make such modifications in the report as it deems necessary, after which, by order or resolution, the report shall be confined. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1, part, 1986.)  
1.13.100 - Special Assessment. 
The cost of such abatement, as determined by the City Council, shall become a special assessment and lien against the aforesaid property, which assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.110 - Public Nuisance by Judicial Decree. 
If a public nuisance has been declared by judicial decree, after the defendant(s) receive(s) notice of entry of judgment as prescribed by laws, and the time within which an appeal may be filed has expired, or, if an appeal has been filed but no stay order has been secured, all procedures of Sections 1.13.080 through 1.13.100 shall be applicable, and shall be followed in the same manner as if a resolution by the City Council or Planning Commission had been passed declaring a public nuisance to exist. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.120 - Emergency Abatement of Nuisances. 
A.  Whenever there is imminent or immediate danger to the public by the existence or continuance of any nuisance endangering the public health, welfare or safety, arising from any act, condition or use or occupation of property, or otherwise amounting to a nuisance per se, it is the duty of the City Council or the appropriate officials of the City to abate such nuisance. 
B.  Such abatement shall not occur unless the Director of Public Services and/or his/her designee finds, from a preponderance of the evidence, that such an imminent or immediate danger exists, and has provided or attempted to provide the owner of the property in question, or person responsible for permitting the danger to occur, reasonable notice within which to correct the condition, and the necessary corrective action has not taken place. Twenty-four hours shall be presumed to be reasonable notice in the absence of evidence to the contrary. Notice hereunder need not take any particular form, and may be dispensed with if the exigencies of the situation require immediate abatement and/or providing reasonable notice is impracticable. 
C.  Sections 1.13.080 through 1.13.100 shall apply to emergency abatement provided hereunder. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
1.13.130 - Provisions Not Exclusive Regulations. 
The provisions of this Chapter are not the exclusive regulations for the abatement of nuisance. They shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, County, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § 1 (part), 1986.)  
CHAPTER 1.15 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
1.15.010 - Imposition of Administrative Citations. 
A.  The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for various violations of the Municipal Code. The City Council also finds that an appropriate method for enforcement of various violations is an administrative citation program that will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process for those cited. 
B.  The City Council finds that the adoption and implementation of this administrative citation program will achieve the following goals: 
1.  To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Martinez; and 
2.  To help ensure compliance with the Municipal Code and state codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner; and 
3.  To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines that will fully comport with due process and provide those cited with the right to a fair hearing without the need for legal counsel; and 
4.  To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the City of Martinez; and 
5.  To reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy allowed by this Code or applicable law, any violation of the Municipal Code shall be subject to an administrative fine, enforcement and collection proceedings, as set forth in this Chapter and authorized by California Government Code Section 53069.4. Application of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Administrative citation" refers to a citation described by Section 1.15.050 of this Chapter which is issued by the Citation Officer to the owner. 
B.  "Citation Officer" refers to the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer or any other person designated by the City Manager to act as Citation Officer. 
C.  "Days" means calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. 
D.  "Hearing Examiner" refers to a panel of no less than 3 persons, selected by the City Council, who shall serve without compensation. The persons serving on the panel shall be residents of the City and shall be knowledgeable, employed or formerly employed in one of the following fields: construction, architecture, engineering, planning, law enforcement or other related fields. 
E.  "Notice to cure" refers to a notice described by Section 1.15.040 of this Chapter which is issued by the Citation Officer prior to a citation being issued for a violation of any provision of this Code. 
F.  "Owner" refers to the owner of record of the property upon which a violation of the Municipal Code exists, the occupant of that property, any person in possession of the property and any other party responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.030 - Duties of Citation Officer. 
The Citation Officer shall be responsible for implementing the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.040 - Notice to Cure. 
Prior to issuing an administrative citation for a continuing violation of this Code pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the Citation Officer shall serve a notice to cure on any owner(s) which shall give a specified time period no less than 15 days nor more than 60 days, as determined to be reasonable by the Citation Officer, by which the violation shall be corrected or otherwise remedied. The notice to cure shall also notify the owner(s) that if the Citation Officer determines, after the issuance of a notice to cure, that a violation of any provision of this Code still exists with respect to any property, the Citation Officer may transmit an administrative citation to the owner, which may result in the determination of fines against the owner for the continuing violation under this Chapter. The notice to cure shall be transmitted in the same manner as an administrative citation under this Chapter. The notice to cure shall specify: 
A.  The conditions on the property constituting violations of specified Municipal Code sections or other codes incorporated into the Municipal Code; and 
B.  A specified time period not less than 15 days from receipt of the notice to cure within which the violation must be corrected and abated; and 
C.  That, in the event the violation is not abated by the expiration of the specified time period, the owner(s) may be subject to an administrative fine under this Chapter; and 
D.  That the owner(s) may submit in writing to the Citation Officer any information relating to a determination of the existence of a violation. If the Citation Officer determines that an effort is being made to correct the violation, he/she may grant an additional period of time for correction of the violation. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.050 - Administrative Citation. 
If the Citation Officer determines, after the issuance of a notice to cure under Section 1.15.040 of this Chapter, that a violation of any provision of this Code still exists with respect to any property, the Citation Officer may issue an administrative citation to any owner(s) by certified mail and posting as set forth in Section 1.13.040 (Abatement by Proceedings Before Planning Commission) of this Code or by personal service by a City employee designated by the Citation Officer. If the violation is in a category that does not require a notice to cure under Section 1.15.040 of this Chapter, the Citation Officer may at his/her discretion issue an administrative citation without first issuing a notice to cure. An administrative citation issued under this Section shall specify: 
A.  The conditions on the property constituting violations of specified Municipal Code sections or other codes incorporated into the Municipal Code; and 
B.  The date(s) of the violations and the fine being imposed for each violation; and 
C.  That failure to request an appeal of the administrative fine within 10 working days shall result in the administrative citation becoming final; and 
D.  That any responsible party upon whom an administrative fine has been imposed may seek judicial review of the order imposing the penalty pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the Citation Officer may require immediate abatement of a violation pursuant to Section 1.13.120 (Summary Abatement of Nuisances) of this Code, if the violation creates an immediate danger to the health and safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.060 - Maximum Fine. 
Any owner who violates any provision of this Code and is fined under this Chapter, irrespective of whether that person caused the violation, shall be subject to a maximum fine of $100.00 for the first day that the violation was committed and up to $100.00 for each additional day that the violation exists on the property, or to the extent that the use of a structure may be permitted with an appropriate permit and the violation would otherwise constitute a misdemeanor under this Code, up to a maximum of 5 times the amount of the standard fee for such permit. 
If within 1 year after the date an administrative citation becomes final, a violation of the same provision of this Code is committed by the owner, the owner shall be subject to a maximum fine of $200.00 for the first day of violation and up to $200.00 for each additional day that the violation exists on the property. If a third violation of the same provision of this Code is committed by an owner within 1 year after 2 or more administrative citations have become final, the owner shall be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00 for the first day of violation and up to $500.00 for each additional day that the violation exists on the property. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.070 - Determination of Fine. 
The Citation Officer shall determine fines up to the maximum amount permitted by Section 1.15.060 of this Chapter in the first instance. In making a determination of a reasonable fine, the Citation Officer shall take into account the facts and circumstances of the violation, including without limitation: 
A.  The length of time the violation existed; and 
B.  The culpability of the owner and the willfulness of the violation; and 
C.  The number of previous violations of the same or related type committed by the owner within the preceding 36 months; and 
D.  The extent of the violation and the effect of the violation on neighboring properties; and 
E.  Attempts, if any, to comply with the applicable ordinances; and 
F.  The time necessary to correct or otherwise remedy the violation; and 
G.  Any other information relevant to a determination of the fine. 
In making a determination of the fine, the Citation Officer shall consider any information submitted by the owner. In the event that the Citation Officer determines that the violation was not caused by, or with the knowledge of, the current owner of the property, the Citation Officer may reduce or nullify the fine. In the event the Citation Officer determines that the correction of the violation is not feasible, and the violation does not present a threat to public health or safety, the Citation Officer may reduce or nullify the fine. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.080 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person upon whom an administrative fine is imposed by the Citation Officer may appeal such fine pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Section. The appellant must file a written appeal with the Citation Officer within 10 working days of personal service or the date of mailing of the administrative citation. The written appeal shall contain: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the interest the appealing party has in the matter relating to the imposition of the fine; and 
2.  A brief statement of the material facts which the appellant claims supports his/her contention that no administrative fine should be imposed or that an administrative fine of a different amount is warranted; and 
3.  An address at which the appellant agrees notice of any additional proceedings or an order relating to imposition of the administrative fine may be received by first class mail. 
B.  No hearing shall be held under this Section until the fine listed in the administrative citation is deposited in advance, unless the appellant demonstrates that depositing the fine in advance would cause an unreasonable financial hardship upon the appellant and the City agrees to waive the fine deposit. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.090 - Hearing Procedure. 
A.  An appeal of an administrative fine imposed by this Chapter shall be heard by the Hearing Examiner. The administrative fine appeal hearing shall be set no sooner than 20 days and no later than 45 days following the filing of a written appeal and the making of a deposit or waiver of the fine in accordance with Section 1.15.080 of this Chapter. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be mailed at least 12 days before the date set for the hearing. Failure to make a timely appeal under this Section or failure to appear at the appeal hearing will constitute the forfeiture of the administrative fine and the fine shall become a final order or decision under this Chapter. 
B.  In addition to those factors set forth by Section 1.15.070 of this Chapter, the Hearing Examiner shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation occurred and whether the recipient(s) of the citation has caused or maintained the violation of the Municipal Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
C.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the Citation Officer or his/her designee shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
D.  If the Citation Officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Examiner for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least 5 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
E.  Subject to the provisions of subsection D of this Section, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, the recipient(s) of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the Citation Officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the appeal hearing. 
F.  The Hearing Examiner may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Citation Officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
G.  In reviewing the fine, the Hearing Examiner shall consider the factors set forth in Section 1.15.070 of this Chapter, and shall uphold the fine imposed by the Citation Officer, nullify the fine or modify it. The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the local agency within the meaning of Government Code Sections 53069.4(b)(1) and (c). The Hearing Examiner shall serve a copy of his/her written decision on the appellant by first class mail to the address provided by appellant in the written notice of appeal. The Hearing Examiner's decision shall be deemed served 2 days after the date it is mailed to the address provided by the appellant. The Hearing Examiner's decision shall list the reasons for the decision and include a statement that the recipient of the administrative citation may appeal the decision to the Contra Costa Superior Court pursuant to the procedures set forth by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
H.  If the Hearing Examiner determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City, or if no fine amount was deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, then the Hearing Examiner shall set forth in the decision a schedule for payment of the fine, which shall not extend more than 180 days from the date of the decision. 
I.  If the Hearing Examiner determines that the administrative citation should be nullified and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, together with interest at the rate applicable to civil judgments against the City under Article XV, Section 1 of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.100 - Enforcement and Collection. 
When an administrative fine becomes a final order under this Section or Government Code Section 53069.4, the City may proceed to collect the fine or penalty as follows: 
A.  In the event a civil action is commenced to collect the administrative fine, the City shall be entitled to recover all costs associated with the collection of the fine. Costs include, without limitation, staff time and attorney fees incurred in the collection of the fine and those costs set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5. 
B.  An administrative fine shall accrue interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment in favor of the City under Code of Civil Procedure Section 685.010. Interest shall accrue commencing on the 20th day after the fine becomes a final decision or order. 
C.  The amount of any unpaid final administrative fine, plus interest, plus any other costs as provided in this Chapter, may be declared a lien on any real property owned by the owner within the City against whom an administrative fine has been imposed, as follows: 
1.  Notice shall be given to the owner before recordation of the lien, and shall be served in the same manner as a summons in the civil action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq.; and 
2.  The lien shall attach when the City records it with the County Recorder's office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date(s) of the code violations, the date of the final decision, the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel; and 
3.  The lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as municipal taxes are collected by the County. 
D.  The City may withhold issuance of licenses, permits and other entitlements to a responsible party on any project, property or application of any kind whenever an administrative fine owed by that party remains unpaid. 
E.  The City may take such other actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the Enforcement of Judgment Law, California Code of Civil Procedure Section 680.10 et seq. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
1.15.110 - Judicial Review. 
Any person aggrieved by a final administrative order or decision of the Citation Officer or the Hearing Examiner imposing an administrative fine may seek review with the Superior Court in the County of Contra Costa pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 1320 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
CHAPTER 1.16 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
 
1.16.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the same meaning as under Penal Code Sections 594 and 594.2, Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2 and 53069.3, unless otherwise defined herein, or where otherwise required by the context, in which case such word or phrase shall have such reasonable meaning as shall give effect to the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  "Cost (or costs) of removal" includes the costs of removal of the graffiti, or if the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, the costs of repair and replacement of property defaced with graffiti, and not the painting, repair or replacement of other parts of the property that were not defaced, and those expenses described in Government Code Section 38722(d)(1). 
C.  "Days" means calendar days. 
D.  "Graffiti" means "graffiti or other inscribed material" as defined in Government Code Sections 38772 and 53069.3, and Penal Code Section 594. 
E.  "Property owner" includes the lessee of the property or other person in possession thereof, in addition to the definition of "owner" given in Section 1.04.010(K). 
F.  "Responsible adult" is a parent or guardian having custody or control of an individual under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 1, 1999: Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.020 - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
A.  To have graffiti on property which can be seen from the public right-of-way of adjacent or neighboring property; 
B.  To have graffiti on property which causes a depreciation of property values or is detrimental to the health and welfare of neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 2, 1999: Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.030 - Declaration of Nuisance. 
The existence of graffiti in the City of Martinez is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.1 et seq. and 53069.3, and this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 3, 1999: Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.040 - Restriction of Markers and Aerosol Paint. 
All persons offering for sale markers with a marking tip of ¼ inch or more in diameter or any aerosol or pressurized container of paint shall keep such markers or paint in a location where they can be in constant view of the employee, agent or other authorized representative of the person selling the markers or paint. 
(Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.060 - Removal of Graffiti. 
A.  Private property owners shall remove graffiti from their property within 20 calendar days after notification to the property owners by the City to remove such graffiti. Failure to remove graffiti within the time allowed shall automatically cause the building or property to be deemed a nuisance, and the expense of abatement of the nuisance shall be a lien or special assessment against the property and a personal obligation of the property owner pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.1 or 38773.5. 
B.  Where graffiti is applied by an individual under the age of 18 years, in addition to such individual, the responsible adult shall be responsible for such removal or payment for the costs of removal. In the event that such individual or responsible adult fails to remove the graffiti or pay for the costs of removal within 7 days after being served with notice to remove the graffiti, the amount of the cost of removal shall become the personal obligation of such individual and/or responsible adult pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773.2 or 38773.6. Any notice from the City shall contain an admonition that any costs of removal incurred by the City shall be the responsibility of the person(s) being notified and, if not paid by said person(s), may become an assessment or lien against the property of said person(s). If the graffiti is on private property, the person required to remove it shall obtain consent of the private property owner to go upon that owner's property to remove the graffiti. 
C.  All notices required or given hereunder to property owners shall be provided in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 or 38773.2. No lien or special assessment shall be recorded until after such notice has been provided. 
D.  In the event that the property owner, responsible adult or individual who has applied the graffiti fails to remove the graffiti after notice has been sent, the City may abate the graffiti as a nuisance as provided herein. 
E.  The City may remove the graffiti of a property owner with the consent of the property owner and shall charge the property owner for the cost of removal. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 5, 1999: Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.070 - Appeal. 
A.  The property owner, responsible adult or individual who has applied the graffiti may request a hearing with respect to any of the duties, responsibilities or liabilities under this ordinance before the Chief of Police within 10 days after mailing or delivery of the notice. The Chief of Police shall schedule a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request for a hearing. The Chief of Police shall hear facts and testimony relevant to the hearing and shall not be limited to the technical rules of evidence. The property owner may appear at the hearing or submit a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing. The Chief of Police shall notify the property owner of the decision within 15 days of the hearing. If not timely appealed, the Chief's (or his/her designee's) decision shall be final. The Chief of Police may delegate any of the authority granted under this section to an appropriate hearing officer. 
B.  The property owner, responsible adult or individual who has applied the graffiti may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days of receipt of the decision of the Chief of Police. The appeal shall be heard within a reasonable time of receipt of the notice of appeal. The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the property owner. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police, and shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.080 - Liens. 
All liens recorded pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with the requirements of Government Code Section 38773.2. Any fee imposed on the City by the County Recorder in connection with the processing and recording of any lien hereunder, or the providing of notice to the property owner, may be recovered from the property owner as provided in Government Code Section 38773.2. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 6, 1999: Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.085 - Costs. 
Whenever this Chapter allows for the recovery of costs, such costs may include, but are not limited to, administrative costs, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the City in identifying and apprehending the minor. 
(Ord. 1262 C.S. § 7, 1999.)  
1.16.090 - Reward. 
The City may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person who applies graffiti a reward as established by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.100 - Appropriations. 
The City may apply and administer City funds (as defined in Government Code Section 53069.3 (3)) to abate or remove graffiti under this Chapter, and to replace or repair property within the City that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively. 
(Ord. 1221 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.110 - Criminal Action. 
A.  The violation of any section of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
B.  Community service in the City of Martinez may be imposed in lieu of any penalties and punishments where there has been a conviction or guilty or nolo contendere plea to a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.120 - Non-liability. 
Prior to the entry onto private property by the City for the purpose of graffiti removal, written consent in a form acceptable to the City Attorney shall be obtained from the property owner or designated agent for authorization of entry and release of liability. Notwithstanding the foregoing, consent of the property owner shall not be required if the City is authorized by court order to enter the property for the purpose of graffiti removal. 
(Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
1.16.130 - Administrative Fee. 
A reasonable administrative fee may be imposed against any person found in violation of this ordinance as a part of any abatement hereunder in addition to and not in lieu of any other fine, charge, fee, cost, assessment or payment imposed in connection with any violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1190 C.S. § 1, 1992.) 
TITLE 1 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to codify their ordinances, see Gov. Code §§ 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10. 
2.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to prosecute ordinance violations as misdemeanors, see Gov. Code § 36900; for statutory provisions regarding citations for misdemeanors, see Pen. Code § 853.6 et seq.; for authorization for cities to impose penalties for ordinance violations not exceeding $500.00 in fines and 6 months imprisonment, see Gov. Code § 36901. 
Issued: 4/95  
TITLE 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Office Established—Appointment. 
The office of City Manager is established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of an objective evaluation of his administrative qualifications, he need not be a resident of the City at the time of his appointment and he shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. No person elected or appointed to membership on the City Council shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until 1 year has elapsed following the expiration of the last term for which he was elected or appointed. 
(Prior code § 2205(a).)  
2.04.020 - Removal—Hearing. 
The City Council at any time, by majority vote, may remove the City Manager. The Council's action in removing the City Manager shall be final and its discretion shall be uncontrolled. At the time the Council votes to remove the City Manager it may or may not grant a public hearing at its sole discretion. If such hearing is granted the hearing shall be held in not less than 7 days nor more than 30 days from the time the Council votes to remove the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2205(b).)  
2.04.030 - Bond. 
If required by the City Council, the City Manager shall furnish, at City expense, a surety bond in such sum as the City may determine. 
(Prior code § 2205(c).)  
2.04.040 - Administration. 
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give any orders to subordinates of the City Manager, including all City department heads. 
( Ord. 1389 C.S. § 1, 8-19-2015; Ord. 1333 C.S. § 1, 2007: prior code § 2205(d).)  
2.04.050 - Powers and Duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City Government under the direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided for by ordinance. He or she shall be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of the affairs of the City. In addition to the City Manager's general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, he or she shall have the following duties: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances are fully enforced; 
B.  To employ, all City employees, including department heads, to discipline or remove all City employees, including all City department heads, to transfer employees from one department to another, and to consolidate or combine officers, positions or departments under his or her jurisdiction notwithstanding the foregoing; the City Manager shall have the authority to hire and terminate the Chief of Police with the advice and consent of the City Council; however nothing herein contained shall apply to the City Clerk, City Treasurer or City Attorney; provided further, the authority given the City Manager under the terms of this subdivision shall be subject to any civil service or personnel system now or hereafter established by ordinance; 
C.  To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the City Government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof; 
D.  To attend all meetings of the Council, except when his removal is under consideration, unless excused therefrom by the Council; 
E.  To recommend to the Council such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or proper; 
F.  Serve as purchasing agent and as such make all purchases in behalf of the City except where the laws of the State require sealed bids, in which case he shall lay before the Council such information as may assist them in calling for bids and awarding contracts; 
G.  Serve as personnel officer under Section 2.68.120 of this Code; 
H.  Approve all warrants drawn upon the City Treasurer; 
I.  Serve as director of emergency services; 
J.  Consolidate departmental budget requests and prepare budgets for Council review and adoption, be responsible for administration of the City budget after its adoption; 
K.  Investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the City; 
L.  Investigate all complaints made to the City with regard to services maintained by public utilities in the City, to insure that the provisions of franchises, permits, privileges and contracts granted by the City are faithfully observed; 
M.  Perform such other duties as may, from time to time, be delegated by the Council; 
N.  To prepare and recommend to the City Council a salary plan; 
O.  To prepare and submit to the City Council an organization chart showing the organizational plan for all departments of the City Government; 
P.  To devote his or her entire time to the duties and interests of the City; and 
Q.  To execute documents specified in California Government Code Section 40602 whenever it is inconvenient for the Mayor to do so and provided such documents have been approved by the City Council for execution by resolution, motion, minute order or other appropriate action. 
( Ord. 1389 C.S. § 1, 8-19-2015; Ord. No. 1385 C.S., § 1, 4-1-2015; Ord. 1333 C.S. § 2, 2007; Ord. 1252 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 1039 C.S. § 8, 1985: Ord. 809 C.S. § 1, 1975: prior code 2205(e).)  
CHAPTER 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
 
2.08.010 - Regular Meetings. 
Meetings of the City Council shall be held at the City Hall Building, 525 Henrietta Street, between Alhambra Avenue and Castro Street, in the City of Martinez or such other place located within the City limits designated by the City Council. 
The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the 1st and 3rd Wednesdays of every month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.; provided, that when the regular meeting date falls upon a holiday the meeting shall be held on the next day thereafter at 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 1237 C.S. 1997; Ord. 1180 C.S. 1992; Ord. 1039 C.S. § 9, 1985: Ord. 920 C.S. § 1, 1980; prior code § 2100.)  
2.08.020 - Special Meetings. 
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by three Councilmembers by delivering written notice to each Councilmember and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting same in writing. Such meeting may be held at any place specified in the notice of the special meeting. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail at least 24 hours before the time of such meeting as specified therein. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 10, 1985: prior code § 2101.)  
2.08.030 - Quorum and Majority Vote. 
A.  A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business except a Councilmember who has a conflict of interest pursuant to the Political Reform Act of 1974 shall not be counted towards the establishment of a quorum unless that Councilmember's participation is legally required for the action or decision to be made. 
B.  Resolutions, orders for the payment of money, and all ordinances require a recorded majority vote of the total membership of the City Council. The adoption of urgency ordinances shall require the affirmative vote of 4 Councilmembers for passage. 
C.  For all other matters, unless the law provides otherwise, a majority vote of those Councilmembers voting shall be necessary for the adoption of any motion, except that a motion shall not be deemed adopted unless at least 2 Councilmembers have voted for it. The vote of any Councilmember abstaining or otherwise failing to vote on a motion or resolution shall not be considered a vote for or against the motion or resolution. Instead, and except in those cases where a Councilmember abstains because s/he has a conflict of interest under the Political Reform Act of 1974, an abstention or failure to vote shall be considered as consent to the will of the majority as expressed by the majority vote on the motion or resolution. 
(Ord. 1327 C.S. § 1, 2006; Ord. 1276 C.S. § 1, 2000.)  
2.08.040 - Presiding Officer. 
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council; or, in case of his absence, a Mayor pro tem, appointed by the Council, shall preside. In case of the absence of the Clerk, the Deputy City Clerk shall act in his stead. If there is none, the Mayor or Mayor pro tem shall appoint 1 of the Councilmen as City Clerk pro tem. 
(Prior code § 2103.)  
CHAPTER 2.12 - CITY ENGINEER 
 
2.12.010 - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to give, or cause to be given, the corners, lines or survey of lots, and the proper grade of the sidewalks, curb, gutters and storm drains fronting all buildings, blocks or lots with plot or certificate of same, when applied to for that purpose. For such service, the party requiring such work done shall pay all lawful charges for the same. When required by the City Council or any City contractor for work in the City, he shall furnish the lines, grades and measurements and calculations for any street or other City work. The City Engineer shall prepare and recommend revisions to standard plans and specifications for all public services construction and enforce the same. The City Engineer shall review and approve all Public Services Improvement Plans for compliance with the City Standards or good engineering practices and inspect the same on behalf of the City. He shall review all maps, deeds and land descriptions to assure technical accuracies. 
(Ord. 1069 C.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 11, 1985: Prior code 2203.)  
2.12.020 - Records of Surveys and Public Improvements. 
The City Engineer shall keep a record of all Improvement Plans for Public Services and surveys and measurements made under the provisions of this chapter. All records of surveys and all calculation books pertaining to street or other public works, with all maps, plans and profiles in which the City can in any manner be interested, shall be and remain the property of the City, and shall be kept in a secure place open to public inspection; and all such books, plans, maps and profiles shall be carefully preserved by the City Engineer and transmitted to his successor in office. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 12, 1985: Prior code § 2204.)  
CHAPTER 2.16 - CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER 
 
2.16.010 - Office Established. 
The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Traffic Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this Chapter, and Title 10 of the Martinez Municipal Code. Whenever the City Traffic Engineer is required or authorized to place and/or maintain official traffic-control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed and/or maintained. 
(Prior code § 3201.)  
2.16.020 - Powers and Duties. 
It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City. Whenever, by the provisions of this Chapter and Title 10, a power is granted to the City Traffic Engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 13, 1985: Prior code § 3201.1.)  
CHAPTER 2.20 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.20.010 - Finance Division—Duties Generally. 
The Finance Division shall be supervised by a department head responsible for the administration of financial matters for the City who shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall remain in office, until ordered discharged or removed therefrom by the City Manager. With the approval of the City Manager, the department head responsible for the administration of financial matters may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as such officer under this Chapter to any other officer or employee in the City. The department head for the Finance Division shall: 
A.  Supervise the Finance Division; 
B.  Cooperate with the City Treasurer and other officials of the City in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions and services of the City in accordance with modern municipal accounting practice. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 3, 2007: prior code § 2206(a).)  
2.20.020 - Director—Financial and Accounting Duties. 
In accordance with the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk under Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code are hereby transferred to the Director of Finance. 
(Prior code § 2206(b).)  
2.20.030 - Department—Duties and Responsibilities. 
The Finance Department shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
A.  Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the City and of each of the respective departments, divisions and services thereof; 
B.  Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses; 
C.  Keep and maintain, or prescribe and require the keeping and maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices; 
D.  Assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties relating to the administration of property taxes, sales taxes and license taxes levied by the City, and of the collection thereof; 
E.  Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands against the City, including payrolls; 
F.  Assist the City Manager in the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the City; 
G.  Assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof. 
(Prior code § 2206(c).)  
2.20.040 - Department—Reports. 
The Finance Department shall prepare and present the following to the City Manager for transmittal to the City Council, in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City: 
A.  A quarterly, or more frequently as may be desired, statement of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the City; 
B.  An annual statement and report of the financial condition of the City; 
C.  Such other financial reports as may be required by the City Manager or by request of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2206(d).)  
2.20.050 - Department-Additional Duties. 
The Finance Department shall perform such additional duties and functions as may be hereafter prescribed or required by the City Manager, with the City Council's approval, as evidenced by the adoption of a resolution. 
(Prior code § 2206(e).)  
CHAPTER 2.24 - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.24.010 - Membership and Compensation. 
There is created a City Planning Commission consisting of 7 members to be appointed by the Mayor of the City, subject to approval by the City Council. The City Attorney shall act as advisor of the Planning Commission. Residence within the corporate limits of the City shall be a requisite for membership in the City Planning Commission. Members of the Commission may receive compensation for their services, the compensation shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(Ord. 812 C.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 2700.)  
2.24.020 - Terms. 
Members shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for 4-year terms. 
(Ord. 812 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 2700.1.)  
2.24.030 - Rules of Procedure. 
The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of procedure by resolution. 
(Ord. 812 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 2700.2.)  
2.24.040 - Vacancies. 
All vacancies on the Commission or in its offices shall be filled according to the method of their original selection, and such new members of offices shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for the unexpired term of their respective predecessors. 
(Ord. 812 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 2700.3.)  
2.24.050 - Meetings—Officer Selection—Notices—Quorum. 
Members of the Planning Commission shall meet at such times and places as they may fix by resolution. They shall select one of their members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, who shall serve in the absence of the chairperson, and both shall serve for one year until their successors are elected. In case of their absence, the members of the Commission shall select a chairperson pro tem. The Planning and Building Director shall serve as Secretary to the Planning Commission, but shall have no vote. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson, or four members, by written notice served upon each member of the Commission and to each newspaper of local circulation or any other news media requesting same in writing. Such notice must be delivered at least twenty-four hours before the time of such meeting as specified therein. All meetings of the City Planning Commission shall be public. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Commission shall cause a proper record to be kept of its proceedings. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 14, 1985: Prior code § 2701.)  
2.24.060 - Powers and Duties. 
The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties provided by law and shall act and be guided by the statute now or hereafter applicable to planning commissions. 
(Ord. 812 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 2702.)  
2.24.070 - Expenses. 
No expenses of any kind shall be incurred by the Commission unless first authorized and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2703.)  
CHAPTER 2.26 - DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE 
 
2.26.010 - Membership and Compensation. 
There is created a Design Review Committee composed of five members, with each member appointed by the Mayor of the City, subject to approval by the City Council. Members may receive compensation for their services, if approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.020 - Powers and Responsibilities. 
The Committee shall be advisory to the Planning Commission and staff on Design Review applications under Section 22.34.030 et seq. of the Martinez Municipal Code, as referred to the Committee by the Community Development Director. If requested, the Committee may also assist the City Council, and other City Boards and Commissions, in reviewing other design review issues throughout the City. The Committee shall not adopt policy but may recommend the adoption of ordinances or other planning regulations directly related to design review. The Committee shall have no authority or power to hire or fire City staff or to require City staff to perform any tasks in behalf of or for the Committee or its members. 
(Ord. No. 1196 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.030 - Qualifications and Terms. 
A.  The Mayor shall strive to make membership appointments from each of the groups listed below. This composition is meant to be advisory. 
B.  Two committee members to be architects licensed in the State of California or with demonstrated knowledge and skills in the design field, two members to be landscape architects licensed in the State of California, or possessing a degree in landscape architecture from an accredited college, or possessing a certificate from the California Nurserymen's Association, and the remaining member to be a member of the public or a member of the Planning Commission. Members shall serve two-year terms. Initial appointments shall be effective November 1, 1986, with three members serving initial one-year terms, to provide for staggered terms. 
Members shall continue to serve on the Committee even after their term has expired until their replacement has been appointed or until the member has been reappointed. Members shall be Martinez residents or otherwise qualified professionals familiar with the City. 
(Ord. No. 1196 C.S. § II, 1993; Ord. 1104 C.S. § 1, 1987: Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.040 - Chair and Staff. 
The Committee shall annually in June elect one member to serve as Chair. Staff to the Committee shall be the Community Development Director, or a staff member as selected by the Director. However, the intent of establishing the Committee is to supplement the staff resources available to the Planning Commission. It is the intent that this Committee be an informal working group that can meet with staff and the applicant to help achieve the City's design review goals. 
(Ord. No. 1196 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.050 - Meetings. 
Three members shall constitute a quorum. Regular meetings shall be held on a date determined by the Committee and staff in relation to regular Commission meetings. Special meetings may be called as needed on one day's notice by the Director with the concurrence of the Chair. All meetings of the Committee are subject to the Brown Act. 
(Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.060 - Disclosure. 
All members and alternates shall file disclosure statements in Category A under the City's Conflict of Interest Code. 
(Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.070 - Procedure. 
The Committee may adopt Rules of Procedure. Insofar as possible, review by the Committee shall take place concurrently with, and as an integral part of, the normal City staff review of a project. A summary of committee comments shall be incorporated in the staff report to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
2.26.080 - Removal. 
All members sit on the Committee at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council, and shall be subject to removal at will and for any or no reason by a 4/5 vote of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1077 C.S. § I part, 1986.)  
CHAPTER 2.32 - CEMETERY COMMISSION 
 
2.32.010 - Creation of Cemetery Commission. 
A.  There is hereby created a Cemetery Commission consisting of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the City Council. Residence within the corporate limits of the City shall be a requisite for membership on the Cemetery Commission. The City Council will appoint two members to terms expiring June 30, 1982 and three members whose terms expire June 30, 1983. All subsequent appointments shall be for four years or until a successor's appointment is confirmed. 
B.  Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.  
2.32.020 - Organization of the Commission. 
Annually, the members of the Commission shall meet in regular session and elect from their members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. These officers shall perform the normal and customary duties associated with these officers. Officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are elected. 
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedure and shall by vote set a time for regular meetings which will normally be held once each month and shall determine the manner in which special meetings may be held and the notice given. A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum. 
Minutes of the Commission meetings shall be filed with the City Clerk and copies shall be forwarded to the City Council and the City Manager.  
2.32.030 - Duties and Responsibilities. 
The duties of the Cemetery Commission shall be to do the following: 
A.  Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager and Public Services Director, in all matters pertinent to cemetery care and maintenance. 
B.  Make recommendations to the Public Services Director concerning preparation of the annual budget and capital improvement program. 
C.  Make recommendations for a long-range plan, including a list of priorities for restoration of Alhambra Cemetery. 
D.  Make recommendations for annual care and maintenance of Alhambra Cemetery. 
E.  To continue the "Adopt a Pioneer Gravesite" program, being responsible for issuing certificates and obtaining historical information on the pioneer whenever possible. 
F.  To plan and conduct an annual Pioneer Day, an annual cleanup day prior to Memorial Day, and if necessary an annual cleanup day in the fall of the year. 
G.  To assist the City staff in preparing and maintaining a master map of the Cemetery plots. 
H.  To encourage and solicit volunteer contributions of work and/or expertise in restoration of the Cemetery. 
I.  To encourage volunteers to work on a project of writing a general history of the Alhambra Cemetery to be printed in simple form with copies to be made available to the public at "cost of printing". 
J.  To assist the City staff in applying for federal and state funds to be used in restoration and maintenance of Alhambra Cemetery. 
K.  To review the annual report of the Tavan Trust Fund for Alhambra Cemetery. 
(Ord. 1069 C.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 15, 1985: Ord. 929 C.S. § 1, 2, & 3, 1980.)  
CHAPTER 2.34 - VETERANS' COMMISSION 
 
2.34.010 - Membership and Compensation. 
There is hereby created a Veterans' Commission consisting of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City Council. Residence or employment within the corporate limits of the City shall be requisite for membership on the Veterans' Commission. The City Council shall appoint three (3) members to terms expiring June 30, 1992, and four (4) members whose terms shall expire June 30, 1993. All subsequent appointments shall be for four years or until a successor's appointment is confirmed. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation.  
2.34.020 - Organization of the Commission. 
Annually, the members of the Commission shall meet in regular session and elect from their membership a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson. These officers shall perform the normal and customary duties associated with these offices. Officers shall hold office for one year or until their successors are elected. 
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedure and shall, by vote, set a time for regular meetings which will normally be held every other month and shall determine the manner in which special meetings may be held and notice given. A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum. 
Minutes of the Commission meetings shall be filed with the City Clerk, and copies shall be forwarded to the City Council and the City Manager.  
2.34.030 - Duties and Responsibilities. 
The duties of the Veterans' Commission shall be to do the following: 
A.  Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager, and/or his designees in all matters pertinent to Veterans' memorials care and maintenance. 
B.  To plan and conduct events honoring Veterans. 
C.  Make recommendations for a long-range plan, including a list of priorities for enhancement to the Veterans' memorials. 
D.  Make recommendations for annual care and maintenance of the Veterans' memorials. 
E.  Make recommendations to the Public Works Director concerning preparation of the annual budget and capital improvement program as related to Veterans' memorials projects. 
F.  To sponsor fund-raising activities to allow for continued improvements and financing of Veterans' memorials. 
G.  To assist City staff in applying for funding, which may be available to improve and maintain Veterans' memorials. 
H.  To encourage and solicit monetary contributions and volunteer labor or expertise for improvement of Veterans' memorial sites. 
(Ord. 1130 C.S. § I, part 1989.)  
CHAPTER 2.38 - PARK, RECREATION, MARINA AND CULTURAL COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1351 C.S., §§ 1, 2, adopted January 21, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 2.38, §§ 2.38.010—2.38.030, and adding a new Ch. 2.38. Former Ch. 2.38 pertained to the park and recreation commission, and derived from Ord. 842 C.S. of 1976; Ord. 927 C.S. of 1982; Ord. 1039 C.S. of 1985; Ord. 1069 C.S. of 1986; Ord. 1231 C.S. of 1996; of Ord. 1242 C.S. of 1997. 
 
2.38.010 - Commission Established. 
A.  The Park, Recreation, Marina and Cultural Commission shall consist of 9 members and 1 alternate who shall be appointed by the Mayor. Residence within the corporate limits of the City shall be a requisite for membership on the Park, Recreation, Marina and Cultural Commission. The Mayor will make appointments for staggered terms of office. Three of the terms shall expire on June 30, 2011, 2 terms shall expire on June 30, 2012 and 2 terms shall expire on June 30, 2013. All subsequent appointments shall be for 4 years or until a successor's appointment is confirmed. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, and affirmed by the vote of the City Council. 
B.  The Mayor shall strive to make initial membership appointments from each of the Commissions (Arts and Library Commission, Marina Commission, and the Park and Recreation Commission). New appointments to the PRMCC shall be made by the Mayor and ratified by the City Council. 
C.  Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. 
D.  To facilitate time efficient decision-making and recommendations to the full commission, the PRMCC will utilize a number of Ad Hoc and Standing Sub-Committees as desired or needed from time to time and as staff resources permit. No sub-committee meetings will take place without a city staff member present. 
(Ord. No. 1355 C.S., § 1, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 1351 C.S., § 2, 1-21-2009)  
2.38.020 - Organization of the Commission. 
A.  Annually, the members of the Commission shall meet in regular session and elect from their members a chairman and a vice-chairman. These officers shall perform the normal and customary duties associated with these offices. Officers shall hold office for 1 year or until their successors are elected. Elections for chairman and vice-chairman will generally take place in October of each year and the newly elected chairman and a vice-chairman will assume their positions on the 1st of the New Year. There are no term limits for these positions. 
The City Council will adopt rules and regulations (Bylaws) to govern the activities of the PRMCC. The PRMCC and/or staff determine the regular meeting day that is in the best interest of the Commission, the meeting day may be changed by a majority vote of the PRMCC. A special meeting may be called by staff with approval from the chair to address critical time sensitive issues or by a majority vote of the Commission. 
B.  A majority of the regular members will constitute a quorum. 
C.  Minutes of the PRMCC meetings will be taken at each regular and special meeting and will be presented to the PRMCC for approval after preparation at the next regular meeting of the PRMCC after which said minutes are ready for PRMCC approval. After approval, the minutes will be filed with the City Clerk and copies shall be forwarded to the City Council and City Manager. 
D.  Agenda Preparation: The staff assigned to the PRMCC will develop the draft agenda for each regular and/or special meeting based upon business items carried over from previous PRMCC agendas, action items needing PRMCC discussion, deliberation and/or recommendation, new projects or programs, current project updates and/or programs moving forward, requests from the public, minute approval, and informational items. 
1.  Agenda Review: the staff assigned to the PRMCC will discuss the draft agenda with the Chair to jointly review and approve.. 
2.  Agenda Posting: the staff assigned to the PRMCC will ensure that the agenda for each regular or special meeting will be physically and electronically posted consistent with the City's policy and State Brown Act requirements. 
3.  The scope and depth of agenda items and reports will be provided within the parameters of the staff and available resources. 
(Ord. No. 1355 C.S., § 1, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 1351 C.S., § 2, 1-21-2009)  
12.38.030 - Duties and Responsibilities. 
The duties of the Park, Recreation, Marina and Cultural Commission shall be: 
A.  Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager, and Department Heads: 
1.  In all matters pertinent to public recreation, public parks, open space, and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of park planning and recreation programming; and 
2.  Policies and procedures pertaining to the use, improvement and utilization of the City's Marina; and 
3.  Policies and procedures pertaining to the implementation and coordination of public events in city parks, events and public arts displays, including public murals and art works, music and arts festivals, drama presentations, and special cultural events to stimulate local and regional interests; and 
4.  Policies and procedures pertaining to the implementation and coordination of library operations, services and programs; and 
5.  Policies and procedures pertaining to the coordination, operation, funding and advancement or arts, cultural events and library services/events in the City, and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the same capacity. 
B.  Make recommendations to the staff assigned to the PRMCC concerning preparation of the annual budget and capital improvement programs for park and recreation programs, marina, library services and cultural programs. 
C.  Make recommendations to the staff assigned to the PRMCC concerning preparation of an annual budget for various events, fundraising activities and programs sponsored by the City. Promote and actively solicit funding for expansion of these and other arts services to the community. 
D.  Review and provide input on the following program and funding areas: 
1.  Open space areas, recreation and park areas and facilities; and 
2.  Marina use by members of the public as well as members of the Martinez Yacht Club; and 
3.  Library facility, program and hours; 
4.  Cultural, artistic, library and literary events. 
E.  Review, upon referral from the Planning Commission, tentative subdivision maps and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council regarding park dedication fees, open space and trails. 
F.  Make periodic appraisals of: 
1.  The recreation program and make inspections of recreation and park facilities and report findings to the to staff assigned to the PRMCC, Recreation, Community Services & Marina; and 
2.  the Marina program and make inspections of the Marina's facilities and report its findings to the to staff assigned to the PRMCC, Recreation, Community Services & Marina; and 
3.  the arts, cultural and library programs and report findings to the to staff assigned to the PRMCC, Recreation, Community Services & Marina. 
G.  Formulate recommendations to the City Council and Planning Commission pertaining to the development of long-range plans for park, recreation and marina development, and arts, cultural and library programs in the City and review annually the long-range plans including the Parks Master Plan, the General Plan Update and other documents as may be required and make recommendations as needed or requested. 
H.  Hear public comment on policies and functions of the Parks Division of the Public Works Department and Recreation Division of the Community and Economic Development Department, the Martinez Marina, and on plans for arts, cultural and library programs and events and assist in their implementation within the parameters of the staff and resources available. 
I.  Commission members will notify the staff person in charge of the PRMCC of their absence from a PRMCC meeting at least 24 hours before a scheduled meeting. Giving insufficient notice repeatedly may result in removal from the Commission. 
J.  The role of the Chair and/or Vice Chair is to: 
i)  insure that the meeting proceeds in a logical manner according to the agenda and Roberts Rules of Order, 
ii)  insure that all commission members are heard and respected, 
iii)  manage input received from the public during the meeting, and 
iv)  work with staff to enhance overall meeting effectiveness. 
(Ord. No. 1355 C.S., § 1, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 1351 C.S., § 2, 1-21-2009)  
CHAPTER 2.44 - TRAFFIC COMMITTEE 
 
2.44.010 - Established. 
There is established an advisory Traffic Committee to serve without compensation, consisting of the City Traffic Engineer, the Chief of Police, Planning and Building Director, and City Engineer. Each committee member may designate a representative to serve in their place on the advisory Traffic Committee. The chairman of the Traffic Committee shall be the City Traffic Engineer. 
(Ord. 1069 C.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 20, 1985: Prior code § 3201.2.)  
2.44.020 - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of this City having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend to the legislative body of this City and to the City Traffic Engineer, the Chief of the Traffic Division and other City officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(Prior code § 3201.3.)  
CHAPTER 2.52 - CITY OFFICERS 
 
2.52.010 - Officers Designated. 
The government of the City shall be vested in the following officials: 
A.  Mayor and City Council members; 
B.  City Manager; 
C.  City Attorney; 
D.  City Clerk; 
E.  City Treasurer; 
F.  Chief of Police; 
G.  City Engineer; 
H.  The heads of each City department as contained in the organization chart prepared by the City Manager and submitted to the City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.050. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 4, 2007: Ord. 1069 C.S. §§ 1 & 2, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 22, 1985: prior code § 2200.)  
2.52.020 - Consolidation of Offices. 
The City Council, may by resolution, consolidate any two or more appointive offices and require one officer to perform the duties of such offices. 
(Prior code § 2201.)  
2.52.030 - Duties Generally. 
A.  All officials of the City shall perform such duties as are enjoined upon them by any portion of this Code or by any ordinance or resolution of the City or by the general laws of the State. 
B.  In addition thereto, specific duties are enjoined upon the officials designated in Chapters 2.04, 2.12 and 2.20. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 5, 2007: prior code § 2202.)  
CHAPTER 2.56 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
 
2.56.010 - Required—Amount. 
A.  The officers of the City named in this section, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices shall each execute to the City a bond in the penal sum mentioned next to the name of such officer, with a surety company as sole surety thereon, or with two sureties satisfactory to the City Council, which bond shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of such officer, including in the same bond the duties of all officers of which he is made the ex officio either by general law, this Code or any ordinances of the City. Each such bond so furnished shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor of the City. In the event it is deemed by the City Council, at any time, that the surety or sureties, or either of them, upon a bond so furnished are insufficient to meet the penal sum thereof, a new bond may be required and shall be furnished by the officer as a substitute therefor. 
B.  The officers and the penal sums of their respective bonds shall be as follows: 
1.  Clerk: in the penal sum of $1,000. 
2.  Treasurer: in the penal sum of $25,000. 
3.  As to each of the other officers of the City the amount of the bond, if any are required, shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Council. 
(Prior code § 2400.)  
2.56.020 - Payment of Premium. 
The City shall pay the premium on all such surety bonds. 
(Prior code § 2401.)  
2.56.030 - State Law Applicable. 
All the provisions of any law of this State relating to the official bonds of officers, existing at the time of the presentation of any of the bonds mentioned in Section 2.56.010, shall apply to such bonds. 
(Prior code § 2402.)  
CHAPTER 2.60 - COMPENSATION 
 
2.60.010 - Generally. 
City officers and employees shall be entitled to receive such compensation for their services as the City Council shall prescribe from time to time by ordinance or resolution. Except as otherwise herein provided, no officer or employee shall be allowed any fees, perquisites, emoluments, rewards or compensation aside from the salary or compensation as fixed by the Council, but all fees received by him in connection with his official duties shall be paid by him daily to the Finance Department. 
(Prior code § 2300.)  
2.60.020 - City Attorney. 
The salary of the City Attorney shall be in full compensation for his services in attending all meetings of the City Council, in advising all officers of the City as to their official duties and in preparing all ordinances and resolutions for the City Council, save as hereinafter provided. It is expressly provided that the salary referred to in this Section shall not cover services which shall be rendered by the City Attorney in any litigation in which the City may be interested as a party or otherwise, nor services rendered by the City Attorney in connection with work done by the City under the General Street Laws of California. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the Council from allowing from time to time extra compensation for services rendered by the City Attorney. 
(Prior code § 2301.)  
2.60.030 - City Clerk. 
The salary of the City Clerk shall be, at stated times, fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1142 C.S. § 1, 1989: Prior code § 2302.)  
2.60.040 - City Treasurer. 
The salary of the City Treasurer shall be, at stated times, a compensation fixed by resolution, as is more specifically provided for by Section 36517, Stats. 1971, C 275, p. 580, paragraph one of the Government Code of the State. 
(Ord. 799 C.S. § 1, 1975: prior code § 2303.)  
2.60.050 - City Council. 
Each Council member shall receive a monthly salary of $585. 
(Ord. 1292 C.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 1120 C.S. § I, 1988: Ord. 1068 C.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 905 C.S. § 1, 1979: Ord. 867 C.S. § 1, 1977: Ord. 844 C.S. § 1, 1976; Ord. 802 C.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 2304.)  
CHAPTER 2.64 - ELECTIONS 
 
2.64.010 - Procedure. 
All municipal elections held in the City shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Elections Code of the State governing elections in fifth and sixth class cities, so far as they may be applicable. 
(Prior code § 2500.)  
2.64.020 - Time of Election. 
The Martinez General Municipal Election shall be held in November of the even numbered years and consolidated with the Statewide General Election. 
(Ord. 1019 C.S. § 1, 1984.)  
2.64.030 - Term of Office. 
The term of office for the Mayor and all members of the City Council shall be four years. 
(Ord. 1162 C.S. § 1, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 2.68 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.68.010 - Civil Service System Adopted—Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the legislative body of any city within the State under the provisions of Chapter 48 of the Statutes of 1935, and the amendments thereto, the Civil Service System set out in this chapter is adopted for the City. 
(Prior code § 2600.)  
2.68.020 - Classified Service. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the City, except: 
A.  Elective officers; 
B.  Positions on appointive boards, commissions or committees; 
C.  The following officers: City Manager, City Attorney, and City Engineer; 
D.  The head of each department as contained in the organization chart prepared by the City Manager and submitted to the City Council pursuant to Section 2.40.050; 
E.  Special police officers and other Police Department employees paid on an hourly or per diem basis; 
F.  Hourly or per diem employees in any office or department of the City including interns, temporary full-time and temporary part-time employees; 
G.  Persons under contract with the City to perform special services; 
H.  Employees appointed to positions of public work, when the work or improvements are undertaken or done pursuant to any procedure under the Street Improvement Act or other similar State acts; 
I.  Emergency employees in any office or department of the City. For the purpose of this Chapter, an "emergency employee" is defined to be any person appointed to a position of employment, the necessity for which was created by reason of riot, insurrection or other extraordinary emergency. All such positions and employments shall be for the duration of the emergency and shall terminate immediately thereafter. 
All offices, positions and employments not exempted by the foregoing exceptions shall constitute the classified service of the City. The City Council may, from time to time, by ordinance, add additional departments, appointive officers or employees to these enumerated in this Section. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 6, 2007; Ord. 1069 C.S. §§ 3, 4, 1986: Ord. 1039 C.S. § 23, 1985: prior code § 2601.)  
2.68.040 - Civil Service Commission—Created—Membership. 
A.  There is created a Civil Service Commission consisting of five members. 
B.  Vacancies on the Civil Service Commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the unexpired term. Each member of the Civil Service Commission shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. A four-fifth vote of all the members of the City Council, at a regular meeting thereof, shall be required to appoint a commissioner to the Civil Service Commission, or fill a vacancy thereon, or to remove any commissioner thereof to the expiration of his term. 
C.  The commissioners shall be qualified electors of the City and shall serve without compensation. No person holding elected office or employment with the City of Martinez, or the spouse of any person holding elected office or employment with the City of Martinez shall be eligible for appointment. No person who is the husband or wife or any member of the Civil Service Commission, or of the personnel officer, or of any appointing authority shall be appointed to any salaried office, employment or lucrative position in the service of the City. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 25, 1985: Ord. 932 C.S. § 1, 1982: prior code § 2603.)  
2.68.050 - Civil Service Commission—Powers and Duties. 
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To represent the public interest in the improvement of personnel administration in the City; 
B.  The duties contained in the provisions of this Chapter and in the Civil Service Rules and Regulations adopted by the City Council; 
C.  To recommend to the City Council such amendments to the Civil Service Rules and Regulations as it considers necessary to carry out an effective Civil Service System; 
D.  To carry on all other activities which may be necessary or proper and lawful for executing the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 26, 1985: Prior code § 2604.)  
2.68.060 - Civil Service Commission—Prohibition of Interference by Council. 
The Council and each of its members are prohibited from interfering or attempting to interfere directly or indirectly with the performance of the Commission's duties and from obtaining or attempting to obtain directly or indirectly from any person any agreement as to how he will perform any of the duties of a commissioner. 
(Prior code § 2605.)  
2.68.070 - Civil Service Commission—Adoption of Rules. 
The Commission does approve and adopt as its rules the Civil Service Rules and Regulations previously adopted by the City Council with all amendments thereto. 
(Prior code § 2606.)  
2.68.080 - Appointing Authority—Designated. 
The appointing authority shall be the City Council in the case of appointments to the positions of City Manager, City Attorney and Chief of Police. The City Manager shall be the appointing authority for department heads with the exception of the Chief of Police. The appointing authority in the case of positions below the department head level shall be department heads, with the approval of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 7, 2007: prior code § 2607.)  
2.68.090 - Appointing Authority—Disciplinary Actions. 
Any appointing authority shall have the right of removal, demotion, discipline and suspension of employees subject to the provisions of the California State Code. 
(Ord. 1333 C.S. § 8, 2007: prior code § 2608.)  
2.68.100 - Appeal to Commission or Arbitrator. 
Any employee within the classified service shall have the right to submit a grievance, defined as any real or imagined dispute by an employee, group of employees, or a formally recognized employee organization, concerning: 
A.  Disputes over the application or interpretation of policies, procedures, including memorandum of understandings, or the practical consequences that decisions on these matters may have upon an affected employee or group of employees; 
B.  Disputes over the application or interpretation of City ordinances, resolutions or general laws related to personnel matters or working conditions, to either the Civil Service Commission or Arbitration. 
Submission of such a grievance shall be made only after an employee or group of employees has made his appeal through the lines of authority to the City Manager. 
(Ord. 779 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 2609.)  
2.68.110 - Commission or Arbitrator Decision Final. 
The decision of the Commission or the Arbitrator upon hearing and investigating shall be final and binding upon both parties. 
(Ord. 779 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974: prior code § 2610.)  
2.68.120 - Appointment and Duties of Personnel Officer. 
A.  The City Manager shall act in the capacity of Personnel Officer. He/she shall be custodian of all personnel records and shall be the official upon whom all notices, requests for hearings, complaints and other official documents in connection with the Commission shall be served or filed. 
B.  The Personnel Officer or designated appointee shall administer all provisions of this Chapter and of the rules, except those specifically reserved to the Commission or the Council. He shall perform such additional services and make such investigations and prepare and present such reports in connection with the Civil Service System, employment or employees as may be requested by the Commission, the Council or the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 27, 1985: Prior code § 2611.)  
2.68.130 - Criminal Conduct—Ineligibility for Employment. 
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, no person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment in the competitive service of the City; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if he finds and determines that mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of the conviction, or the fact that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction. 
The City Manager/Personnel Officer, or his designee, Chief of Police, City Attorney, and each Department Head of the City are hereby authorized to have access to the "State Summary Criminal History Information" as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council of the City of Martinez hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 1018 C.S. § 1, 1984.)  
CHAPTER 2.72 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
 
2.72.010 - Intention to Qualify Under State Law. 
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 5 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1129 C.S. § 1, part 1989: Ord. 377 C.S. § 1, 1961.)  
2.72.020 - Adherence to State Standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 and Section 13510(C) of Chapter 1 of California Penal Code, the City, while receiving aid from the State pursuant to Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 1129 C.S. § 1, part 1989: Ord. 377 C.S. § 2, 1961.)  
2.72.030 - Compliance. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the City's Public Safety Dispatcher Personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training." 
(Ord. 1129 C.S. § 1, part 1989.)  
2.72.040 - Definitions. 
As used in the Chapter: 
A.  "Reserve Police Officer" means any qualified person appointed by the Chief of Police and is assigned specific police functions by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The person is a peace officer, if the person qualifies as set forth in Section 832.6 of the California Penal Code. The authority of the person designated as a peace officer pursuant to this paragraph extends only the duration of the persons specific assignment with the exception of Designated Level I Reserve Officers. Reserve Police Officers shall be appointed Level I or II pursuant to California Penal Code Section 832.6 and, additionally, fulfill any additional police department requirements. 
B.  "Designated Level I Reserve Police Officer" means, upon appointment by the Chief of Police, Reserve Police Officers who have qualified as Level I Reserve Police Officers pursuant to subsection (1) of subsection (a) of Section 832.6 of the California Penal Code and, in addition, have completed a minimum of 2 years of field experience as a Reserve Police Officer with the City comprising a minimum of 400 working hours, or have comparable experience of 5 years as a Reserve Police Officer or Reserve Deputy Sheriff in another jurisdiction and 1 year with the City, or have at least a basic POST certificate and 1 year as a Reserve Police Officer with the City shall have those peace officer powers and duties as provided by subsection (2) of subsection (a) of Section 830.6 of the California Penal Code. Such officers shall be known as "Designated Level I Reserve Police Officers." 
C.  "Time requirement" means the time requirement for a Reserve Police Officer to be in the Police Department prior to appointment as a Designated Level I Reserve Police Officer may be waived at the discretion of the Chief of Police. 
D.  "Revoking or suspending Level I Reserve Officer status" nothing in this subsection shall prevent the Chief of Police from revoking or suspending Designating Level I Reserve Police Officer status, nor shall the Chief of Police be under any mandate or obligation to make such an appointment. 
(Ord. 1345 C.S. § 1, 2008.)  
CHAPTER 2.76 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
 
2.76.010 - Purpose. 
The declared purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the adoption, application and administration of a records management program for the City. 
(Ord. 733 C.S. § 1,1971: prior code § 2207 (part).)  
2.76.020 - Definitions. 
As used in the Chapter: 
A.  "Microfilm" means the photographic reduction of records as replacements for or in lieu of original records. Such microfilm is to be retained in accordance with Council-approved retention schedules. 
B.  "Records" means any paper, document, archive, map drawing or microfilm which is created or maintained in the conduct of City business and preserved as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities, or because of the informational value of data contained therein. 
C.  "Records center" means a central repository for housing all City inactive records until they have met their specified retention. 
D.  "Records management" means the systematic control over the creation, maintenance, protection and disposition of all City records. 
E.  "Retention schedules" means the document describing records maintained by City departments and specifying the period of time established for its retention in accordance with statutory or other requirements which must elapse before disposition may be made of a body of records. 
(Ord. 733 C.S. § 2, 1971: prior code § 2207 (part).)  
2.76.030 - Office of City Clerk as Administrator—Duties. 
The office of the City Clerk shall be responsible for the administration of the records management program for the City. He shall: 
A.  Develop and issue such instructions as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the program; 
B.  Develop a uniform filing system for all City records to be administered, where practical, on a centralized basis under his jurisdiction; 
C.  Maintain a City Records Center to house records no longer required in active office areas but which records require further retention due to legal, operating or historical retention; 
D.  Develop procedures for the protection of City records against natural or other disasters; 
E.  Advise and assist City departments in the preparation of records retention schedules; 
F.  Advise and assist City departments in studies to determine applications of records-housing equipment and microfilming systems; 
G.  Submit City records retention schedule, which affects the destruction of records, to the City Council for approval; 
H.  The City Council may, by approving the departmental records retention schedule, grant to City officers and department heads the authority to destroy duplicate records less than five years old if they are no longer required in accordance with the retention periods established in the schedules. Requests by officers or department heads for the destruction of original records in accordance with the established retention periods shall be forwarded to the City Attorney for his written consent and to the City Council for its approval as provided for by the provisions of the Government Code of the State governing municipalities. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § 28, 1985: Ord. 733 C.S. § 3, 1971: prior code § 2207 (part).)  
CHAPTER 2.80 - WARRANT-PURCHASE ORDERS 
 
2.80.010 - Procedure. 
All purchase orders shall be submitted to the City Manager, or his designated representatives, for his approval or rejection. When approved, and materials supplied, a warrant based upon the approved purchase order shall be drawn against the proper fund. All warrants shall be signed by the Finance Director and the City Treasurer. 
(Prior code § 2800.)  
CHAPTER 2.84 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
2.84.010 - Auction by Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police may, from time to time, hold a public auction at which lost or unclaimed property in the possession of the City may be sold to the highest bidder. Only those articles which have been in the possession of the City for a period of at least six months may be sold at such auction, except that bicycles in the possession of the City for a period of at least three months may be so sold. 
(Prior code § 3600.)  
2.84.020 - Notice of Auction. 
The Chief of Police shall give notice of the holding of a public auction at least five days in advance thereof by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(Prior code § 3601.)  
2.84.030 - Disposition of Receipts. 
All funds realized at such public auction shall be paid into the general fund of the City. 
(Prior code § 3602.)  
2.84.040 - Unsold Property. 
Any item or article of lost or unclaimed property upon which no bid was made at public auction may be given to any charitable institution or destroyed at the option of the Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 3603.) 
TITLE 2 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions vesting the government of a general law city in certain officers, see Gov. Code § 36501; for statutory provisions permitting the appointment of necessary officers, see Gov. Code § 36505. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding City Manager form of government, see Gov. Code § 34851—34859. 
3.  For statutory provisions regarding City Council meetings, see Gov. Code § 36805—36811. 
4.  For statutory definition of Engineer, see Gov. Code § 4001. 
5.  For provisions on vehicles and traffic, see Title 10. 
6.  For statutory provisions regarding the office of Director of Finance, see Gov. Code § 40802—40805.5. 
7.  For statutory provisions regarding local planning, see Gov. Code § 65100 et seq.; see Title 21, Subdivisions; see Title 22, Zoning. 
8.  For statutory provisions regarding emergency powers, see Gov. Code § 53019—53023; for statutory provisions regarding local Disaster Councils, see Gov. Code 8610 et seq. 
9.  For statutory provisions regarding human relations and local commissions, see Gov. Code § 50260—50265. 
10.  For Parking District Law of 1951, see Strs. § Hwy. Code § 35100 et seq.; for statutory provisions regarding Parking Place Commissions, see Strs. § Hwy. Code § 3555 et seq. 
11.  For statutory provisions regarding community redevelopment agencies, see Health § Safety Code § 33100 et seq. 
12.  For provisions on vehicles and traffic, see Title 10. 
13.  For statutory provisions regarding the bonding of City officers and employees, see Gov. Code § 1651 and 36518 -36521. 
14.  For statutory provisions regarding salary schedules for councilmen, see Gov. Code § 36516; for statutory provisions requiring the salaries of City Clerk and City Treasurer to be fixed by ordinance or resolution, see Gov. Code § 36517. 
15.  For statutory provisions regarding municipal elections, see Elections Code § 22800 et seq. 
16.  For statutory provisions regarding the adoption of a personnel system, see Gov. Code § 45000 et seq. 
17.  For statutory provisions regarding application for aid from State fund, see Pen. Code § 13522. 
18.  For statutory provisions regarding destruction of records, see Gov. Code § 34090, 34090.5, and 34090.7. 
19.  For statutory provisions regarding purchased of supplies by local agencies, see Gov. Code § 54201—54205. 
20.  For statutory provisions regarding sale of unclaimed property by cities, see Civil Code § 2080.4. 
Issued: 7/97  
TITLE 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 3.04 - HIGHWAY FUNDS 
 
3.04.010 - Apportionment and Expenditure. 
There is hereby referred to a Chapter of the Streets and Highways Code of the State, "Highway Users Tax Funds (Account)" as to accountability or responsibility of the apportionment and expenditure of highway funds. 
(Ord. 814 C.S. § I, 1975: prior Code § 8500.)  
CHAPTER 3.08 - PROPERTY TAX 
 
3.08.010 - Assessment and Collection. 
The assessment and collection of ad valorem property taxes on property located within the City, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements within the City, shall be performed by the Assessor and the Tax Collector of Contra Costa County in conformance with Sections 51500 and following of the Government Code of the State (1963). 
(Prior Code § 8100.)  
CHAPTER 3.12 - DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.12.010 - Authority for Adoption. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Documentary Transfer Tax of the City," pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. 
(Prior Code § 8600.)  
3.12.020 - Imposition and Rate of Tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 8601.)  
3.12.030 - Persons Required to Pay Tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 8602.)  
3.12.040 - Instrument Securing Debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior Code § 8603.)  
3.12.050 - Instruments of United States, State, Territory or Political Subdivision. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. 
(Prior Code § 8604.)  
3.12.060 - Conveyance Under Reorganization or Adjustment Plans. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
B.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
C.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this Section shall apply only if the making, delivery or filing of instruments or transfer of conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior Code § 8605.)  
3.12.070 - Conveyance Under Order of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission is obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior Code § 8606(1).)  
3.12.080 - Transfer of Certain Partnership Property. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior Code § 8607.)  
3.12.090 - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior Code § 8608.)  
3.12.100 - Claims for Refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State. 
(Prior Code § 8609.)  
CHAPTER 3.16 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Short Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be .975 percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.030 - Purpose. 
The City Council hereby declares that this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt sales and use tax provisions which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt sales and use tax provisions which incorporate provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt sales and use tax provisions which impose a tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt sales and use tax provisions which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.040 - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax Chapter; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.050 - Sales Tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 2 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.060 - Place of Sale. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such changes are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.070 - Use Tax. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 2 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.080 - Adoption of Provisions of State Law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985: Ord. 1010 C.S. § I, 1983.)  
3.16.090 - Limitations on Adoption of State Law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, The State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those Sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, Sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.100 - Permit Not Required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.110 - Exclusions and Exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a Sales and Use Tax Chapter enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators Of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.120 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.130 - Enjoining Collection Forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985: Ord. 1010 C.S. § II, 1983.)  
3.16.140 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
3.16.150 - Severability. 
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 1039 C.S. § XXIX part, 1985.)  
CHAPTER 3.20 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Short Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the Utility Users Tax Ordinance and the taxes imposed hereunder may be collectively referred to as the Utility Users Tax. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions in Municipal Code § 1.04.010 and the following definitions shall govern the construction of this Chapter: 
A.  "City" means the City of Martinez. 
B.  "City Council" means the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
C.  "Electrical corporation," shall have the same meaning as defined in Public Utilities Code § 218 and shall also include any public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user. 
D.  "Gas" means any natural or manufactured gas or fuel used for light, heat or power. 
E.  "Gas corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Public Utilities Code § 222 and shall also include any public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of gas to a service user. 
F.  "Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, or individuals. 
G.  "Service supplier" means any person required to collect or self-impose, collect and remit to the City the Utility Users Tax. 
H.  "Service user" means a person required to pay the Utility Users Tax. 
I.  "Tax Administrator" means the Finance Director of the City or designee. 
J.  "Telephone corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Public Utilities Code § 234. 
K.  "Cellular telephone carrier" means a carrier which provides cellular telephone service. 
L.  "Video Services" shall mean any and all services related to the providing of video programming (including origination programming), or communications (including two-way communications), regardless of the content of the video programming or communications, and shall include the leasing of channel access. 
M.  "Video Services Provider" shall mean any person who provides one or more channels of video programming or communications (including the leasing of channel access to provide such video programming or communications) to an address in the City, including to a business, home, condominium or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A "Video Service Provider" includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(12), providers of cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multichannel multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. 
N.  "Water corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Public Utilities Code § 241 and shall also include any public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of water to a service user. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.030 - Purpose and Application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a utility users tax as a revenue measure necessary to pay the usual and current expenses of conducting the municipal government of the City, the proceeds of which shall be paid to the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.040 - Telephone Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone communication services by every person in the City using such services (the "Telephone Users Tax"). The Telephone Users Tax shall be at the rate of three and a quarter percent (3.25%) of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. The Telephone Users Tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the City, irrespective of whether a particular telephone communication service originates and/or terminates within the City. 
B.  As used in this section, "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to Public Utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation. 
C.  As used in this section, "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system; provided, however, that the term "telephone communication services" shall not include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on January 1, 1970. 
D.  The Telephone Users Tax shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A), the Telephone Users Tax shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.050 - Cellular Telephone Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax on the amounts paid for basic service charges for every person residing and/or who has a place of business in the City using cellular telephone services. The tax imposed by this section is three and quarter percent (3.25%) of such basic charges, and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  "Basic service charges" shall mean the amounts billed by a cellular telephone company to customers for the privilege of having the service. This term does not include the amounts billed by a cellular telephone company for actual calls made or received. 
C.  The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service users by the person providing the cellular telephone services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax; an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.060 - Electricity Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electrical energy in the City (the "Electricity Users Tax"). The Electricity Users Tax shall be at the rate of three and quarter percent (3.25%) of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the City and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. 
B.  As used in this section, "charges" shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
C.  As used in this section, "using electrical energy" shall not include: (1) the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by such person for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that such term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; (2) electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; (3) the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale; and (4) the use of suck energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency. 
D.  The Electricity Users Tax shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the electrical energy. The Electricity Users Tax imposed on electrical energy supplied by a supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.080. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier in one month shall be remitted by U.S. mail to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by U.S. mail, to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. The amount of the tax remitted may be estimated by a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user not having the full tax due, billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within thirty days of said use, and shall remit directly to the City the amount of said tax due. 
F.  The tax administrator may require from said service user the filing of tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the sale price, or fair market value in the absence of a sales price, and quantity of electricity used. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.070 - Gas Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the City, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport or by rail (the "Gas Users Tax"). The Gas Users Tax shall be at the rate of three and a quarter percent (3.25%) of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. 
B.  "Charges" as used in this section shall include: (1) charges billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
C.  The Gas Users Tax is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes or by rail; (2) charges made for gas sold by a public utility for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water; (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
D.  The Gas Users Tax shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the 20th of each calendar month, commencing on the 20th of each calendar month after the effective date of this ordinance, make a return to the Tax Administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the Tax Administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the Tax Administrator. 
E.  The Tax Administrator may require from service user the filing of tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the sale price, or fair market value in the absence of a sales price, and quantity of gas used. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.080 - Direct Purchase of Gas or Electricity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a supplier not under the jurisdiction of this ordinance, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator within thirty days of said use and shall directly remit to the City the amount of tax due. 
B.  The Tax Administrator may require said service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.090 - Water Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using water in the City which is delivered through mains or pipes ("Water Users Tax"). The Water Users Tax shall be at the rate of three and a quarter percent (3.25%) of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the base on which the Water Users Tax is computed: (1) charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes and (2) charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a City or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district. 
C.  The Water Users Tax shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.).  
3.20.100 - Video Users Tax. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using video services from a video services provider. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and quarter percent (3.25%) of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
B.  "Charges" as used in this section shall include charges for leased access channels and origination programming which are transmitted to video service users in the City and shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the video service user in exchange for video services. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the video service. The amount collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.110 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any individual who qualifies as a "claimant" under the Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Law. (Chapter 1, commencing with Section 20501, of Part 10.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California) shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter and any such tax paid by any such individual is subject to refund under Section 3.20.170. 
B.  Persons who are qualified under the Low Income Rate Assistance ("LIRA") program of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, and persons who are qualified under the Lifeline program of the telephone corporation shall be exempt in whole from paying the gas, electrical, and Telephone Users Taxes imposed by this chapter. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the state or federal constitutions. 
D.  The City Council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of the Utility Users Tax and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax. 
E.  The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.120 - Delinquent Taxes—Penalty. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday. 
B.  Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination shall attach and be paid by the person required to collect and remit at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax collected or imposed in this section. 
C.  The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon any person required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting at a rate of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the tax administrator. 
D.  Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.130 - Actions to Collect. 
Any Utility Users Tax required to be paid by a service user shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.140 - Collection Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the Utility Users Tax shall be performed as follows: 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Utility Users Tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges, Section 3.20.160(B) will apply. 
B.  The duty to collect the Utility Users Tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. The amount of the tax remitted may be estimated by a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customers. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.150 - Additional Powers and Duties of Tax Administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the Utility Users Tax. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file at City Hall. 
C.  The Tax Administrator may make agreements, subject to City Council approval, to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of the Utility Users Tax may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier, so long as said agreements result in collection of the Utility Users Tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. Such agreements can only be made if one or both of the following criteria are met: 
(i)  Any flat-rate agreement that is made must be for no less than $50,000 per year; 
(ii)  The tax rate proves too difficult to calculate due to the nature and/or complexity of the taxable utility use. 
D.  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the Utility Users Tax. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the Utility Users Tax, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
E.  The Tax Administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least 90 days prior to any annexation or other change in the City's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from LAFCO. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.160 - Assessment—Service User Administrative Remedy. 
A.  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect the tax from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth below. 
B.  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the Utility Users Tax. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the Utility Users Tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect such taxes due. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that the Tax Administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user's address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.170 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City the Utility Users Tax to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.180 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of city tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of the Utility Users Tax and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three (3) years from the date of overpayment. 
C.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the Utility Users Tax on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
D.  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practices. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.190 - Termination or Suspension. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification from the City, terminate or suspend any Utility Users Tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
3.20.200 - Sunset Provision. 
This chapter will expire and be of no further force or effect at the end of twenty four (24) months from the date it takes effect. 
(Ord. 1223 C.S. § 1, JULY 24, 1995.)  
CHAPTER 3.28 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXI 
 
3.28.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax of the City." 
(Prior Code 6700.)  
3.28.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this Section govern the construction of this Chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax Administrator" means the Finance Director of the City of Martinez. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter may be considered. 
(Prior Code § 6701.)  
3.28.030 - Imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator. 
(Ord. 1216 C.S. § I, 1994; Ord. 1201 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 882 C.S. § I, 1978: Prior Code § 6702.)  
3.28.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided; 
2.  Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business; 
3.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under a penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior Code § 6703.)  
3.28.050 - Operator's Duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code § 6704.)  
3.28.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him a Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies requirements of the Uniform Occupancy Tax Chapter by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Prior Code § 6705.)  
3.28.070 - Reporting and Remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior Code § 6706.)  
3.28.050 - Penalties and Interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. An operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Subsections A and B of this Section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior Code § 6707.)  
3.28.090 - Failure to Collect and Report Tax—Determination of Tax. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.100. 
(Prior code § 6708.)  
3.28.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed herein for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. 
(Prior Code § 6709.)  
3.28.110 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of 3 years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior Code § 6710.)  
3.28.120 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in Subsections B and C of this Section provided a claim in writing therefor, which complies with the procedures and provisions contained in Chapter 3.40 of this Code, is filed with the City. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in Subsection A of this Section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 2, 2003; prior Code § 6711.)  
3.28.130 - Action to Collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operation which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior Code § 6712.)  
3.28.140 - Penalty for Violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this Chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Prior Code § 6713.)  
CHAPTER 3.32 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
 
3.32.010 - Adopted. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to secure for the City supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed to exercise positive financial control over purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. 
(Ord. 825 C.S. § I (part), 1975.)  
3.32.020 - Purchasing Officer. 
The City Manager is appointed the purchasing officer of the City. The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other City Officer or position. The City Manager may delegate his duties as purchasing officer to other City staff. The purchasing officer or his designated representative shall have the following authority: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment necessary for operation of City Departments in accordance with the purchasing policies prescribed and other rules and regulations prescribed by the City Council and City Manager; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment; 
C.  Review on an annual basis city purchasing policy and procedures to determine if new or revised purchasing rules and procedures are needed to insure the prompt and efficient procurement of supplies, services and equipment for City Departments; apply new developments and practices in the field of purchasing to City purchasing, if appropriate; 
D.  Promote full and open competition on all City purchases. 
E.  Initiate and maintain appropriate purchasing forms and files; 
F.  Administer the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all surplus supplies and equipment which have become unsuitable for City use. 
(Ord. 825 C.S. § I (part), 1975.)  
3.32.030 - Policy and Procedures. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, approve appropriate policies and establish appropriate procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment. 
(Ord. 825 C.S. § I (part), 1975.)  
CHAPTER 3.36 - INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES UNDER THE UNIFORM PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION COST ACCOUNTING ACT 
 
3.36.010 - Informal Bid Procedures. 
Public projects, as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, of $125,000.00 or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 1363 C.S., § 1, 4-6-2011; Ord. 1279 C.S., § 1, 2000; Ord. 1146 C.S., § I, (part), 1990; Ord. 1090 C.S., § I, (part), 1987.)  
3.36.020 - Contractors List. 
A list of contractors identified according to categories of work, shall be developed and maintained by the City's Public Services Director in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.34 of the Public Contract Code and with criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(Ord. 1146 C.S. § I (part), 1990: Ord. 1090 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
3.36.030 - Notice Inviting Informal Bids. 
Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed at least 10 calendar days before bids are due to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 3.36.020. Said notice shall describe the project, how to obtain more information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be noticed at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids; provided however: 
1.  If there is no list of qualified contractors identified according to categories of work, maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
2.  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
(Ord. 1146 C.S. § I (part), 1990: Ord. 1090 C.S. § I, 1987.)  
3.36.040 - Award of Contracts. 
The City Finance Director and the Director of Public Services are each authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. 1090 C.S. § I, 1987.)  
3.36.050 - All Bids Greater Than $125,000.00. 
If all bids received are in excess of $125,000.00, the City Council may, by passage of a resolution by a 4/5 vote, award the contract, at $137,500.00 or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the City was reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 1363 C.S., § 2, 4-6-2011; Ord. 1279 C.S., § 1, 2000; Ord. 1146 C.S., § I (part), 1990.)  
3.36.060 - Automatic Adjustment of Monetary Limits. 
In accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22020, the monetary limits specified in this chapter shall adjust automatically and without further amendment by the City Council upon notification from the California State Controller of such amended monetary limit. Such adjustment shall be effective on the date specified in the Controller's notification. The monetary limits specified above shall also adjust automatically and without further amendment by the City Council whenever the Legislature amends Public Contract Code Sections 22032 and 22034 by adjusting the monetary limits contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1363 C.S., § 3, 4-6-2011.)  
CHAPTER 3.40 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY OF MARTINEZ 
 
3.40.010 - Authority. 
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 935 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
3.40.020 - Claim Required. 
All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law, shall be presented within the time and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
3.40.030 - Form of Claim. 
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this Section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
3.40.040 - Claim Pre-Requisite to Suit. 
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this Section and acted upon by the City Council prior to the filing of any action on such claims, and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not filed a claim in accordance with Section 3.40.030. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
3.40.050 - Suit. 
Any action brought against the City of Martinez upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Martinez shall conform to the requirements of Sections 950-951 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.) 
TITLE 3 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding the transfer of City tax functions, see Government Code § 51500 et seq. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding the documentary transfer tax act, see Revenue & Tax Code § 11901 et seq. 
3.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to levy sales and use taxes, see Government Code § 37010: for provisions on local sales and use taxes, see Revenue & Tax Code § 11901 et seq. 
4.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose transient occupancy taxes, see Revenue & Tax Code §§ 7280 and 7281.  
TITLE 5 - BUSINESS TAXES AND REGULATIONS 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE: Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
I. - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY  
CHAPTER 5.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
5.04.020 - Purpose. 
Licenses are issued for the purpose of raising revenue for municipal operation. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6100.)  
5.04.020 - Effect on Other Ordinances. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under the ordinance codified in this Chapter and Chapters 5.08 through 5.32 shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the City, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6102.)  
5.04.030 - Effect of Provisions on Past Actions—Unexpired Licenses. 
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter and Chapters 5.08 through 5.32 nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the City shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the City and the tax paid for the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by the ordinance codified in this Chapter and Chapters 5.08 through 5.32 shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6144.)  
CHAPTER 5.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
5.08.010 - Generally. 
For the purpose of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 certain words and phrases are defined, and certain provisions shall be construed as set out in this Chapter, unless it shall be apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101 (part).)  
5.08.020 - Business. 
"Business" includes professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(a).)  
5.08.030 - Collector. 
"Collector" means the Finance Director or other City Officer or employee charged with the administration of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(c).)  
5.08.040 - Employee. 
"Employee" means any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business whether as a member of the owner's family, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in the business. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(d).)  
5.08.050 - Fixed Place of Business. 
"Fixed place of business" means the premises within the City where a business is continuously conducted from day to day and regularly kept open for the purposes of such business. The term "regular place of business" shall have the same meaning as "fixed place of business." 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(e).)  
5.08.060 - Gross Receipts. 
"Gross Receipts" includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" are all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind without deduction of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses. Excluded from "gross receipts" are the following: 
A.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
B.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
C.  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
D.  Such part of the sales price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in case or by credit; 
E.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee furnishes the Collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them; 
F.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business are not excluded; 
G.  As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker; 
H.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under Part 1 of Division 2 of Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
I.  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(f).)  
5.08.070 - Itinerant Vendor. 
"Itinerant Vendor" is a person who engages in a temporary and transient business in the City selling any merchandise, article or service with the intent of continuing for not more than 90 days, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business either has no fixed place of business, or hires or occupies a room or place for the exhibition or sale of merchandise, or from which place the sales are made or business solicited by means of samples or delivery from house to house. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(g).)  
5.08.080 - Peddler. 
"Peddler" is a person who travels by foot, wagon, vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise of any kind, offering or exposing them for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers or who sells or offers them for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle or other vehicle or conveyance. "Peddler" includes "hawker" and "huckster". The term "peddler" shall not include those persons or entities that provide prepared or pre-packaged food products for sale from motorized vehicles that make regularly scheduled stops and which do not actively solicit business, but merely offer or expose the food products for sale only at such stops. 
(Ord. 1015 C.S. § 1, 1984: Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974; prior code § 6101(h).)  
5.08.090 - Person. 
"Person" includes domestic or foreign corporation or association, syndicate, joint stock corporation, partnership, club, business or canon law trust, society, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City, other than as an employee. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(i).)  
5.08.100 - Sale. 
"Sale" includes the transfer of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of property. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price, is a sale. This definition does not exclude any transaction which results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(j).)  
5.08.110 - Solicitor. 
"Solicitor" is a person who travels by foot, wagon, vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take, orders for the sale of goods, personal property of any kind, for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(k).)  
5.08.120 - Sworn Statement. 
"Sworn Statement" is an affidavit or a declaration or certificate made under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(1).)  
5.08.130 - Transient Business. 
"Transient Business" means every business not conducted as a "fixed place of business" or at a regular place of business, whether the person conducting such transient business is or is not a resident of this City. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(m).)  
5.08.140 - Wholesale and Manufacturing Business. 
"Wholesale and Manufacturing Business" means every business conducted solely for the purpose of selling or manufacturing goods, wares or merchandise in wholesale lots for resale. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6101(n).)  
CHAPTER 5.12 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
5.12.010 - Duties of Collector. 
The Collector shall administer and enforce Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. The Collector shall examine each place of business in the City to determine whether Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 are being complied with. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6104.)  
5.12.020 - Powers of Collector and Police Officers. 
The Collector and each police officer and each person employed as a license inspector may: 
A.  File complaints and make arrests for the violation of chapters 5.04 through 5.32; 
B.  Enter free of charge during regular business hours any place of business for which a license is required and demand the exhibition of the license certificate. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6105.)  
5.12.030 - Additional Administrative Powers of Collector. 
The Collector may: 
A.  Extend the time for filing information required for a period of not more than 30 days and to waive the penalty that otherwise would accrue. However, in this case, the amount determined to be due, if any, bears interest at 8 percent simple interest from the original due date; 
B.  Compromise disputed claims as to license tax; 
C.  Adopt forms and prescribe information to be given in the forms. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6106.)  
5.12.040 - Administrative Rules and Regulations. 
The City Council may, by resolution, adopt administrative rules and regulations necessary to carry out Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6107.)  
5.12.050 - Information Disclosure When. 
The Collector and each representative of the City having an administrative duty shall keep confidential all information concerning the business affairs and operations obtained by an investigation of records in the discharge of official duty and the amount and source of income, profits, losses, expenditures set forth in the statement or application. However, this Section does not prevent: 
A.  The disclosure or examination of records and equipment by another City Official for collection of taxes for the purpose of administering Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 or collecting taxes imposed by them; 
B.  Disclosure of information to, or the examination of, records by Federal or State officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; 
C.  Disclosure of information to a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena; 
D.  Disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence of amount of license tax liability to the City; 
E.  Disclosure to the taxpayer or his successor, administrator, assignee or guarantor, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of the paid tax, unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. However, the City Attorney must approve each such disclosure and the Collector may refuse to make the disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion, the public interest would suffer; 
F.  Disclosure of the name and address of a person to whom a license is issued and the general type or nature of the business; 
G.  Disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the City Council to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the City for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6108.)  
5.12.060 - Appeal. 
A.  A person aggrieved by a decision of the Collector or of any other officer of the City made under Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 may appeal from the decision to the City Council. 
B.  A person appealing a decision shall file written notice of the appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days after notice of the decision. The notice shall state the grounds relied upon for appeal. 
C.  The City Clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the City Council within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than 10 days' notice in writing of the time and place of hearing. 
D.  The findings and determination of the City Council at the hearing are final and conclusive. Within 3 days after the findings and determinations are made, the City Clerk shall give notice of them to the appellant. 
E.  If no appeal is taken, the decision of the Collector or other officer is final and conclusive on expiration of the time fixed for appeal. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6109.)  
5.12.070 - License Tax Deemed a Debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of the ordinance codified in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6142.)  
5.12.080 - Remedies Cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of 1 or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6143.)  
CHAPTER 5.16 - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 
 
5.16.010 - License and Tax Payment Required. 
A.  There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the City without first having procured a license from the City to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
B.  This Section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the State. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6110.)  
5.16.020 - Evidence of Doing Business. 
When any person, by the use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books or newspapers, advertises, holds out or represents that he is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City, or when any person makes a sale, takes an order, renders a commercial service, or performs any other similar act within the City, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he is not conducting a business in the City after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting a business in the City. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6111.)  
5.16.030 - Branch Establishment. 
A.  A separate business tax shall be paid for each branch establishment or location of a business and for each separate type of business at the same location. A permanently constructed billboard shall be deemed to be a single location of business for purposes of this Section. A person who provides goods, services, music or amusement by vending machines or coin-operated devices shall be subject only to one tax for all such machines or devices within the City. A warehouse and a distributing plant used in connection with a business licensed under Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 is not a separate place of business or branch establishment within the meaning of this Section. 
B.  A person conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location under the same management but who uses a single set or integrated set of books and records, may pay only one tax calculated on all gross receipts of the businesses under the schedule that applies to the type of business which requires the highest percentage payment on such gross receipts, except that a license fee of $10.00 for each additional branch or location shall be paid upon issuance. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6112.)  
5.16.040 - Constitutional Apportionment. 
A.  None of the business taxes provided for by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the State. 
B.  In any case where a business tax is believed by a person transacting or carrying on any business in the City to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before or at the time the tax is required to be paid or within 6 months after payment of the prescribed business tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of such business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent if any of such undue burden or violation. 
C.  The Collector shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the City Attorney shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the business tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so fixed. Such investigation, fixing of the business tax and order of refund shall be accomplished no later than one week from the date of application. In fixing the business tax, the Collector shall have the power to fix the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax prescribed by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. Should the Collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the City or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of business tax therefor, provided that no additional business tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the taxpayer has paid an amount equal to the annual business tax as prescribed in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. If it is determined that no business tax is due, the applicant exempt from the business tax shall obtain, and the Collector shall issue, a certificate indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6113.)  
CHAPTER 5.20 - EXEMPTIONS 
 
5.20.010 - Agriculture. 
The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not require the payment of a business tax on the business of agriculture except for the retail activities conducted in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(a).)  
5.20.020 - Charitable Purposes. 
The provisions of Chapter 5.04 through 5.32 shall not require the payment of a business tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which has conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any individual. A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(b).)  
5.20.030 - Benefit Activities. 
The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not require the payment of a business tax for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, benevolent or moral subjects within the City whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any benevolent purpose within the City. A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(c).)  
5.20.040 - Nonprofit Activities. 
The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not require the payment of a business tax for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any benevolent, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or Municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any individual. A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(d).)  
5.20.050 - Part-time Occupations. 
The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not apply to any natural person who performs any service or sells any item, excepting an itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor or transient business, whose gross income does not exceed $1,000.00 per year. A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(e).)  
5.20.060 - Exhibiting Artists. 
A.  The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not apply to an individual artist: 
1.  Who displays a painting, sculpture, photograph or other examples of fine art in a public building, art gallery or business establishment and the display is incidental to the primary business conducted on the premises and is primarily for cultural and educational purposes; and 
2.  Whose gross receipts do not exceed $1,000.00 per year. 
B.  A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(f).)  
5.20.070 - Disabled Veterans. 
The provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not apply to any veteran who is unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor due to any physical disability who may hawk or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise without payment of any business tax by applying to the Collector and producing a certificate from a local physician showing the applicant to be physically disabled, evidence of being a legal voter of the State and a copy of an honorable discharge. A certificate shall be obtained from the Collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(g).)  
5.20.080 - Exemptions Otherwise Prescribed By Law. 
Nothing in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitutions or applicable statutes of the United States or the state from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed. A certificate shall first be obtained from the collector indicating such exemption from the tax. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(h).)  
5.20.090 - Public Utilities Making Franchise Payments. 
The terms of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not be deemed nor construed to apply to any public utility or other service organization which makes an annual payment to the City under a franchise or a similar agreement. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3, (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(i).)  
5.20.100 - Public Agencies. 
The terms of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not be deemed nor construed to apply to any public utility or other organization which is wholly owned and operated by a political subdivision of the State nor any public district organized under the laws of the State. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(j).)  
5.20.110 - Vehicles Subject To Highway Carriers' Tax. 
The terms of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall not be deemed nor construed to apply to any vehicle which is subject to the Highway Carriers' Uniform Business License Tax; provided, however, that this exemption shall only apply to the transportation business. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(k).)  
5.20.120 - Compliance With Permit Requirements Required. 
The exemption from payment of a license tax granted by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 does not exempt the person conducting the business from complying with the permit requirements of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6114(1).)  
CHAPTER 5.24 - LICENSE PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS 
 
5.24.010 - Contents of License. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the Collector, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax, the Collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
2.  The business licensed; 
3.  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
4.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
5.  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
B.  Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the collector shall issue only one license; provided that he may issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6115.)  
5.24.020 - Application for First License. 
A.  Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the Collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the Collector, setting forth the following information: 
1.  The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested; 
2  The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same; 
3.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of those owning the business; 
4.  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall, set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof; 
5.  In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant; 
6.  Any further information which the Collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied for. 
B.  If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the Collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the Collector with a sworn statement upon a form furnished by the Collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. 
C.  The Collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person has furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6116.)  
5.24.030 - Renewal License. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the Collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant a sworn statement upon a form to be provided by the Collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be required by the Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6117.)  
5.24.040 - Statements and Records. 
A.  No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the Collector, his deputies or authorized employees of the City, who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
B.  All persons subject to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall keep complete records of business transactions, including sales, receipts, purchases and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for examination by the Collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the Collector to examine the records at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6118.)  
5.24.050 - Failure to File Statement or Corrected Statement—Tax Determination by Collector—Hearing. 
A.  If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the Collector, he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 fails to apply for a license, the Collector may determine the amount of the license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. 
B.  If such a determination is made, the Collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Martinez, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the Collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the Collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within 15 days before the City Council. The Collector shall give at least 10 days' notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed herein for serving notices of assessment. The Council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed herein for serving notices of assessment. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6119.)  
5.24.060 - License Nontransferable—Change of Location or Ownership. 
No license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be transferable; provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor, and paying a fee of $5.00 have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this Section. For the purpose of this Section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6120.)  
5.24.070 - Duplicate License. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the Collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying the Collector a duplicate license fee of $2.00. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6121.)  
5.24.080 - Posting and Keeping Licenses. 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. 
C.  Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the Collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device or machine or piece of equipment kept in use, during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is issued. 
D.  No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment, for which it has been issued at the location designated by the Collector, or to give away, sell or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate or symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6122.)  
5.24.090 - License Tax-How and When Payable. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes payable hereunder shall be due and payable in advance on the 1st day of January of each year; provided that license taxes covering new operations commenced after the 1st day of January or the first renewal license applied for under Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be prorated for the balance of the license year in that proportion which the number of months remaining in the calendar year bears to 12. Other flat-rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6123.)  
5.24.100 - Delinquent Taxes-Penalties. 
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the Collector shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof; providing that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed 25 percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6124.)  
5.24.110 - Refunds of Overpayments. 
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the City which complies with the procedures and provisions of Chapter 3.40 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1302 C.S. § 3, 2003: Ord.794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6125.)  
CHAPTER 5.28 - LICENSE TAXES 
 
5.28.010 - Gross Receipts Schedule. 
A.  The amount of the annual license tax due and payable by every person doing business as a retail business within the City, except as otherwise specifically provided or exempted, is that amount which is calculated in accordance with the gross receipts schedule shown below: 
GROSS RECEIPTS SCHEDULE 
Gross Receipts 
(in dollars) 	Tax 
(Mil per dollar) 	
		
First 1 to 15,000 	at 	$1.00 
Next 15,000 to 50,000 	at 	$1.50 
Next 50,000 to 75,000 	at 	$1.25 
Next 75,000 to 100,000 	at 	$1.00 
Next 100,000 to 500,000 	at 	$0.50 
Next 500,000 to 1,000,000 	at 	$0.25 
Next 1,000,000 to 5,000,000 	at 	$0.20 
Next 5,000,000 to 10,000,000 	at 	$0.15 
All over 10,000,000 	at 	$0.10 
 
Minimum tax under gross receipts schedule is $25.00. 
B.  A "retail business" is defined as every business conducted for the purpose of selling or offering to sell any goods, wares or merchandise, other than as a part of a wholesale business. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6126; Ord. § 83 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978.)  
5.28.015 - Service Stations. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.28.010, the amount of the annual license tax due and payable by every person doing business as a retail business within the City, which includes the sale of motor vehicle fuel in excess of 50,000 gallons per year, shall be determined by the provisions of Section 5.28.020 plus the amount of $.25 per thousand gallons of motor fuel sold during the previous calendar year. In lieu of a full year's previous experience, the annual volume of fuel sold shall be estimated. 
(Ord. 892 C.S. § 1, 1978.)  
5.28.020 - Manufacturer, Wholesaler or Purveyor of Services. 
The amount of the annual license tax due and payable by every person doing business as a manufacturer, wholesaler or purveyor of services, except as otherwise specifically provided or exempted, is $85.00 plus $14.00 multiplied by the number of employees not exceeding 50, plus $8.00 multiplied by the number of employees in excess of 50. 
(Ord. 983 C.S. § 1, 1982: Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974; prior code § 6127.)  
5.28.030 - Professions. 
The amount of annual license tax due and payable by every person doing business within the following professions: 
Accountant 
Appraiser 
Architect 
Assayer 
Attorney 
Auditor 
Bacteriologist 
Bail Bond Broker 
Blueprinter 
Bookkeeping Service 
Chiropodist 
Chiropractor 
Collection Agency 
Credit Reporting Bureau 
Consultants or Advisors 
Dentist 
Designer or Decorator 
Detective or Detective Agency and Police Patrol 
Draftsman 
Drugless Practitioner 
Electrologist 
Engineer (civil, electrical, mining, construction, structural, consulting, mechanical and hydraulic) 
Engraver 
Escrow Company 
Feed, Grain and Fruit Broker 
Geologist 
Herbalist 
Insurance Broker Insurance or Claims Adjuster 
Interpreter 
Laboratories, dental, medical, research or scientific 
Landscape Gardener or Architect 
Lapidary 
Lithographer 
Masseuse 
Mercantile Agency 
Money Lender or Broker or Selling Obligations 
Mortician 
Oculist 
Optician 
Optometrist 
Osteopath 
Physician 
Podiatrist 
Psychiatrist 
Real Estate Broker 
Roentgenologist 
Sign Painter 
Stocks and Bonds Broker 
Surgeon 
Surveyor 
Taxidermist 
Veterinarian 
X-Ray Laboratory 
or for any other professional or trade person not listed is $84.00 plus $35.00 for each principal or associate in excess of 1 and $7.00 for each employee. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6128(1).)  
5.28.040 - Hotel, Motel and Rooming House. 
A person who owns a hotel, motel or rooming house shall pay an annual license tax based upon the following schedule: 
Rentable Rooms 	Tax 
		
2 to 4 	$ 21.00 	
5 to 9 	35.00 	
10 to 14 	70.00 	
15 to 19 	105.00 	
20 to 24 	140.00 	
25 to 29 	175.00 	
30 to 34 	203.00 	
35 to 39 	231.00 	
40 to 44 	259.00 	
45 to 49 	287.00 	
 
plus $4.00 for each rentable room over 49. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6129.)  
5.28.050 - Delivery From Outside City. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the City, and not otherwise licensed or classified under Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 who delivers merchandise of any kind by vehicle, or who provides any service by the use of a vehicle in the City shall pay an annual license tax of $49.00. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6130.)  
5.28.060 - Contractors. 
A.  Any provision in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 to the contrary notwithstanding, every person doing business as a general contractor within the City from a fixed place of business within the City, is assessed an annual license tax, in the sum of $98.00. 
B.  Any provision in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 to the contrary notwithstanding, every person doing business as a general contractor within the City from a fixed place of business outside the City, is assessed a license tax, which expires 3 months next succeeding the date of application therefor, in the sum of $32.00, which is due and payable prior to commencement of business within the City, except that s/he shall have the option to pay a license tax, which expires 6 months next succeeding the date of application therefor, in the sum of $56.00, except that s/he shall have the option to pay the sum of $98.00 for a license which shall expire 1 year next succeeding the date of assessment therefor. 
C.  Each contractor, subcontractor, developer and builder, whether building for their own occupancy or not, shall file with the Collector a full written list of all subcontractors performing any service whatever for the contractor or builder within the City for which a license is required under Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 before any subcontractor begins work. A subcontractor subcontracting work is a contractor for the purpose of this Section. 
The City may not give final inspection on a building, structure or project until each contractor and subcontractor performing work is licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1357, § 1, 12-1-2010; Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 813 C.S. § 1, 1975; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6131.)  
5.28.070 - Subcontractors. 
A.  Any provision in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 to the contrary notwithstanding, every person doing business as a subcontractor within the City from a fixed place of business within the City, is assessed an annual license tax, in the sum of $98.00. 
B.  Any provision in Chapters 5.04 through 5.32 contrary notwithstanding, every person doing business as a subcontractor within the City from a fixed place of business outside the City, is assessed a license tax which expires 3 months next succeeding the date of application therefor, in the sum of $32.00, which is due and payable prior to commencement of business within the City, except that s/he shall have the option to pay the sum of $56.00 for a license which shall expire 6 months next succeeding the date of application, except that s/he shall also have the option to pay the sum of $98.00 for a license which shall expire 1 year next succeeding date of assessment therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1357, § 1, 12-1-2010; Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6132.)  
5.28.080 - Christmas Tree Lots. 
The license tax for a Christmas tree lot and the sale of related items on the lot is $25.00 per quarter. The tax may not be prorated. A cleanup fee in the amount of $50.00 shall be deposited with the Collector and shall be refunded if the premises have been cleaned to the satisfaction of the building inspector. No license is required where the sale of Christmas trees is conducted in connection with another regularly established place of business for which a business license has been obtained. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6133.)  
5.28.090 - Vending Machines and Coin-Operated Amusement Devices. 
A.  Every person conducting, carrying on or managing any business consisting of sales of goods, wares, merchandise and other commodities, including food, by vending machine or coin-operated devices, and every person conducting, carrying on or managing any business consisting of providing services, amusement or music provided by coin-operated devices, shall pay an annual business tax of $7.00 per $1,000.00 gross receipts from all machines or devices, plus ½ of 1 percent (0.5%) of the balance of annual gross receipts from all machines or devices over the first $1,000.00. This Section shall not apply to those machines or devices whose owner is the operator of the business wherein they are located. 
B.  Each coin-operated device or vending machine placed, distributed or located in the City shall have affixed thereto in printing, plainly visible to the public, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the device or machine. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6135.)  
5.28.100 - Carnivals and circuses. 
A.  In this Section carnival includes: circus, fair, menagerie, tent show, exhibit, games of skill, rides, etc. 
B.  A person who conducts a carnival shall pay a license tax of $200.00 for the first day and $100.00 for each additional day. 
C.  The City Manager shall reduce the tax to $50.00 per day upon submission of satisfactory evidence that: 
1.  Such carnival is an incidental part of an overall business promotion activity conducted by an organized group of merchants licensed to do business in the City; or 
2.  Such activity is sponsored by a tax-exempt, religious, charitable, fraternal, veterans, or educational organization or association, or a school student body group for purposes of raising funds for such organization, association or group and if the proceeds received by the sponsoring tax-exempt organization, association or group are used entirely for the purposes and objectives for which such organization, association or group was formed. 
The application for a reduced license tax shall be accompanied by a confirmed copy of agreement or contract between the carnival operator and the sponsoring organization showing the agreement regarding division of the proceeds to be derived from operation of the amusement activity. 
D.  Upon written application, the City Manager may waive the license tax for an amusement activity which is sponsored or conducted by a tax-exempt, religious, charitable, fraternal, veterans, or educational organization or association, or a school student body group, if the organization, association or group does not employ the services of a professional carnival operator to conduct the amusement activity. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6136.)  
5.28.110 - Cabarets. 
Every person owning or operating a business under an on-sale retail license duly issued under the Beverage Control Act of the State and who, in addition thereto, furnishes, makes available or permits in the place of business, music or entertainment either vocally, by orchestra, music box, radio or other musical entertainment devices shall pay an annual license tax to the City of $75.00 per year. It is unlawful to so operate without such license. It is provided, however, that such license is issued subject to the following terms and conditions, the violation of each or any of which is a public nuisance: 
A.  That no loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct that disturbs the peace or quiet of the neighborhood shall be permitted therein; 
B.  That no loud music, noise or entertainment that disturbs the peace or quiet of the neighborhood shall be permitted therein; 
C.  That the business shall not be operated while music or entertainment as aforesaid is furnished, available or permitted, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978; Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6137.)  
5.28.120 - Dances and Dance Halls. 
The license tax for holding or conducting a public dance where an admission fee is charged is $10.00 a day or $100.00 a year. This Section shall not apply to those businesses licensed under Section 5.28.110. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code 6138.)  
5.28.130 - Fortune-Tellers, Astrologers and Other Similar Businesses. 
Every person who carries on the practice or profession or who practices the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, fortune-telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, dramatic, magic, or necromancy or other similar businesses and who demands or receives a fee for the exercise or exhibition for his art or practice therein or who gives an exhibition therein or at any place where an admission fee is charged, the annual license tax shall be equivalent to the fees due and payable by professions as specified in Section 5.28.030. The applicant shall be required to furnish evidence of his identity of such character as the Chief of Police may require, and shall also be required to furnish his finger and thumb prints, together with a photograph which is to be, at all times, attached to the permit if issued, and any additional information required by the Chief of Police. Further, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation from time to time of the premises of operation. Only 1 license for fortune-tellers, etc. shall be issued for each 20,000 persons residing in the City. 
(Ord. 1350 C.S. § 1, 2008: Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6139.)  
5.28.140 - National Business Solicitors. 
A.  The license tax imposed by this Section is intended to apply to the following: a nationally recognized firm which utilizes agents, employees, or self-employed representatives who are permanent residents of the City or the surrounding area and who are assigned to a specific territory over which they carry samples and take orders for merchandise upon a regularly established schedule. This description is intended to apply to firms and their representatives engaging in business conducted similarly to that of Fuller Brush or Avon Products. 
B.  The license tax imposed for a person engaging in the business described in Subsection A is $100.00 per year for the firm. In addition, each agent, employee and self-employed representative shall pay an annual fee of $20.00. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6140.)  
5.28.150 - Flat Rates. 
Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall pay a license tax as follows: 
Auctioneers 	$ 30.00 per day 
Fire Sales 	100.00 per day 
Itinerant Vendors 	25.00 per day or 300.00 per year 
Peddlers 	25.00 per day or 300.00 per year 
Solicitors 	25.00 per day or 300.00 per year 
 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974: prior code § 6141.)  
5.28.160 - Exception to Sections Other than 5.28.150. 
The amount of the annual license tax due and payable by every person doing business covered by any of the previous Sections, with the exception of Section 5.28.150, and as an individual proprietor, over the age of 65, and grossing less than $10,000.00 per year, shall be at the rate of 50 percent of the stated license tax for that particular classification of business. 
(Ord. 897 C.S. § 1, 1979.)  
5.28.200 - Automatic Adjustment in License Tax Based on Consumer Price Index. 
The rate of the license tax payable for the license period beginning January 1, 1979 and each year thereafter shall be adjusted upward or downward automatically, except those businesses licensed under Section 5.28.010 as follows: by the percentage change, rounded off to the nearest full percentage point, in the All Items Consumer Price Index for the San Francisco/Oakland Urban Area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the twelve month period ending the previous June 30. 
(Ord. 883 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978.)  
CHAPTER 5.32 - PENALTY 
 
5.32.010 - Designated. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.28 or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this City a material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless specified an infraction. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Municipal Code of the City, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  An infraction is punishable as provided by the Government Code and the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
D.  Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 965 C.S. § 3 (part), 1982: Ord. 794 C.S. § 3 (part), 1974; prior code § 6145.)  
II. - BUSINESSES REGULATED  
CHAPTER 5.36 - AMBULANCES 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Ambulance" means any motor vehicle used to transport, move or convey a sick or injured person. 
B.  "Ambulance business" means the business of owning, operating, managing or maintaining as principal or agent any ambulance herein defined. 
C.  "Ambulance service charges" means any charge, fare or other consideration for ambulance service. 
D.  "Operation within the City of Martinez" means the receiving, picking up or embarking within the City of Martinez of a sick or injured person for transportation or conveyance to any point within or without the City of Martinez. 
E.  "Person" means individuals, partnerships, firms, corporations and associations of every kind, and their agents, servants or employees. 
(Prior code § 6600.)  
5.36.020 - Determination of Public Convenience and Necessity. 
No permit for the operation within the City of any private ambulance shall be granted until the Chief of Police determines that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such ambulance or ambulances. In making such determination, the Chief of Police may take into consideration all facts which are deemed pertinent and proper. In order to grant such a permit, the Chief of Police must make written findings in support thereof, including a specific finding that an applicant is financially responsible, that the premises and motor vehicles which the applicant proposes to use are fit and suitable for the ambulance business, and that the operation of the ambulances for which a permit is applied is necessary to provide adequate ambulance service to the public. 
No permit shall be granted unless all of the findings specified in the previous paragraph are made. If the Chief of Police denies an application for a permit, he/she shall render a decision in writing which contains the findings and reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 1, 1987: Prior code § 6601.)  
5.36.030 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the City, any ambulance unless a determination of public convenience and necessity therefor shall have first been made as provided in Section 5.36.020 hereof, and unless such person shall thereafter have obtained a permit to do so, as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 6602(a).)  
5.36.040 - Permit—Application. 
Applications for permits to operate, manage or maintain within the City private ambulances shall be in writing and submitted to the Chief of Police for the determination provided in Section 5.36.020, and for investigation as provided in Section 5.36.050. Applications shall contain: 
A.  The business name and address of applicant; 
B.  A statement as to whether the applicant is a corporation, partnership or individual, and if the last, the residence address of the applicant; 
C.  The number and description of the motor vehicles proposed to be used as ambulances; 
D.  The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is requested, and the name under which it is to be operated; 
E.  Whether or not any license or permit to operate ambulances has been revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation or suspension; 
F.  The color scheme and characteristic insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the owner; 
G.  The address and a description of the premises at and from which it is proposed to maintain and operate such ambulances; 
H.  A schedule of ambulance service charges which the applicant proposes to charge for operations within the City; 
I.  Such other relevant facts as the Chief of Police may, prior to the filing of the application, determine by written policy as advisable or necessary. 
Within 10 days after the filing of any such application for a permit, the City Clerk shall cause to be posted on the bulletin board at the City Hall, notice of the filing of such application setting forth in the notice the name and address of the applicant, and the date of filing such application. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 2, 1987: Prior code § 6602(b).)  
5.36.050 - Investigation and Appeal. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer to cause an investigation to be made of the premises and the motor vehicles named and described in applications for permits for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises and motor vehicles from a health and sanitation standpoint. The health officer shall also determine whether the applicant has complied with the laws of the State and the provisions of the ordinances of the City, relating to health, safety and sanitation. Should the health officer determine that such premises and motor vehicles are fit and suitable for such business and that the applicant has complied with the laws of the State and the provisions of the ordinances of the City, relating to health and sanitation, the health officer shall, upon payment by applicant to the Director of Finance of the license fee hereinafter fixed, issue or cause to be issued to such applicant a permit to operate, manage or maintain private ambulances. 
A.  No permit shall be granted within 40 days after the date of filing of the application with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant, and shall within 30 days from the date of filing the application, report his/her findings and render his/her decision in writing and file the same with the City Clerk. If the Chief of Police does not make all of the findings required under Section 5.36.020, of if the report of the Chief of Police finds: 
1.  That the ambulance(s), or its equipment, proposed to be operated is inadequate or unsafe. 
2.  That the applicant has been convicted of a felony or the violation of a narcotic law, or of any penal law involving moral turpitude, or during the previous 60 days of any provision of the ordinances of the City or law relating to traffic or use of streets in the City; 
3.  That the proposed color scheme or characteristic insignia will tend to confuse the identification of the vehicles proposed to be operated with those of another operator operating in the City; or 
4.  That the name under which the applicant proposes to operate will tend to cause confusion with that of another owner operating in the City, then the application shall be denied. 
B.  It is provided, however, that in any such event, the applicant may, within 10 days from the date of posting notice of the Chief of Police's decision by the City Clerk, file in writing with the City Clerk an appeal to the City Council from the denial. In which case, at its next regular meeting, following the filing of the appeal, the City Council shall hear the appeal by the applicant, consider the written report and decision of the Chief of Police and such other material evidence as may be presented. After due consideration, the City Council shall by resolution determine whether or not such application shall be granted or denied. 
C.  If, however, the Chief of Police grants the application, any citizen of the City may, likewise within said 10 day period file in writing with the City Clerk, objections to the granting of the application; then, at its next regular meeting after the filing, the City Council shall review the application, the report and decision of the Chief of Police, the objections filed, and such other material evidence as may be presented. After due consideration, the City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether or not the application shall be granted or denied. 
D.  If no appeal of the Chief of Police's granting of the permit is taken, or if an appeal is taken of the Chief of Police's decision to the City Council and the City Council grants the permit, the applicant shall be issued the necessary permits. 
E.  Within two days after the filing of the Chief of Police's decision with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall post on the bulletin board at the City Hall, notice of the Chief of Police's decision and the right of any person dissatisfied therewith to appeal same to the City Council within ten days. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 3, 1987: Prior code § 6602(c).)  
5.36.051 - Permit—Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may, by resolution, and after 10 days' written notice to an owner, and a public hearing at a regular meeting thereof following the notice, suspend or revoke an owner's permit (1) for any of the grounds specified as grounds for denial as set forth in Section 5.36.050 of this chapter, (2) in the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or (3) for a failure to pay any judgment for damages arising from the operation of the applicant's ambulances, or any of them, for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 4, 1987.)  
5.36.052 - Change in Number of Ambulances. 
A.  Any person holding a permit to operate one or more ambulances as provided in this chapter, who desires to add to the number of such vehicles, shall do so only upon obtaining a permit therefor, which shall be granted only upon application made in the same manner and under the same proceedings as are required in this chapter in the instance of obtaining the original permit. 
B.  Any person holding a permit to operate one or more ambulances, as provided in this chapter, who desires to substitute a different vehicle for a vehicle operated under such permit, shall do so only upon obtaining a permit therefor, which shall be granted only upon application made in the same manner and under the same proceedings as are required in this chapter in the instance of obtaining the original permit, a temporary permit shall be issued to make a substitution, provided the written application has been filed, which temporary permit shall be valid only until the Chief of Police renders his/her written decision. The Chief of Police shall have the same authority in granting or denying the application for permission to add to or substitute as is herein in this chapter vested in him/her, in the matter of the original application when presented to him/her, and shall be a written decision, grant or deny the petition as she/he may determine advisable after due consideration of the application. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 5, 1987.)  
5.36.060 - Charging in Excess of Schedule Restricted. 
No person to whom a permit has been issued hereunder to engage in the ambulance business within the City shall charge for ambulance service within the City any amount in excess of the schedule of ambulance service charges set forth in such permittee's application without first obtaining a written authorization from the City Manager to do so. 
(Prior code § 6602(d).)  
5.36.070 - Permit Expiration. 
All permits hereafter issued shall expire on the 30th day of June next following date of issuance of such permit. Applications for permits to become effective on the 1st day of July of any year may be made at any time during the 60 days prior to such date. 
(Prior code § 6602(e).)  
5.36.080 - Insurance Required/Terms. 
A.  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any ambulance within the City unless there is in full force and effect at all times a policy of insurance insuring such ambulance, in a company authorized to do business in the State, insuring such person against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to any person or to property by the operation of such ambulance; the policy of insurance shall be limited to not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, combined single limit liability for bodily injury or death; and the insurance policy shall name the City as a co-insured to the extent of any insurable interest, obligation or risk; shall be primary insurance; and shall contain cross-liability and waiver of subrogation clauses. 
B.  Such policy of insurance shall also provide insurance to the extent of $500,000 for damage to or destruction of any property of third persons; and the policy of insurance shall provide that it shall not be cancelled except upon 30 days' prior written notice to the City Manager; and a certificate of insurance showing compliance with this Section shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 6, 1987: Prior code § 6603.)  
5.36.081 - Liability Insurance—Required. 
It is unlawful to drive or operate any ambulance in the City, unless the owner thereof has obtained an insurance policy or policies as provided in this chapter. In the event, during the term of a permit issued hereunder, such liability insurance policy so filed becomes ineffective by reason of its expiration or cancellation, or the corporation issuing the same becomes irresponsible or insolvent, the owner shall obtain a new policy or policies meeting the foregoing requirements to replace the ineffective policy, and file certificate thereof with the City Clerk, as aforesaid. The City Council may at any time require an owner to replace any such policy within 10 days from the date of notice requiring the same, with a policy and certificate thereof, both in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then, at the termination of 10 days, the owner's permit for the ambulance covered by such policy, shall be, by such failure, automatically suspended until such time as the requirement is complied with. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 7, 1987.)  
5.36.082 - Liability Insurance—Certificate Required. 
Each certificate required under the provisions of this chapter shall certify that the issuer thereof has issued an insurance policy or policies insuring the owner named in the certificate, and that each of the policies contains each of the provisions required to be therein as provided by this chapter. Each of the certificates shall be conclusive evidence against the issuer thereof that its contents are true and correct. All such certificates shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 8, 1987.)  
5.36.090 - Indemnification. 
Prior to issuance of any permit to operate a private ambulance within the City, the Chief of Police shall obtain from the person to be issued the permit an agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, indemnifying and holding harmless the City from any loss or liability arising out of that person's operation of the ambulance or conduct of such ambulance business. 
(Ord. 1097 C.S. § 9, 1987.)  
CHAPTER 5.40 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS 
 
5.40.010 - Defined. 
Every person, who at public outcry, offers for sale as principal or agent, to the highest bidder on the spot, any article of merchandise or property shall be deemed an auctioneer. 
(Prior code § 6300.)  
5.40.020 - Auction Sales Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of, or offer for sale in the City at public auction, or to cause or permit to be sold, disposed of, or offered for sale in the City at public auction, goods, wares, merchandise, commodities or personal property, whether the same shall be their own property or whether they shall sell the same as agents or employees of others. 
(Prior code § 6301.)  
5.40.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 5.40.020 shall not apply to judicial sales by executors or administrators, nor to sales by or on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges in manner provided by the law, nor to the sale at public auction of the stock on hand of any person, or persons, or corporation that shall, for the period of 1 year next preceding such sale, have been continuously in business in the City as a retail or wholesale merchant of goods, wares, merchandise, commodities or personal property. 
(Prior code § 6302.)  
5.40.040 - Regulations for Permitted Sales. 
Such sales at public auction of the stock on hand of such merchant shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than 30 days in all from commencement of the sale and shall be permitted only where such merchant is bona fide disposing of his stock for the purpose of retiring from business. 
(Prior code § 6303.)  
5.40.050 - Application for Permit. 
Not less than 15 nor more than 30 days previous to conducting any such sale as provided in Section 5.40.030 of this Chapter, the merchant must make a sworn written application to the City Council for a permit to do so, specifying under oath the name and address of the applicant, the location and purpose of the sale and its expected duration, and itemizing in detail the quality, quantity, kind or grade of each item of the goods, wares and other articles to be sold, the wholesale market value thereof, and the name of the auctioneer who shall conduct the sale. 
(Prior code § 6304.)  
5.40.060 - Investigation of Applicant. 
Before granting or denying a permit, the application must be furnished to the Chief of Police who shall investigate and report to the City Council his findings as to the character of the applicant and his auctioneer, the bona fide nature of the proposed sale, and as to whether the place where it is proposed to carry on the sale is a proper place. The City Council must also be furnished satisfactory evidence that the goods, wares, merchandise, commodities or personal property proposed to be sold is a bona fide part of the merchant's stock in trade and not secured, purchased or brought into the place of business for or in anticipation of the sale. The City Council in considering the application and the attending facts shall exercise a reasonable and sound discretion in granting or denying the permit applied for. 
(Prior code § 6305.)  
5.40.070 - Hours of Operation. 
In no event shall any auction sale of goods as herein specified by conducted at public auction between the hours of 6 p.m. and 8 a.m. 
(Prior code § 6306.)  
CHAPTER 5.44 - AUTOMATIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES 
 
5.44.010 - Defined. 
"Automatic communication device" includes any device that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electrically or by any other means select a telephone line, number or instrument assigned to a public agency in the City for the purpose of reporting intrusion or emergency. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3700.)  
5.44.020 - Public Agency Defined. 
"Public agency" includes, but is not limited to, the State, City, County or Federal governments, districts or any departments or officers thereof. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3701.)  
5.44.030 - Telephone Number Defined. 
For the purposes of this Chapter a "telephone number, line or instrument" includes any number or numbers assigned by a public utilities company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect to a public agency. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3702.)  
5.44.040 - Unlawful Use. 
No person, firm, corporation or business shall use, operate, cause to be operated, installed or provide any automatic communication device without the written authorization of the public agency. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3703.)  
5.44.050 - Authorization for Use. 
Any person, firm, corporation or business that desires to use, operate, cause to be operated, installed or provide any automatic communication device shall apply in writing to the public agency for authorization to use, operate, cause to be operated, installed or provide such automatic communication device. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3704.)  
5.44.060 - Approval for Use. 
If the public agency determines that: 
A.  The equipment to be installed meets acceptable standards of operation; 
B.  There will be no hindrance to the normal public use of the telephone number; 
C.  The person, firm, corporation or business seeking approval will maintain adequate maintenance of the automatic communication device; The public agency then may issue written approval, setting forth any regulations or requirements necessary for the installation and use of the automatic communications device. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3705.)  
5.44.070 - Withdrawal of Approval. 
The public agency may withdraw approval for an automatic communication device by mailing written notice to the holder of the authorization. The device shall be disconnected within 7 days from the date the written notice was mailed. 
(Ord. 743 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 3706.)  
CHAPTER 5.48 - CARDROOMS 
 
5.48.010 - Defined. 
As used in this Chapter, "cardroom" means any room, enclosure or space furnished with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for playing cards and similar games, the use of which table is available to the public or any portion of the public. 
(Prior code § 6500.)  
5.48.020 - License—Required. 
No person, for himself or for any other person, shall maintain a cardroom without first having obtained a cardroom license. 
(Prior code § 6501.)  
5.48.030 - License—Application. 
An applicant for a cardroom license shall submit his application under oath to the Chief of Police. The application shall include: 
A.  The true names and addresses of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business. Persons financially interested shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business in any form; 
B.  The criminal record, if any, of the applicant; 
C.  Fingerprints and photographs of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business; 
D.  Any other information required by the Chief of Police; 
E.  An application fee of $5,000.00 payable to City Finance Officer. 
(Ord. 881 C.S. § 1, 1978; Prior code § 6502.)  
5.48.040 - Investigation by Chief of Police. 
Upon application for a cardroom license, the Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant. After completing the investigation, the Chief of Police shall submit his report to the City Council. The report shall include an itemization of the costs of investigation and a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application, with reasons. If the City Council disapproves the application, but not otherwise, the application fee, less costs of investigation, shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 6503.)  
5.48.050 - License—Grounds for Denial. 
The City Council may deny the application for a cardroom license on any of the following grounds: 
A.  That the applicant or any person financially interested in the business has been convicted of a felony; 
B.  That, in the opinion of the City Council, the applicant or any person financially interested in the business is not of good moral character; 
C.  That the proposed cardroom is near a school, playground or place of business frequented by minors. 
(Prior code § 6504.)  
5.48.060 - License—Certificate—Issuance and Display. 
Upon approval of the application for a cardroom license, the Chief of Police shall issue a certificate of license suitable for display. The licensee shall display this certificate prominently in the cardroom during all times that the license is unsuspended and unrevoked. 
(Prior code § 6505.)  
5.48.070 - License—Fee. 
If the City Council approves the application for a cardroom license, the applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $250.00 per card table. 
(Ord. 881 C.S. § 2, 1978: prior code § 6506.)  
5.48.080 - Employee Work Permits—Required. 
No person shall work as a cardroom employee without first having obtained a work permit from the Chief of Police, nor shall any person who maintains a cardroom employ any person as a cardroom employee who does not possess a valid work permit. For the purposes of this Chapter, a "cardroom employee" is a dealer or any other person directly connected with the operation and supervision of card tables, but not a bartender, culinary worker or any other person not directly connected with the cardroom operation. 
(Prior code § 6507.)  
5.48.090 - Employee Work Permits—Application. 
An applicant for a cardroom work permit shall submit his application, under oath, to the Chief of Police. The application shall include: 
A.  The criminal record, if any, of the applicant; 
B.  Fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant; 
C.  Any other information that the Chief of Police may deem necessary to determine whether a work permit shall be issued; 
D.  A permit fee of $25.00 which shall be returned to the applicant if his application is denied, less the expense of conducting an investigation of the applicant; 
E.  An approved work permit need be renewed annually from the anniversary date of its issuance, accompanied by the payment of a fee of $25.00 with each subsequent renewal. (See sub-Section D. if application denied.) 
(Ord. 881 C.S. § 3, 1978: prior code § 6508.)  
5.48.100 - Employee Work Permits—Grounds for Denial. 
The Chief of Police may deny the application for a work permit on either of the following grounds: 
A.  That the applicant has previously been convicted of a felony; 
B.  That, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the applicant is not a person of good moral character. 
(Prior code § 6509.)  
5.48.110 - Employee Work Permits—Appeal from Decision—Hearing. 
If the Chief of Police denies an application for a work permit, the applicant may appeal from the Chief of Police's decision to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Council within 10 days after denial of the application. The Council shall provide for a hearing on the application and shall give the applicant at least 5 days' written notice of the time and place of hearing. After the hearing, the Council may deny the application on either of the grounds specified in Section 5.48.100. 
(Prior code § 6510.)  
5.48.120 - License and Work Permit—Suspension or Revocation. 
A.  The City Council may suspend or revoke a cardroom license on any of the grounds specified in Section 5.48.050 or on the ground that the licensee has violated a provision of this Chapter. 
B.  The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a work permit on either of the grounds specified in Section 5.48.100 or on the ground that the permittee has violated a provision of this Chapter, but this action is subject to the appeal provisions of Section 5.48.110. 
(Prior code § 6511.)  
5.48.130 - Transferability. 
A.  No cardroom work permit shall be assignable or transferable; 
B.  A cardroom license in effect on June 1, 1978 may be transferable under the following terms and conditions: 
1.  To a remaining partner upon the death or withdrawal of a partner, provided, however, for the remaining partner or partners to use said license, said remaining partner or partners must qualify in the same manner as required of the licensee. 
2.  To a surviving spouse or the estate of the deceased licensee for the purpose of transfer to a qualified licensee in accordance with the provisions stated above. 
3.  To the assignee or transferee of an active licensee, provided, however, any such assignee or transferee shall be required to apply and qualify under the terms and conditions of this ordinance. 
4.  The assignee or transferee shall pay the same of $5,000 upon approval of the transfer. 
(Ord. 881 C.S. § 4, 1978.)  
5.48.140 - Cardroom Regulations. 
No person shall maintain a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations: 
A.  Not more than 1 cardroom shall be located at 1 address; 
B.  Neither the licensee nor his employees shall extend credit to any player, nor accept promissory notes, nor offer to or cash checks as a service to players within the cardroom enclosure; 
C.  No game prohibited by State law shall be permitted in any licensed cardroom; 
D.  Not more than 4 tables shall be permitted in any cardroom; 
E.  Not more than 8 players shall be permitted at 1 card table; 
F.  Cardrooms shall be located on the ground floor and so arranged that card tables and players at the tables are plainly visible from the front door openings; 
G.  No minor shall be permitted at any card table, particularly in any game, or remain in a cardroom; 
H.  All cardrooms shall be closed at 2:00 a.m. and shall remain closed until 8:00 a.m., except that on Saturday mornings and Sunday mornings such cardrooms may remain open from 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.; 
I.  Cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation; 
J.  Only table stakes shall be permitted; 
K.  Each card table shall have assigned to it a person holding a valid cardroom permit. This person shall supervise the game strictly in accordance with the laws of the State and the provisions of this Chapter; 
L.  No intoxicated person shall be permitted in a cardroom; 
M.  The licensee shall post in every cardroom, in letters plainly visible throughout the room, signs stating so many of these regulations as the Chief of Police may require; 
N.  There shall be only 1 cardroom for each 10,000 inhabitants in the City. 
(Ord. 811 C.S. § 1, 1975: prior code § 6513.)  
5.48.150 - Nonprofit Groups Excluded. 
Any nonprofit society, club, fraternity, labor or other organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and members may be excluded from compliance with this Chapter by applying to the City Council, if the Council finds that the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the organization and that no charge is made for the use of the cardroom facilities. 
(Prior code § 6514.)  
5.48.160 - Chapter Limitations. 
This Chapter shall not be construed to permit the licensing of any cardroom for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the State. 
(Prior code § 6515.)  
CHAPTER 5.52 - CLOSING-OUT SALES 
 
5.52.010 - License Required. 
Every person, firm or corporation, before a license shall be issued therefor and before offering for sale in the City any article or product at a forced bankrupt, close-out sale or other sale outside of the ordinary channels of trade, shall file with the Chief of Police the following: 
A.  A complete, itemized and verified inventory of the articles or products to be offered for sale, together with the proposed sale price of each such article or product; 
B.  A statement under oath that the articles or products contained in the inventory were purchased for sale during the normal conduct of business for which a license had previously been issued; 
C.  A statement under oath that the articles or products contained in the inventory and none others shall be offered for sale, if license issued, and at a price not less than the price stated. 
(Ord. 836 C.S. § 1, 1976: prior code § 6400.)  
5.52.020 - Permissible Sales Price. 
If the proposed price of any such article or product referred to in Section 5.52.010 hereof shall be a price in violation of the Unfair Trade Practices Act of the state as set forth in the Business and Professions Code Sections 17000 et seq. and any subsequent amendments thereto, then no license shall issue. Burden of proof that the price or prices is not in violation thereof to the reasonable satisfaction of the Chief of Police shall be upon the applicant for such license. 
(Prior code § 6401.)  
5.52.030 - License Issuance. 
Upon the compliance with the provisions of Sections 5.52.010 and 5.52.020 hereof, the Chief of Police shall issue the license in the manner and as required and for the license fees fixed by the ordinances of the City and amendments, if any, thereto. 
(Prior code § 6402.)  
5.52.040 - Terms of License—Fees. 
If the license applied for before the sale in the City of any article or product referred to in Section 5.52.010 hereof without the compliance with all of the requirements of Section 5.52.010B and C but upon full compliance with Subsection A of Section 5.52.010, and for sale of such articles or products, together if desired of other articles or products purchased outside of the City or in the ordinary channels of trade, in the manner and for the prices permitted by the Unfair Trade Practices Act, the license shall be issued to the applicant by the Chief of Police for 1 month upon the payment of the following license fee: $250.00. The license so issued may be reissued, monthly, upon the payment of a monthly license fee of $100.00. 
(Prior code § 6403.)  
CHAPTER 5.56 - DANCES 
 
5.56.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as hereinafter set forth: 
A.  "Dancing club" means any club or association of persons which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests, more frequently than once a month, at which a fee is charged, either for admission or for dancing therein or of which any collection or donation of money is made or received, or in which the amount of dues to be paid by each member is dependent upon attendance at such dance by such member; 
B.  "Dinner dancing place" means a place where food and music are regularly provided and the public is permitted to dance without payment of a fee; 
C.  "Public dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises or place where dancing is participated in and to which the general public is admitted or invited with or without charge; 
D.  "Teenage dance" means a nonprofit dance held or conducted exclusively for teenagers and to which no person 20 years of age or older is admitted as participants. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.)  
5.56.020 - Regulations Generally. 
No person shall violate any of the regulations hereinafter provided or fail to comply with any of the mandatory provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.1.)  
5.56.030 - Hours of Operation. 
No person shall conduct or assist in conducting any public dance, dance hall, dancing club, dinner dancing place or public teenage dance between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.2.)  
5.56.040 - Illumination. 
All public dances, dance halls, dancing clubs, dinner dancing places or teenage dances, shall be adequately lighted at all times when open or used for dancing. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.3.)  
5.56.050 - Alcoholic Beverage Restrictions. 
Alcoholic beverages may be served at a place where public dances are being conducted, when the sale and serving of such beverages are permitted by state law, however, such alcoholic beverages shall not be taken to or permitted on the dance floor, or authorized area for dancing purposes. However, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed or be available on the premises, in or about, where any teenage dance is held. Admission to a teenage dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence of drinking any alcoholic beverage or having such beverage on his person. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.4.)  
5.56.060 - Minors In Attendance Restricted. 
No person under the age of 21 years shall be allowed in or about any public dance hall, or dance club that sells or serves any alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this Section however, shall be construed to prevent a person under 21 years from being in a bona fide hotel, cafe or other place where meals are regularly served and where a public dance is being held. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.5.)  
5.56.070 - Teenage Dance—Parking. 
All off-street parking facilities made available for the participants of teenage dances, shall be adequately supervised. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.6.)  
5.56.080 - Teenage Dance—Reentry. 
No minor admitted to a teenage dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter reenter the dancing premises during the course of the event, and further, no reentry passes shall be issued unless required by the physical arrangements of the premises. 
(Ord 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.7.)  
5.56.090 - Teenage Dance—Loitering. 
No person shall loiter around or about the premise of which a teenage dance is being conducted. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.8.)  
5.56.100 - Floor Space. 
A.  Notwithstanding those places where dances are conducted or held where they are substantially the same as previously approved to hold or conduct public dances, the provisions of this Section shall be considered continuations of existing law and shall not be considered new enactments, unless there is a change in use or occupancy of such premises; 
B.  No permit shall be issued for the conduct of any public dance, dance hall, dancing club or dinner dancing place, nor shall any such dance be conducted at any establishment having less than the following prescribed area set aside and reserved exclusively for dancing, such area to be exclusive of hallway space: 
1.  200 square feet of dance floor where the seating capacity of the premises used is not more than 75 persons; 
2.  300 square feet of dance floor where the seating capacity of the premises used is not more than 75 persons; 
3.  400 square feet of dance floor where the seating capacity of the premises used is in excess of 75 persons. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.9.)  
5.56.110 - Disorderly Persons. 
No person managing, holding or conducting a public dance, dance hall, dancing club, dinner dancing. place or teenage dance or persons employed in and about the same shall allow or permit any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly person to enter, remain at or be in such place. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974; prior code § 6146.10.)  
5.56.120 - Obscene Dancing. 
No person or persons shall dance in an obscene manner. 
(Ord. 813 C.S. § 2, 1975; prior code § 6146.11.)  
5.56.130 - Permit Required—Application. 
A.  No person shall conduct or maintain any public dance, dance hall, dancing club, dinner dancing place or teenage dance without a written permit as provided for herein; 
B.  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to conduct or operate a public dance, dance hall, dancing club or dinner dancing place or teenage dance, shall file a written signed application with the License Collector not less than 2 weeks prior to the date of the dance showing the following: 
1.  Name, address and phone numbers of the applicant; 
2.  Date, hours and location where the dance or dancing is proposed and the admission fee if any to be charged; 
3.  Names of the persons in charge of management or supervision; 
4.  Indicate whether or not alcoholic beverages are to be served; 
5.  Indicate whether or not special guards will be employed. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.12.)  
5.56.140 - Investigation. 
The Chief of Police shall conduct a reasonable investigation to determine whether the allowing or permitting of a dance in the location for which the permit is sought will be inimical to the public health, welfare or safety of the community, and whether the applicant or persons in charge of the dance are of good moral character. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.13.)  
5.56.150 - Permit Issuance—Posting. 
If the Chief of Police, as the result of his investigation, finds that the dance or dancing for which the permit is sought will not be inimical to the public health, welfare or safety of the community and that the applicant or persons in charge of the dance are of good moral character, he shall advise the License Collector who shall issue a permit for such public dance, dance hall, dancing club or dinner dancing place or teenage dance. A copy of the report and recommendation of the Police thief shall be forwarded to the City Manager, for his approval, prior to issuing a permit. Every license or permit issued under the provisions of these Sections shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location of such dance. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.14.)  
5.56.160 - Permit—Fees. 
Every person applying for a permit to conduct or carry on a public dance, dance hall, dancing club, dinner dancing place or public teenage dance shall pay a permit fee to the City at the time a permit is issued in the sum of: $25.00 for 1 day, $40.00 for 6 months, $80.00 for 12 months; provided however, that no fee is required for teenage dances, or dances where no admission fees are charged or donation requested and, provided, further, that the City Council shall have the right, on proper showing, to waive or refund the fee for legitimate nonprofit religious or charitable dances. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974: prior code § 6146.15.)  
5.56.170 - Permit—Conditions. 
A.  The Police Chief may require as a part of any permit issued to the person or persons, holding, conducting, carrying on or having charge or control of such dance, the employment of approved special guards to assure that orderly conduct will be maintained and to assure the compliance with the provisions of these Sections, as well as compliance with local or State laws affecting the conduct of the dance. The Police Chief may further recommend the number of such guards, which in his opinion may be necessary; 
B.  The License Collector may attach any additional conditions that may be necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare or safety; 
C.  The applicant and all persons participating in the management or supervision of a dance or dancing shall comply with all statements contained in their application for a permit, together with all applicable laws and ordinances as well as the tens and conditions of the permit, without exception. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974; prior code § 6146.16.)  
5.56.180 - Permit—Fees—Exceptions. 
A permit or fee for a teenage dance is not required for any agency or department of the City, County, Board of Education, or other political subdivision of the State or other youth organizations approved by the City Recreation Department, which are normally engaged in youth activities. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974; prior code § 6146.17.)  
5.56.190 - Permit—Revocation or Suspension—Grounds. 
Any permit under the terms of this Chapter may be revoked or suspended at any time by the City Manager or City Council for the following reasons: 
A.  The conduct of such dance hall, public dance, dancing club, dinner dancing place or teenage dance, does not or will not comport with the public welfare for any reason; 
B.  The same has been conducted in an illegal, improper or disorderly manner; 
C.  The proprietor or person in charge thereof violates or permits any infraction of any law of the State or any ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974; prior code § 6146.18.)  
5.56.200 - Permit—Revocation or Suspension—Hearing. 
A.  When any permit issued under the terms of this Chapter has been revoked or suspended, the person to whom the permit was issued may in writing appeal the revocation or suspension to the City Council within 5 days of such suspension or revocation; 
B.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing as soon as practicable after receiving such appeal and shall consider all facts and evidence bearing on the reason for the suspension or revocation; 
C.  After hearing all facts and evidence, the City Council shall, if the suspension or revocation appears warranted, affirm such suspension or revocation. Otherwise it may reinstate such permit. 
(Ord. 794 C.S. § 2, 1974; prior code § 6146.19.)  
CHAPTER 5.58 - MASSAGE PARLORS AND MASSEURS 
 
5.58.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Employee" means any person working for the operator of a massage parlor or outcall massage service; 
B.  "Massage" means and includes the method of treating the superficial parts of the human body for medical or hygienic purposes by rubbing, pounding, tapping, pressing, stroking, kneading, vibrating or stimulating with hands or any instrument; 
C.  "Massage parlor" includes any premises where massage is given either as a primary or secondary function; 
D.  "Masseur" means any person, male or female, who administers to another person a massage; but it does not apply to cosmetologists, barbers or to persons licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code when engaged in such practice within the scope of his or her license; 
E.  "Operate" and "operator" refer to operating, conducting, maintaining or allowing a massage parlor or outcall massage service, or employing a masseur to serve others; 
F.  "Outcall massage service" means a massage given other than in the massage parlor; 
G.  "Client" includes a customer or prospective client of a massage parlor; 
H.  "Permit" means a permit required and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 528 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3525.)  
5.58.020 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, or allow the conduct of such business in any premises, or an outcall massage service, within the City, as owner, operator, employee or otherwise, without first obtaining a permit therefor, in the manner hereinafter set forth, notwithstanding the provisions contained in these sections, the owner/operator shall, unless exempt therefrom, procure a business license pursuant to Title 5 of this Code. An employee or otherwise shall make application for a permit in the same manner as required of the owner/operator. 
(Ord. 528 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3525.1.)  
5.58.030 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
An applicant for a permit shall submit his application under oath to the Chief of Police. The application shall include: 
A.  The true name, address of each and every person financially interested or employed in the business including each and every person's residence address and telephone number; 
B.  Name and address of the massage parlor or the outcall massage service; 
C.  The names and addresses of any and all previous massage establishments where the applicant has either owned or been employed; 
D.  The criminal record, if any, of the applicant; 
E.  Whether any license or permit to engage in the practice of massage as a masseur or otherwise has previously been denied the applicant or revoked from him and, if so, the circumstances of such denial or revocation; 
F.  The furnishing of recent photographs together with a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business. Fingerprints are to be taken by the Chief of Police or his agent; 
G.  Applicant's birth certificate or true copy thereof; 
H.  Applicant's residence for the five years preceding date of application; 
I.  A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior to filing his application herein, been examined and found to be free from any contagious and communicable disease; 
J.  Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school wherein the method, profession and work of massage techniques is taught. The term "recognized" means any school or institution of learning has been approved pursuant to Section 29007.5 of the Education Code of the State, and which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, ethics and practice, methods, profession or work of massage technicians, and which school or institution of learning requires a resident massage technician be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning showing successful completion of such course of study already approved by the California State Department of Education. Schools offering correspondence courses not requiring actual attendance at class, or courses of a massage technician not approved by the California State Department of Education shall not be deemed "recognized schools." 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, any applicant who has been gainfully employed in the City as a masseur on the effective date of this chapter shall be excused from complying with the requirements of this subsection; 
K.  owner/operator shall furnish a statement of the nature and character of the business; 
L.  Owner/operator shall submit an application fee of $50.00 payable to the City. The fee of $50.00 shall be payable annually on a calendar year basis and submitted with each subsequent permit renewal. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 832 C.S. § 1, 1976; Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3525.2.)  
5.58.040 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
The Chief of Police, upon receipt of a written application for a permit, shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as hereinafter set forth. Permits shall be issued on a calendar year basis. The Chief of Police shall consider any relevant factual material relative to such application. The Chief of Police shall issue an annual massage parlor or outcall massage service permit required by this chapter only if he finds that: 
A.  A written application form therefor has been filed; 
B.  The required filing fee therefor has been paid; and 
C.  As a result of his investigation that all applicable provisions of this chapter, with regard to such permit application have, or will be, met. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3525.3.)  
5.58.050 - Permit—Issuance. 
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit, based upon his investigation within 30 days after the application has been filed, if he finds that: 
A.  The operation, as proposed by the owner/operator, if permitted would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the City's building, zoning and health regulations; 
B.  The applicant has not been convicted of a violation of 266i, 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the Penal Code or is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 Penal Code or of any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code; 
C.  The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in the permit application, or any other document required by the City in conjunction therewith. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3525.4(a).)  
5.58.060 - Permit—Conditional. 
Permits may be issued conditionally, in order to insure compliance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3525.4(b).)  
5.58.070 - Permit—Denial. 
If the Chief of Police finds any of the facts, as set forth in Section 5.58.050 hereof, are present, he shall decline to issue the permit as requested and return the application form with his reasons for denial set forth in writing. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3525.4(c).)  
5.58.080 - Unlawful to Practice Massage Without Permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to practice massage as a principal, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid masseur's permit issued to him by the City pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3525.3(d).)  
5.58.100 - Sanitation Requirements. 
A.  All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically inspected by the City for safety of the structure and the propriety of plumbing, ventilation and heating. One artificial white light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room where a massage is being administered. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable mold resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Separate restrooms shall be provided for men and women; 
B.  Towels, sheets and linens of all types and items for personal use of operators and patients shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used once for every person and discarded; 
C.  Dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for patients. Lockers shall be separate for each patient and such lockers shall be capable of being locked for the protection of the clothing and valuables of the patient. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § l(part), 1975: prior code § 3525.6.)  
5.58.110 - Inspection by Health Officer When—Permit Denial or Revocation for Health Violations. 
A.  The Chief of Police may call upon the City Health Officer from time to time to request assistance in conducting the City's investigation; 
B.  A masseur permit holder shall each 60 days after the issuance of a permit, furnish the Chief of Police with a certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the permittee was examined for contagious and communicable disease and the doctor's findings; 
C.  If the applicant for either a massage parlor, outcall massage service or a masseur's permit has a communicable or venereal disease, or if the applicant is in violation of any federal, state or local health law or regulation, then the respective application may be denied, or if a permit has already been issued, it may be revoked or suspended pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3525.7.)  
5.58.120 - Permit Transfer. 
No massage parlor or outcall massage service permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the Chief of Police. An application for such a transfer shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee of $50.00. If the transfer is denied by the Chief of Police, the permittee or proposed transferee lay appeal such action to the City Council pursuant to procedures hereinafter enacted in this Chapter.  
5.58.130 - Standards. 
A.  No massage parlor or outcall massage service shall perform a massage service prior to 8:00 A.M. and after 6:00 P.M. of any day; 
B.  No person under the age of 18 years shall be licensed to perform massages in a massage parlor or for a massage outcall service; 
C.  No foods or beverages shall be sold, furnished or available for consumption in any massage parlor; 
D.  No non-massage business shall be allowed on the premises that is licensed as a massage parlor. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3525.9.)  
5.58.140 - Immoral Practices Prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to massage a patient with the intent or purpose of arousing, appealing to or gratifying the sexual desires of the patient, or prospective client to request, solicit or encourage such immoral practice; 
B.  No masseur shall, while massaging a client or while in a room where massage is conducted, expose genitalia including breasts. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3526.)  
5.58.150 - Permit Display. 
The owner or operator shall display the massage parlor permit and the permit of each and every masseur employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3526.1.)  
5.58.170 - Identification Required. 
A.  Every person practicing massages under this chapter in any massage parlor shall post his permit in a conspicuous place in the room where massages are conducted; 
B.  Any masseur performing an outcall massage service shall wear a badge on his person which shall contain his name and a recent photograph of him. The badge shall be readily identifiable by the client. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3527.1.)  
5.58.180 - Notification of Ownership, Employee or Address Change. 
Every massage business owner or operator shall report immediately to the Chief of Police any and all changes of address or ownership of the massage establishment, and any changes or transfers of masseurs employed in the business or practice. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.2.)  
5.58.190 - Permit—Denial—Hearing. 
If a permit for a massage parlor, outcall massage service or a masseur is denied, an applicant may, within seven days after such action is taken, request a hearing before the Chief of Police at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether the action of the Chief of Police in denying the issuance of an annual permit should be reversed. The Chief of Police shall render his decision within seven days after the hearing has been concluded. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.3.)  
5.58.200 - Permit—Denial—Appeal. 
If the Chief of Police does not reverse his action in denying the permit under Sections 5.58.040 or 5.58.050 through 5.55.080, the applicant may within seven days after the rendition of the decision by the Chief of Police appeal such action to the City Council. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.4.)  
5.58.210 - Permit—Revocation or Suspension—Grounds. 
Any massage parlor or masseur's permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any provision of this Chapter, or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of the issuance of such permit in the first place. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.5.)  
5.58.220 - Permit—Revocation or Suspension—Hearing. 
Prior to the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this Chapter, the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the Chief of Police, at which time evidence will be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such permit shall be suspended or revoked, or whether the permit may be retained. The Chief of Police shall render his decision within seven days after the hearing has been concluded. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.6.)  
5.58.230 - Permit—Revocation or Suspension—Appeal. 
Within seven days after any action has been taken by the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 5.58.210, the permittee, or interested persons, may appeal such action to the City Council. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.7.)  
5.58.240 - Masseur's Permit—Fee—Nontransferability. 
The permit fee for masseurs shall be $10.00 annually with a new application to be submitted each year. Masseur permits are not transferable. 
(Ord. 910 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979: Ord, 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975; prior code § 3527.8)  
5.58.250 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to physiotherapy establishments nor to any practice of business which would be covered by the licensing provisions of the state where a city has been preempted from regulating such business. 
(Ord. 831 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 3527.9.)  
CHAPTER 5.59 - ITEM PRICE MARKING ON PACKAGED CONSUMER COMMODITIES 
 
5.59.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided or required by the context, the following terms have the indicated meanings in this ordinance. 
A.  "Customer Commodity" means any of the following: 
1.  Food, including all material whether solid, liquid, or mixed, and whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets, and all substances or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose, but excluding individual packages of cigarettes and individual cigars. 
2.  Foil wrapping and paper and plastic products, including but not limited to napkins, facial tissue, toilet tissue, plastic wrapping, paper towels, and disposable plates and cups. 
3.  Detergents, soaps, and other cleaning agents. 
4.  Pharmaceuticals, including non-prescription drugs, bandages, hygiene products and toiletries. 
B.  "Grocery Store" means a store engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food as distinguished from food prepared for consumption on the premises; 
C.  "Grocery Department" means an area within a retail store which area is used primarily in the retail sale of packaged food as distinguished from food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises; 
D.  "Sale Item" or "Special" means any consumer commodity offered in good faith for a period of seven days or less on sale at a price below the normal price that item is usually sold for in that store.  
5.59.020 - Requirements. 
A.  Price Mark Required. Every owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a grocery store or grocery department shall cause to have a clearly readable price indicated on each package consumer commodity offered or displayed for sale on or after January 1, 1980; 
B.  Exceptions. This requirement does not apply to: 
1.  Any unpackaged or unwrapped fresh food produce; 
2.  Any consumer commodity under three cubic inches in size and weighing less than three ounces and priced for less than thirty cents ($0.30); 
3.  Any grocery business which has as its only regular employees, the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, or child of such owner, or in addition thereto, not more than two other persons employed on a regular schedule for a continuing period of time; 
4.  Identical items within a multi-item package, which is price marked; 
5.  Items sold through a vending machine; and 
6.  Sale items or specials. 
C.  Waiver. Upon application to the City Council, the requirements of this ordinance may be waived provided that the applicant can demonstrate a proposed pricing system with the ability to provide a more cost efficient operation and to provide for consumer protection.  
5.59.030 - Sunset Provision. 
The requirements specified in this ordinance shall terminate on December 31, 1986.  
5.59.040 - Violations and Enforcement. 
A.  Violations. Every failure or omission to have a clearly readable price as required by this ordinance indicated on six or more units of the same item of the same commodity is an infraction; 
B.  Civil Enforcement. Any person may seek civil enforcement of this ordinance; 
C.  Liability for Violations. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be liable to any person injured for any losses and expenses thereby incurred and for the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition thereto. This remedy applies only to actions brought by or on behalf of a single plaintiff, including any governmental agency and not to multiple plaintiffs or class actions. 
(Ord. 934 C.S. § 1, 1980.)  
CHAPTER 5.60 - TAXICABS 
 
5.60.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this Chapter, the following term shall respectively be deemed to mean as follows: 
A.  "Driver" means every person in charge of, or operating, any taxicab, or rent car, as herein defined, either as agent, employee or otherwise under the direction of the owner, or as owner, as herein defined; 
B.  "Owner" means every person, firm or corporation having use or control of any taxicab or rent car, as herein defined, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise; 
C.  "Rent car" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, excluding taxicabs, as herein defined, and operated, at rates per hour, or portion thereof, and not equipped with a taximeter, as herein defined, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the City, and not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the City, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such person hiring the same; 
D.  "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel; 
E.  "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle operated at rates per mile or portion thereof, or for wait time, or for both, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the City, and not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the City, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such persons hiring the same; 
F.  "Taximeter" means any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon the instrument, appliance, device or machine such charge is indicated by figures. 
(Prior code § 6200.)  
5.60.020 - License—Required—Nontransferable. 
It is unlawful to operate a taxicab or rent car in the City unless the owner thereof shall apply for and obtain a license to do so, which license shall be applied for, granted and be in effect, all in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Prior code § 6201.)  
5.60.030 - License—Application. 
A.  The application for such owner's license shall be in writing, duly certified under oath, and it, together with a copy thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall forthwith transmit to the Chief of Police the copy, and each application shall set forth: 
1.  A full identification of the applicant and all persons, firms or corporations directly or indirectly interested in the license, if granted; 
2.  The residence and business address and the citizenship of the applicant, including all members of any firm, or partnership, or all officers and directors of any corporation applying; 
3.  The exact nature of the proposed business for which the license is requested, and the name under which it is to be operated; 
4.  Whether or not any license has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation; 
5.  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated; 
6.  The complete description of the vehicles proposed to be operated and of the proposed operations; 
7.  The color scheme and characteristic insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of the owner; 
8.  The passenger seating capacity of each vehicle proposed to be operated; 
9.  The make and type of a taximeter if any intended to be installed on each taxicab for which application is made; 
10.  Such other relevant facts as the City Council may, prior to the filing of the application, determine by resolution as advisable or necessary. 
B.  Within 10 days after the filing of any such application for license, the City Clerk shall cause to be posted on the bulletin board at the City Hall, notice of the filing of such application setting forth in the notice, the name and address of the applicant, and the date of filing such application. 
(Prior code § 6202.)  
5.60.040 - License—Issuance. 
A.  No license shall be granted within 40 days after the date of filing of the application with the City Clerk. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the application, and shall, within 30 days from the date of filing the application, report his findings in writing and file the same with the City Clerk. If the report of the Chief of Police finds: 
1.  That the vehicle, or its equipment, proposed to be operated is inadequate or unsafe; 
2.  That the applicant has been convicted of a felony or the violation of a narcotic law, or of any penal law involving moral turpitude, or during the previous 60 days of any provision of the ordinances of the City or law relating to traffic or use of streets in the City; 
3.  That the proposed color scheme or characteristic insignia will tend to confuse the identification of the vehicles proposed to be operated with those of another operator operating in the City; or 
4.  That the name under which the applicant proposes to operate will tend to cause confusion with that of another owner operating in the City, then the application shall be deemed denied. 
B.  It is provided, however, that in any such event, the applicant may, at any time within 40 days from the date of filing of the application with the City Clerk, as aforesaid, file in writing with the City Clerk an appeal to the City Council from the denial. In which case, at its next regular meeting, following the filing of the appeal, the City Council shall hear the appeal by the applicant, consider the written report of the Chief of Police and such other material evidence as may be presented. After due consideration, the City Council shall by resolution determine or not such application shall be granted or denied. 
C.  If, however, the report of the Chief of Police finds none of the objections to the granting of the application, any citizen of the City may, likewise, within the 40-day period file in writing with the City Clerk objections to the granting of the application, then at its next regular meeting after the filing, the City Council shall review the application, the report of the Chief of Police, the objections filed, and such other material evidence as may be presented. After due consideration, the City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether or not the application shall be granted or denied. 
D.  It is provided, however, that if the report of the Chief of Police finds none of the objections to the granting of the application and no written objections thereto are filed with the City Clerk as herein specified, or after hearing, in either event herein specified, the City Council determines that the application shall be granted, and 40 days have expired since the filing of the application, the License Collector shall issue the license to the applicant upon the payment of the license fee set forth in Section 5.60.050. 
(Prior code § 6203.)  
5.60.050 - License—Fee. 
The owner, upon the issuance of a license for the operation of a taxicab or rent car hereunder, shall pay to the City thereof a license fee of $100.00 annually in advance for one such vehicle and $50.00 annually in advance for each additional vehicle so licensed. 
(Prior code § 6204.)  
5.60.060 - License—Suspension or Revocation. 
The City Council may, by resolution, and after ten days' written notice to an owner, and a public hearing at a regular meeting thereof following the notice, suspend or revoke an owner's license for any of the four grounds specified as grounds for denial as set forth in Section 5.60.040 of this Chapter, in event of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or for a failure to pay any judgment for damages arising from the operation of the vehicles, or any of them, for which the license was issued. 
(Prior code § 6205.)  
5.60.070 - Change in Number of Vehicles. 
A.  Any owner holding a license to operate one or more taxicabs or rent cars as provided in this Chapter, who desires to add to the number of such vehicles, shall do so only upon obtaining license therefor, which shall be granted only upon application made in the same manner and under the same proceedings as are required in this Chapter in the instance of obtaining the original license and paying the license fee required for each additional vehicle; 
B.  Any owner holding a license to operate one or more taxicabs or rent cars, as provided in this Chapter, who desires to substitute a different vehicle for a vehicle operated under such license, shall do so only upon obtaining permission to do so from the City Council, which shall be granted only upon written application to the City Council filed with the City Clerk, setting forth the particulars of such proposed substitution and upon otherwise complying with the requirements of this Chapter; provided, however, the License Collector shall issue a temporary permit to make a substitution provided the written application has been filed, which temporary permit shall be valid only until the first regular meeting of the City Council next following the date of issuance. The City Council shall have the same authority in granting or denying the application for permission to add to or substitute, as is herein in this Chapter vested in it, in the matter of the original application when presented to it, and shall, by resolution, grant or deny the petition as it may determine advisable after due consideration of the application. 
(Prior code § 6206.)  
5.60.080 - Liability Insurance—Required. 
It is unlawful to drive or operate or cause or permit to be driven or operated any taxicab or rent car in the City, unless the owner thereof has obtained a motor vehicle liability insurance policy or policies from a responsible and solvent corporation, authorized to issue such policies under the laws of the State, insuring the owner and covering such taxicab or rent car, and also unless the owner files with the City Clerk the written certificate or certificates of such corporation, all as provided in this Chapter. In the event, during the term of such license, such liability insurance policy so filed becomes ineffective by reason of its expiration or cancellation, or the corporation issuing the same becomes irresponsible or insolvent, the owner shall obtain a new policy or policies meeting the foregoing requirements to replace the ineffective policy, and file certificate thereof with the City Clerk, as aforesaid. The City Council may at any time require an owner to replace any such policy within 10 days from the date of notice requiring the same, with a policy and certificate thereof, both in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, then, at the termination of the 10 days, the owner's license for the taxicab or rent car covered by such policy, shall be, by such failure, automatically suspended until such time as the requirement is complied with, or the license is revoked, whichever is sooner in event. 
(Prior code § 6207.)  
5.60.090 - Liability Insurance—Terms of Policy. 
Each motor vehicle liability insurance policy required under the provisions of Section 5.60.080 of this Chapter, in addition to the provisions required to be therein under the laws of the State, shall provide coverage under the National Standard Liability Form and shall also provide that such policy covers any and all taxicabs or rent cars which may be driven or operated by or for the owner insured under the policy and regardless of whether or not any license has been granted the insured under the provisions of this Chapter; such policy insures the owner, as defined in this Chapter, any other person driving, using or responsible for the use of any taxicab or rent car, covered by the policy, with the consent, express or implied, of the owner, and also the City, against loss from the liability imposed on any of them by law for injury to, or death of, the person or damage to property arising from or growing out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any taxicab or rent car covered by the policy to the amount of limit of $100,000.00 for injury, to, or the death of, any one person in any one accident and $300,000.00 for injury to, or the death of, two or more persons in any one accident and $25,000.00 for damage to, or the destruction of property in any one accident. Such policy is a continuing liability up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon; such policy, in the event of the death of the owner, insures to, and is for the benefit and protection of, any person who sustains or suffers any damage or injury, or to the heirs, or legal representatives of any such person, as the case may be, who may be so damaged or injured or suffer death, by reason of the negligent operation of any taxicab or rent car covered by the policy during the period covered by the policy and the life of the owner, and any such person, or the heirs or legal representatives of any such person, as the case may be, may, in such event sue the insurance carrier, provided that any such action must be brought within the period of time that an action on the policy would have been brought against the owner if he had not died and that no recovery can be had in such action in excess of the limits of the policy, and further provided, that the payments required to be made, in such event, shall be made directly to any such person, or the heirs or legal representatives of any such person, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 813 C.S. § 3, 1975; prior code § 6208.)  
5.60.100 - Liability Insurance—Certificate Required. 
Each certificate required under the provisions of Section 5.60.080 of this Chapter shall certify that the issuer thereof has issued a motor vehicle liability insurance policy or policies insuring the owner named in the certificate, and that each of the policies contains each of the provisions required to be therein as provided by Section 5.60.090 of this Chapter and that none of the policies can or will be cancelled except upon 30 days' prior written notice thereof to the City Clerk. Each of the certificates shall be conclusive evidence against the issuer thereof that its contents are true and correct. All such certificates shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. 
(Prior code § 6209.)  
5.60.110 - Bond in Lieu of Insurance. 
A.  Subject to the approval of the City Council, the owner of any taxicabs or taxicab or rent car or cars, operated under the provisions of this Chapter, nay file a bond of a responsible and solvent corporation authorized to issue such bonds under the laws of the State, containing the conditions, and giving the protection required in the motor vehicle liability insurance policy required by Sections 5.60.080 and 5.60.090 hereof, in lieu of either, all or any part of the insurance coverage required by said Sections. 
B.  In view of the filing of a bond under the provisions of this Section, the applicable provisions of Sections 5.60.080, 5.60.090 and 5.60.100 hereof shall govern the furnishing and the contents of such bond and the owner filing it. 
(Prior code § 6210.)  
5.60.120 - Driver's Permit—Required—Application. 
It is unlawful for any driver to operate any taxicab or rent car in the City unless there exists a valid permit to do so as herein provided. The application for such driver's permit shall be in writing, duly certified under oath, and it, together with a copy thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall transmit the copy to the Chief of Police, who shall file the same. Each such application shall set forth the name, age and address of the applicant, his past experience in operating automobiles, the name, business and address of each of his employers, during the preceding period of 3 years, the number of existing operators' or chauffeurs' licenses, whether or not a chauffeur's license issued to him by the State or any state or governmental agency has ever been revoked, the name and address of the owner by whom he is to be employed as a driver (which owner shall endorse the application) and such additional information as the City Council, by resolution prior to the filing of the application, may require. 
(Prior code § 6211.)  
5.60.130 - Driver's permit—Issuance—Nontransferable—Notice of Termination—Mandatory Controlled Substance and Alcohol Testing Certification Program. 
A.  Upon application for a driver's permit and before it shall be issued, the driver, whether the owner or otherwise, must (1) possess a valid, permanent California driver's license and must not have been convicted within the last five years of driving while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs and (2) evidence a proficient knowledge of the traffic laws of the City and of the State, and demonstrate his ability to operate a taxicab or rent car, all to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police, who may issue such permit. Upon satisfying the foregoing requirements, the driver shall be fingerprinted by, and his record filed in the Police Department. The driver shall also file with his application two recent photographs (size 1 ½ inch by 1 ½ inch), one to be filed with his application and one to be permanently attached to his driver's permit when issued, which permit shall be in his possession while the driver is operating a taxicab or rent car, and shall be exhibited to any person on request. Every driver's permit issued hereunder shall set forth the name of the owner for whom the driver is authorized to operate a taxicab or rent car and shall be valid only so long as he continues in the employ of such owner. Upon the termination of such employment, the driver shall forthwith surrender his driver's permit to the Chief of Police. No such driver's permit shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 years, to any person who is not either employed as a driver within the City of Martinez or in possession of an offer of employment as a driver within the City of Martinez, to any person who has not complied with subsection D of this Section 5.60.130, or to any person who has been convicted of a violation, during the previous 60 days, of any provision of the ordinance of the City or law relating to traffic use of streets in the City. Such driver's permit may be denied upon substantial evidence of the facts of either physical or moral deficiencies of the applicant which, in the sound discretion of the Chief of Police would render such applicant incompetent to operate a taxicab or rent car, and the Chief of Police may require an examination and report by an optometrist or physician as to possible physical defects before issuance of such permit. 
B.  No driver's permit issued hereunder shall be transferable in any event. 
C.  Upon the termination of the employment of any driver, the owner for whom such driver has been working shall immediately give the Chief of Police written notice of such termination. 
D.  All drivers shall comply with the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program, as set forth below: 
1.  Drivers shall test negative for each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, before employment. Drivers shall test negative for these controlled substances and for alcohol as a condition of permit renewal. As used in this section, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent. 
2.  Procedures shall be substantially as in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver shall show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in this Subsection D of this Section 5.60.130 Requirements for rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other requirements, except as provided otherwise in this Subsection D of this Section 5.60.130, shall be substantially as in Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
3.  A test consistent with subsection (D)(1) and (2) performed in a jurisdiction other than the City shall be accepted as meeting the same requirement in the City of Martinez. Any negative test result shall be accepted for one year as meeting a requirement for periodic permit renewal testing or any other periodic testing in the City of Martinez if the driver has not tested positive subsequent to the negative result. However, an earlier negative result shall not be accepted as meeting the pre-employment testing requirement for any subsequent employment or any testing requirements under the program other than periodic testing. 
4.  In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the test results shall be reported directly to the City, which shall notify the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing transportation operator, who may be required to notify the City of positive results. 
5.  All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law. 
6.  Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. Employing transportation operators shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of this program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that an operator may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing. 
7.  Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the City shall give the driver a list of the consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that the City knows offer tests in or near the City 
(Ord. 1255 C.S. § 1, 1998; prior code § 6212.)  
5.60.140 - Driver's Permit—Suspension or Revocation. 
A.  The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend or revoke any driver's permit issued hereunder for any of the reasons for which an application for such permit may be denied, or if the holder thereof shall be found guilty by any court, of reckless driving, or the violation of any other law. The Chief of Police shall in writing forthwith report any such suspension or revocation to the City Council, stating the reasons for such action. The City Council may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, any such order on a written appeal filed with the City Clerk by the driver within 10 days from the date of any such order, such action to be taken by the City Council by resolution after a hearing thereon to be had at its next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal. 
B.  In the event of such suspension or revocation of a driver's permit, such permit shall be, by the holder thereof, forthwith surrendered to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6213.)  
5.60.150 - Driver's Permit—Owner's License—Term—Renewal. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each owner's license and driver's permit shall be issued for one year and shall expire at the end of the term for which issued, and may be renewed each year only on regular application made as required in this Chapter. 
B.  Any owner's license or driver's permit heretofore issued under the provisions of any ordinance of the City, and now in force and effect shall remain in force and effect until revoked or suspended as herein provided, or until one year after their issuance, whichever is sooner. 
(Prior code § 6217.)  
5.60.160 - Vehicle and Equipment Specifications. 
A.  No vehicle shall, under the license to the owner, be operated as a taxicab or rent car unless it conforms with all of the provisions of this Chapter, or unless the vehicle has been operated under a license as a taxicab or rent car prior to October 15, 1965, in which latter event it may so operate only for the period of time for which the license was issued, except that it shall, in all events, conform to the provisions of Section 5.60.060 through 5.60.110 and 5.60.240 through 5.60.300 of this Chapter and all regulations subsequent hereto. 
B.  Taximeters placed upon taxicabs either in the first operation, or to replace broken or faulty meters, shall not be operated more than 24 hours prior to being inspected, tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the City Council. 
C.  Each taxicab or rent car so licensed shall have on both sides and the rear of the vehicle the name of the owner or name under which operated, the word "Martinez" and the number assigned to such vehicle by the License Collector. The type, design and size required therefor shall be as may be designated by the City Council by resolution. At the time of the issuance of a license for the operation of any vehicle hereunder, the License Collector shall assign to, and for that vehicle, a number not in excess of the total number of licensed vehicles, keep a record of the number so assigned, and file a copy of the record with the Chief of Police. 
The License Collector shall assign, record in his office, and file a copy in the same manner, to and for each such vehicle licensed to be operated under the provisions of this Chapter, and each owner, so licensed to operate that vehicle shall comply with all provisions of this Subsection as respects that vehicle including the number so assigned. 
(Prior code § 6215.)  
5.60.170 - Inspection—Required. 
Before a license is issued to any owner, the vehicle for which such license is required shall be delivered to a place designated by the City Council for inspection, and the City Council shall designate an agent or agents, to inspect such taxicab or rent car, its equipment and taximeter, if any, to ascertain whether such taxicab or rent car complies with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code § 6216(a).)  
5.60.180 - Inspection—Failure to Pass. 
Any taxicab or rent car which is found, after such inspection, to be in such violation shall be immediately ordered out of service, and before again being placed in service, shall be placed in a safe and proper condition. 
(Prior code § 6216(c).)  
5.60.190 - Cleanup Required—Reporting Valuable Property Left In Vehicle. 
The interior of each taxicab or rent car shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in each 24 hours, and all property of value left in any such vehicle by a passenger shall be forthwith reported by the owner of the licensed vehicle to the Chief of Police, who shall keep a record thereof. 
(Prior code § 6216(d).)  
5.60.200 - Taking Most Direct Route Required. 
Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously. 
(Prior code § 6216(e).)  
5.60.210 - Failure To Pay Fare A Misdemeanor. 
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare as fixed herein of any of the vehicles regulated by this Chapter after employing or hiring the same, and any person so doing is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 6216(f).)  
5.60.220 - More Than Allowable Number of Passengers Restricted. 
No driver of any taxicab or rent car shall accept or take into his vehicle or transport any large number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of his vehicle, provided, however, that children under 12 years of age with an adult escort may be taken in addition thereto. 
(Prior code § 6216(g).)  
5.60.230 - Driver's Log. 
The driver of every vehicle covered by this Chapter shall keep a complete and accurate record of each trip upon a daily sheet showing the time and place of origin and the time and place of destination of the trip, the number of passengers carried, and the amount of fare collected. This record shall be signed by the driver and filed daily with the company by whom he is employed, which record shall be kept on file and made available for inspection by the Martinez Police Department upon request for a period of not less than 6 months. 
(Prior code § 6216(h).)  
5.60.240 - Taximeter—Generally. 
Taxicabs, duly licensed to operate in the City as in this Chapter provided, may be so operated, either with or without a taximeter. If a taximeter is so installed, it shall be the duty of the owner operating such taxicab to keep such taximeter in perfect condition so that the taximeter will, at all times, correctly and accurately indicate the legal charge for the distance traveled and waiting time, and such taximeter shall, at all times, be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police, and the Chief of Police is authorized at his instance, or upon complaint of any person, to investigate or cause to be investigated such taximeter, and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in the taximeter, to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the streets of the City until such time as the taximeter has been correctly adjusted or the taximeter equipment has been removed from the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6214(a).)  
5.60.250 - Taximeter—Flag—Operation. 
Every such taximeter shall register the charge to the nearest 100¢ and be equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words "For Hire" printed or stamped thereon, and the flag shall be so attached and connected to the mechanism of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism to operate when the flag is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for hire, and which flag shall, when moved forward or downward, start the operation of the taximeter so that the same will operate in the manner defined in this Chapter. 
(Prior code § 6214(b).)  
5.60.260 - Taximeter—Flag—Unlawful Operation. 
It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to display the flag or device attached to such taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is for hire, or is not employed, or to have such flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter from operating and it is unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other device of a taximeter into a position which causes the taximeter to record when such vehicle is not actually employed or to fail to throw the flag or other device on such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service, provided that the foregoing shall not apply to trips to or from points outside the City where the charge is fixed on a trip basis. 
(Prior code § 6214(c).)  
5.60.270 - Taximeter—Charges To Be Based On Taximeter. 
All charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs equipped with a taximeter, operated in the City, must be based on the charge indicated on the taximeters and it is unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any such taxicab to charge any passenger or passengers any sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter, provided that the foregoing shall not apply to trips to or from points outside the City where the charge is fixed on a trip basis. 
(Prior code § 6214(d).)  
5.60.280 - Taximeter—Placement. 
The taximeter shall be so placed in the taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well-lighted and readily discernable by the passenger riding in such taxicab. 
(Prior code § 6214(e).)  
5.60.290 - Card Display and Information Required of Same. 
There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab or rent car, in full view of the passenger, a card not less than 2 inches by 4 inches in size which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner, or the fictitious name under which the owner operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner, and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in the vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6214(f).)  
5.60.300 - Rate Schedule—Overcharging Prohibited—Submittal to Clerk—Fare Deductions for Disabled Vehicles. 
A.  It is unlawful, except for trips to or from points outside the City where the charge is fixed on a trip basis, for the owner or driver of any taxicab or rent car, as defined in Section 5.60.010 of this Chapter to fix or charge or collect a rate in excess of the rate schedule filed by the owner of the vehicle with the City Clerk. Before operation of such vehicle under any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter, the owner shall file with the City Clerk, in duplicate, a complete rate schedule to be charged to a passenger or passengers of such taxicab or rent car, and the City Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the Chief of Police and report to the City Council at its next regular meeting the rate schedule so filed. A changed rate schedule may likewise be filed from time to time by the owner but no charges shall be made thereon until consent to such new schedule has been given by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  In case any taxicab or rent car shall become disabled or break down, while conveying passengers for hire, the time of stoppage shall be deducted from the time charged for. 
(Prior code § 6214(g).)  
5.60.310 - Penalties for Violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a forfeiture of his license or permit and by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by such forfeiture and imprisonment in jail for not more than 6 months or by both such forfeiture, fine and imprisonment. 
B.  For the purpose of this Chapter it shall be considered that each day during which any provision of this Chapter is violated shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Prior code § 6218.)  
CHAPTER 5.70 - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FILM PERMITTING 
 
5.70.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Charitable filming activity" means a filming activity conducted or produced by a non-profit organization/corporation which qualifies under Section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization/corporation. 
B.  "Filming activity" means the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion picture, television programs, commercial and non theatrical film productions. 
C.  "Filming Activities Coordinator" means such public official designated by the City Manager to issue film permits within the city. 
D.  "Location manager" means the person in charge at the location of the filming activity within the city associated with the permittee. 
E.  "News purposes" means filming activity conducted for the purpose of reporting on persons, events or scenes which are in the news or newspapers, television news services and other news media. 
F.  "Student filming activity" means a filming activity conducted to fulfill a course requirement by a student enrolled at a public school, private school registered with the state, school within the California State University System or University of California. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.020 - Purpose. 
Filming permits shall be granted in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.030 - Administration. 
The Filming Activities Coordinator is responsible for administering this Chapter, and is authorized to promulgate rules or regulations consistent with and necessary for its efficient administration. The Filming Activities Coordinator or his designee shall work cooperatively with the film industry to expedite the permit process by coordinating all City department reviews and approvals. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.040 - Permit required. 
A.  No person shall engage in commercial motion picture production on public property or requiring public services without obtaining a filming permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The film permit is not transferable without the written authorization of the Filming Activities Coordinator. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities; provided, that the activity will not require the closure of a public street, or substantially impede vehicular traffic thereon: 
1.  Filming activities conducted for news purposes as defined in Section 5.70.010(e); 
2.  Filming activities conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceedings; 
3.  Noncommercial filming activities conducted solely for private or family use. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.050 - Application. 
An applicant for a filming permit may commence the application process by providing all application information to the City by telephone. The application and permit shall be on the form developed by the California Film Commission, which must be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.060 - Permit Issuance. 
A.  The time line for issuing permits shall be: 
1.  Permits not requiring traffic control exceeding three (3) minutes shall be issued within two (2) working days of completion of application; 
2.  Permits requiring traffic control exceeding three (3) minutes shall be issued within four (4) working days of completion of application; 
3.  Permits requiring road closures shall be issued within ten (10) working days of completion of application. 
B.  An application shall not be deemed complete until all required information is provided, all fees are paid, the application is properly signed, and evidence of adequate insurance coverage is provided to the Film Activities Coordinator. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.070 - Permit Conditions. 
The Filming Activity Coordinator may condition the issuance of a film permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of filming activities. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.080 - Amendments. 
Permits may be amended from time to time to accommodate minor changes to the permit. The amendment shall be in the form of an attachment to the permit. A permit may not be amended or extended after the completion of filming activity. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.090 - Permit Revocation or Suspension. 
A.  The Filming Activities Coordinator may revoke the film permit if he determines after the permit is issued that the permit application was false in any material detail or if the permittee, or the agents, employees or contractors of the permittee at the filming activity site, fail to comply with the filming rules. Notice of the grounds for revocation of the film permit shall be provided in writing by the Filming Activities Coordinator to the permittee or location manager. 
B.  The Police Department officer assigned to police the filming activity site may suspend the film permit when the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property and the permittee or location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the officer. The grounds for the permit suspension shall be provided in writing by the filming activity coordinator to the permittee or location manager within one business day of the suspension. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.100 - Appeals. 
A.  The permit applicant may appeal a permit denial, revocation, suspension, permit condition or insurance or fee requirement. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than seven calendar days after the date written notice of the decision is made. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council at its next available regular meeting. 
B.  If there is insufficient time for a timely appeal to be heard by the City Council prior to the planned date for the filming activity or the filming activity is already underway, the applicant/permittee may at his option request that the City Clerk schedule the appeal before the City Manager. The City Manager shall hold a hearing no later than two business days after the filing of the appeal, and shall render his decision not later than one business day after the appeals hearing. If the appeal is heard before the City Manager, his decision is final. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.110 - Permit Copy. 
The applicant shall have a copy of the permit on site at all times, and shall make the copy available for inspection by the Filming Activities Coordinator or his designee. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.120 - Fees. 
A permit application processing fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be charged to cover the cost of permit issuance. In addition, a fee which shall reasonably reflect the cost of providing services occasioned by the filming, including administration, police, fire, and other necessary services shall be paid by the applicant upon filing of an application with the Filming Activities Coordinator. Any excess of the application fee shall be refunded to the applicant. In case of cancellation, a cancellation fee not to exceed the actual cost expended for services provided prior to said cancellation shall be assessed to the applicant. 
A waiver or reduction in city fees may be authorized by the City Manager for charitable and student filming activities. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.130 - Insurance. 
The applicant shall, at no cost to City, furnish evidence of comprehensive liability insurance coverage, including coverage of owned and non-owned automobiles, with a minimum combined single limit coverage of at least $1,000,000 for all damages due to bodily injury, sickness or disease, or death to any person, and damage to property, including loss of use thereof, arising out of each accident or occurrence. The City, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds, and coverage shall not be canceled or reduced in coverage or limits except after 30 days written notice to City. Evidence of coverage shall be provided on the standardized insurance form approved by the California Film Commission. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
5.70.140 - Liability and Indemnification. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of the film permit, the permit applicant must sign an agreement to reimburse the City for any costs incurred to repair or replace city property which is damaged as the result of the filming activity. 
B.  Hold Harmless. As a condition of obtaining a filming permit, the applicant shall defend, indemnify, save and hold harmless the City and its officers and employees from any and all claims, costs and liability for any damages, injury, or death arising directly or indirectly from or connected with the permit, due to or claimed to be due to negligent or wrongful acts, errors or omissions of the applicant or any person under its control, save and except claims or litigation arising through the sole negligence or sole willful misconduct of the City, and will make good to and reimburse the City for any expenditures, including reasonable attorneys' fees, the City may make by reason of such matters and, if requested by the City will defend any such suits at the sole cost and expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. 1246 C.S. § 1, 1997.) 
TITLE 5 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to license businesses for purposes of revenue and regulation, see Gov. Code § 37101; for authority for cities to license business in the exercise of their powers, see Bus. Prof. Code §§ 16000— 16003. 
2.  For statutory provisions authorizing localities to impose more restrictive regulations on ambulance operation, see Veh. Code § 2512. 
3.  For Uniform Commercial Code provisions regarding sales by auction, see Com. Code § 2328. 
4.  For statutory provisions regarding gaming, see Pen. Code § 330; for provisions on gaming, see Ch. 9.28. 
5.  For the Unfair Trade Practices Act, see Bus. Prof. Code § 17000 et seq. 
6.  For statutory provisions allowing local authorities to license and regulate the operation of any vehicles for hire and taxi drivers, see Veh. Code § 16501 and 21100; for provisions regarding financial responsibility requirements for vehicles for hire, see Veh. Code § 16500. 
6/23/98  
TITLE 6 - ANIMALS 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
 
6.04.010 - Adoption-By-Reference of County's Animal Control Code. 
The Board of Supervisors of the County of Contra Costa, an agency of the State of California within the meaning of Government Code Section 50022.1, has adopted County Ordinances Nos. 80-97, 83-10, 85-23, 87-74, 2005-24, 2006-05 being a codification of provisions for animal control services (and constituting Division 416-2 to 416-12 of Division 416 of the County Code) collectively referred to herein as the "Animal Control Ordinance," and it is a code within the meaning of Government Code Section 50022.2; and at least one certified copy of it is and has been on file with the City Clerk where it is open to public inspections, all as required by Government Code Section 50022.3. This Animal Control Ordinance is hereby referred to and adopted by this reference as part of this City of Martinez Ordinance, as provided for in Government Code Section 50022.2. 
(Ord. 1326 C.S. § 1, 2006: Ord. 1249 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1116 C.S. § II, part 1988; Ord. 1052 C.S. § 1, 1985; Ord. 946 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981; prior code § 5100.)  
6.04.020 - Penalties. 
A.  Notwithstanding Section 14-8.004 of the Animal Control Ordinance, and pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code Section 3140, violations of Division 416 of the Animal Control Ordinance, excepting Chapter 416-10 and Article 416-12.2, are punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for the first offense and not more than $100.00 for the second or subsequent offense. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A above, violation of Section 416-404 Abandonment of the Animal Control Ordinance, excluding abandonments under Section 416-8.014 is a misdemeanor and punishable as such. 
(Ord. 1249 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
6.04.030 - Request Enforcement in City. 
The County Animal Control Ordinance referred to and hereby adopted contains the provisions of those sections of the California Food & Agricultural Code referred to in Section 30501, and therefore this City Ordinance constitutes the City's request that the provisions of this County Animal Control Ordinance be applicable within this City, and they shall hereafter so apply, pursuant to Food & Agricultural Code Section 30501. 
(Ord. 1249 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 1116 C.S. § II, part 1988; Ord. 946 C.S. § 1, (part), 1981; prior code § 5101.) 
TITLE 6 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding the regulation and licensing of dogs, see Food & Agric. Code § 30501 et seq.; for provisions regarding strays, see Food & Agric. Code § 17001 et seq.; for dog fancier's use permits, see Title 22 of this Code, Zoning. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding adoption of county ordinances by reference, see Gov. Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
Issued: 3/98  
TITLE 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 8.04 - PUBLIC HEALTH LICENSES AND FEES 
 
8.04.010 - County Ordinance—Adopted—Authority. 
Chapter 413-3 (Public Health and License Fees) as set forth in the Ordinance Code of Contra Costa County is hereby adopted by reference with those changes, additions and deletions made from time to time by the Contra Costa County Board of Supervisors. 
(Ord. 972 C.S. § I (part), 1982: Ord. 780 C.S. § II (part), 1974.)  
8.04.020 - County Ordinance—Interpretation. 
In the Ordinance Code of the County as adopted by reference, the reference in that Code to an office, official title or other designation means the corresponding office, title or designation in the governmental structure of the City. If there is no corresponding office, title or designation, then the reference means the office or person in the City who performs the function or duty referred to in the Ordinance Code adopted by reference. 
(Ord. 780 C.S. § III (part), 1974.)  
8.04.030 - Penalty for Violations. 
A person who violates a provision of the Ordinance Code of the County as adopted by reference is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of $500.00, imprisonment or 6 months or both. 
(Ord. 780 C.S. § IV (part), 1974.)  
CHAPTER 8.05 - PROHIBITION OF SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 1, adopted May 6, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 8.05, §§ 8.05.010—8.05.130, and adding a new Ch. 8.05. Former Ch. 8.05 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1093 C.S. of 1987 and Ord. 1175 C.S. of 1992. 
 
8.05.010 - Purpose and Findings. 
The City Council of the City of Martinez hereby finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke cause death and disease and impose great social and economic costs, as evidenced by the following: 
1.  More than 440,000 people die in the United States from tobacco-related diseases every year, making it the nation's leading cause of preventable death according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and 
2.  The National Cancer Institute has found that secondhand smoke is responsible for an estimated 38,000 deaths among nonsmokers each year in the United States, which includes 3,000 lung cancer deaths and 35,000 deaths due to heart disease; and 
3.  The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has found that secondhand smoke exposure causes as many as 300,000 children in the United Sates under the age of 18 months to suffer lower respiratory tract infections, such as pneumonia and bronchitis; exacerbates childhood asthma; and increases the risk of acute, chronic, middle-ear infections in children; and 
4.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency has found secondhand smoke to be a risk to public health and has classified secondhand smoke as a group A carcinogen, the most dangerous class of carcinogen; and 
5.  The U.S. Surgeon General has concluded that there is no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke; and 
6.  The California Air Resources Board has put secondhand smoke in the same category as the most toxic automotive and industrial air pollutants by categorizing it as a toxic air contaminant for which there is no safe level of exposure; and 
7.  The California Environmental Protection Agency has included secondhand smoke on the Proposition 65 list of chemicals known to the State of California to cause cancer, birth defects, and other reproductive harm; and 
8.  The American Academy of Actuaries has determined that the medical and economic costs to nonsmokers suffering from lung cancer or heart disease caused by secondhand smoke are nearly $6 billion per year in the United States; and 
9.  The total cost of smoking in California was estimated as $475 per resident, or $3,331 per smoker per year, for a total of nearly $15.8 billion in smoking-related costs in 1999 alone, according to a California Department of Health Services study. 
B.  Cigarette butts pose a health threat to young children, as evidenced by the following: 
1.  In 2004, American poison control centers received nearly 8,000 reports of children poisoned by the ingestion of cigarette butts; and 
2.  Children who ingest cigarette butts can experience vomiting, nausea, lethargy, and gagging. 
C.  Cigarette butts are a major and persistent source of litter, as evidenced by the following: 
1.  It is estimated that over 2 billion cigarette butts are discarded every day worldwide, and that Americans alone discard more than 175 million pounds of cigarette butts every year; and 
2.  Cigarette butts are often cast onto sidewalks and streets, and frequently end up in storm drains that flow into streams, rivers, bays, lagoons, and ultimately the ocean; and 
3.  Cigarette butts, made of plastic cellulose acetate, take approximately 15 years to decompose. 
D.  Most Californians do not smoke and a majority favors limitations on smoking in multi-unit residences, as evidenced by the following statistics from the California Department of Health Services and the American Lung Association of California: 
1.  Eighty-six percent of Californians are nonsmokers; and 
2.  Sixty-seven percent of Californians surveyed favor limiting smoking in outdoor common areas of apartment buildings. 
E.  Secondhand smoke can seep under doorways and through wall cracks. 
F.  There is no Constitutional right to smoke. 
Accordingly, the City Council finds that the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of, persons employed in, and persons who frequent the City of Martinez will be benefited regulating exposure to secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall have the following meanings to be interpreted in accord with State statute if a contradiction appears: 
A.  "Bar" means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
B.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes. 
C.  "City" means the City of Martinez. 
D.  "Employee" means any person who is employed, or retained as an independent contractor, by any employer or business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer, business, or nonprofit entity. 
E.  "Employer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, which employs or retains the services of 1 or more employees. 
F.  "Enclosed" means: 
1.  Any covered or partially covered space having more than 50% of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than 2 walls; or 
2.  Any space open to the sky having more than 75% of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a courtyard; 
3.  Except that, an area open to the sky of 3,000 square feet or more is not enclosed, for example, a field in an open-air arena. 
G.  "Landlord" means any person who owns real property leased or rented as residential property, any person who lets residential property, or any person who manages such property, except that "landlord" does not include sublessors. 
H.  "Minor" shall mean any individual who is less than 18 years old. 
I.  "Multi-unit common area" means any enclosed or unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence or multi-unit commercial facility (such as hotels, motels, mobile home parks, shopping centers, and office buildings) accessible to and usable by more than 1 resident, tenant, employee, employer, or member of the public, including but not limited to areas such as halls and paths, lobbies, elevators, laundry rooms, common areas, outdoor eating areas, swimming pools, and parking areas. Multi-unit common areas do not include private parks or playgrounds which are included in the definition of public place. 
J.  "Multi-unit residence" means a premises such as an apartment, co-op, condominium building, senior citizen or nursing home, or building site that contains 4 or more attached dwelling units. This definition excludes detached and attached single-family homes. 
K.  "Nonprofit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a "nonprofit entity" within the meaning of this section. 
L.  "Openings" shall include entrances, exits, operable windows and ventilation intake systems. 
M.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
N.  "Place of employment" means any area under the legal or actual control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee may have cause to enter during the normal course of operations, but regardless of hours of operation, including, but not limited to, enclosed and unenclosed work areas, construction sites, vehicles used for work-related purposes, taxis, employee lounges and breakrooms, conference and banquet rooms, classrooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long term health care facilities, warehouses, and private residences used as child/elder care or health care facilities subject to licensing requirements. 
O.  "Premises" means a piece of land and any improvements upon it such as is usually described in a deed, deed of trust or mortgage, and includes legally separate but contiguous pieces of land that are owned by the same natural person or by legal persons under common control. 
P.  "Private outdoor space" means any outdoor area associated with a unit that is used solely by the resident of that unit, including but not limited to balconies, patios, decks, entry porches, and carports. 
Q.  "Public place" means any place, public or private (excluding streets and sidewalks), open to members of the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, amphitheaters, sports events, public or private parks, common areas of common interest developments, public plazas, playgrounds, taxis, buses, bus shelters, public transportation facilities, hotels and motels, fairs, farmers' markets, parades and theaters. "Public place" does not mean on the premises of private clubs, so long as there are no employees and/or volunteers; or within private vehicles in or on public places, so long as no minor is present, pursuant to State law. 
R.  "Reasonable distance" means a distance of at least 20 feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited. 
S.  "Service area" means any area at which 1 or more persons are waiting for a transaction, entry or service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to ATM's, bank teller windows, telephones, ticket lines, bus stops and shelters, cab stands, and other hubs of transportation such as the AmTrak/Intermodal Station. 
T.  "Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
U.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
V.  "Tobacco product" means (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, blunts, clove cigarettes, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body by inhalation; but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the U. S. Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
W.  "Tobacco store" means a business that primarily sells tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia; does not permit any person under 18 years of age to be present or enter at any time; and does not sell beverages or food for consumption in or around the store. 
X.  "Unenclosed" means any area that is not enclosed. 
Y.  "Unit" means: (1) a dwelling space consisting of essentially complete independent living facilities for 1 or more persons, including, for example, permanent provisions for living and sleeping, and (2) a dwelling space that may lack private cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, including, for example, senior citizen housing, long-term health care facilities, or single room occupancy hotels, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 50519(b)(1). "Unit" does not include lodging in a hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth in California Civil Code section 1940(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.030 - City-owned Vehicles and Enclosed Facilities. 
All City-owned vehicles and all enclosed facilities owned or controlled by the City, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.040 - Vehicles Used for Work-Related Purposes. 
Smoking in vehicles used for work-related purposes is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Enforcement of smoking regulations in such vehicles shall be the responsibility of the employer, and/or the employee by legal action if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.050 - Prohibition of Smoking in Designated Enclosed Areas. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, smoking shall be prohibited in the following Enclosed areas: 
1.  Places of employment, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
2.  Public places, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
3.  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the City; 
4.  Service areas, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
5.  Areas that have a common or shared air space with other enclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited such as, without limitation, air conditioning systems, heating systems, ventilation systems, entries, doorways, hallways, and stairways; 
6.  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage productions, lectures, musical recitals or other similar performances, except for smoking which is an integral part of such production; and 
7.  A designated nonsmoking guest room of any hotel, motel, or bed-and-breakfast facility. 
B.  A minimum of 80% of guest rooms in every hotel and motel, and bed-and-breakfast facilities must be permanently designated as completely nonsmoking. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.060 - Prohibition of Smoking in Certain Unenclosed Areas. 
A.  Except as otherwise expressly authorized by State or Federal law, smoking shall be prohibited in any place where food and/or drink is offered for sale, including but not limited to outdoor dining areas of restaurants, bars and farmers' markets. 
B.  Smoking is prohibited within the following unenclosed areas: 
1.  Places of employment, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
2.  Public places, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
3.  Public events including but not limited to, sports events, entertainment, speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants and parades; 
4.  A reasonable distance from any opening of any enclosed or unenclosed area within which smoking is prohibited, except while passing on the way to another destination; 
5.  Service areas, as defined in Section 8.05.020; 
6.  Courtyards and other areas where air circulation may be impeded by architectural, landscaping or other barriers; and 
7.  A reasonable distance from road, building, and construction crews, while working. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.070 - Prohibition of Smoking in Multi-Unit Residence Common Areas and Private Outdoor Spaces. 
A.  Effective June 1, 2010, smoking is prohibited in all multi-unit residence common areas and private outdoor spaces (including but not limited to balconies, patios, decks, entry porches, carports, and pool areas), and within 20 feet of any entrance, exit, or operable windows and ventilation intake systems of a multi-unit residence, except that a landlord may designate a portion of the outdoor area of the premises as a smoking area as provided in paragraph B. below. 
B.  A designated smoking area: 
1.  Must be located a reasonable distance from any indoor area where smoking is prohibited; 
2.  Must not include, and must be a reasonable distance from, outdoor areas primarily used by children including, but not limited to, areas improved or designated for play or swimming; 
3.  Must be no more that 25% of the total outdoor area of the premises for which it is designated; 
4.  Must have a clearly marked perimeter; 
5.  Must be identified by a minimum of 1 conspicuous sign at the designated smoking area, and 1 conspicuous sign elsewhere on the premises; and 
6.  Must not overlap with any area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other provisions of this Code, State law, or Federal law. 
C.  Required lease terms: 
1.  Every lease, renewal of a lease, lease extension or other agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence shall, by June 1, 2010, include: 
(a)  A clause stating that smoking is prohibited in all multi-unit residence common areas and private outdoor spaces, except for those designated smoking areas identified by the landlord pursuant to Section 8.05.070.B. of this Chapter; and 
(b)  A clause stating that it is a material breach of the lease or other agreement, and grounds for termination of the lease or other agreement, to (i) violate any law regarding smoking while on the premises; or (ii) smoke in any multi-unit residence common area or private outdoor space in which smoking is prohibited by the landlord; and 
(c)  A clause stating that all lawful occupants of the multi-unit residence are express third-party beneficiaries of the above required clauses. 
2.  The California Apartment Association's form 34.0, revised January of 2007, meets the requirements for lease terms as outlined and is an option for use to comply with this section. 
3.  The lease or agreement terms required by subsection C.1. are hereby incorporated by force of law into any lease, renewal of a lease, lease extension or other agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence made on or after June 1, 2010. 
4.  A tenant who breaches the smoking regulations of a lease or knowingly allows another person to do so shall be liable to: (i) the landlord; and (ii) to any lawful occupant of the multi-unit residence who is exposed to secondhand smoke as a result of that breach. A landlord shall not be liable to any person for a tenant's breach of smoking regulations if the landlord has fully complied with subsection C.1.; however, landlords with knowledge of violations shall take reasonable steps to enforce the regulations, such as informing the tenant of landlord's knowledge of the violation, and the course of action to be taken if the violation is not corrected. Tenants may bring legal action to enforce this Chapter, but tenants do not have the authority to evict. 
5.  Failure to enforce any smoking regulation of a lease or agreement on 1 or more occasions shall not constitute a waiver of the lease or agreement provisions required by this ordinance and shall not prevent future enforcement of any such smoking regulation on another occasion. 
D.  Prohibitions and duties generally: 
1.  No person shall smoke or knowingly permit smoking in an area of the premises under his or her legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by law or a lease or agreement term, by this Chapter, this Code, or any other State or Federal law, provided, however, that this prohibition does not apply to a person who is already compelled to act under State or Federal law. 
2.  No person shall knowingly permit the presence or placement of ash trays, cans, or other receptacles within multi-unit residence common areas under his or her legal or de facto control in which smoking is prohibited by this Chapter, this Code, or any other State or Federal law, including, for example and without limitation, within a reasonable distance of any non-smoking area. 
3.  The person with legal or actual control of a multi-unit residence subject to this Chapter shall clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs in every multi-unit residence common area on the premises in which smoking is prohibited by this Chapter or by the person in control, except that signs are not required in private outdoor spaces of individual units. Signs must be sufficient to make areas where smoking is prohibited obvious to a reasonable person. 
4.  The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, nothing shall prevent a landlord from designating units as nonsmoking, or establishing smoke-free regulations more restrictive than otherwise provided for in this Chapter. 
E.  Disclosure by landlords: Every landlord shall maintain a list of designated nonsmoking units and a floor plan identifying the relative position of smoking and nonsmoking units. The floor plan also shall identify the location of any designated smoking areas. A copy of this list and floor plan, and a copy of procedures for addressing smoking-related complaints, shall accompany every new lease or other agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence entered into on or after June 1, 2010. If a copy of the list and floor plan is not supplied, the unit subject to the lease shall be a nonsmoking unit. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.080 - Smoking Optional Areas. 
A.  Except as otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
1.  Private, detached and attached single-family homes, except when used as a child care or health care facility; and 
2.  Tobacco stores, but only if the facility is freestanding, and no smoke from such stores enters an adjacent enclosed area where smoking is not permitted. 
B.  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent any business, employer, nonprofit entity, landlord or other person who controls any establishment or facility from declaring and enforcing a nonsmoking policy in the entire establishment or facility, or from posting signs as described by Section 8.05.100. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.090 - Duty of Person, Employer, Business, or Nonprofit Entity. 
A.  No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit the smoking of tobacco products in an area which is under the legal or actual control of the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law or lease, and the person, employer, business or nonprofit entity is not otherwise compelled to act under State or Federal law. 
B.  No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or intentionally place, cause to be placed, or permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example, ashtrays or ash cans, within an area which is under the legal or actual control of the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is prohibited. 
C.  No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall dispose of smoking waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance requirement. Littering on public or private property, including but not limited to littering of tobacco products, cigarette butts, or cigars, is expressly prohibited by California Penal Code 374.4. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.100 - Posting Requirements. 
A.  The person, employer, business or non-profit entity with legal or actual control of a building subject to this Chapter shall clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs at the entrances of every building, as well as at every other place where smoking is prohibited under this Chapter. "No Smoking" signs will have letters of no less than 1 inch in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a bar). 
B.  Multi-unit residence posting requirements shall be made pursuant to Section 8.05.070.D.3. of this Chapter. 
C.  The absence of "No Smoking" signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
D.  Every tobacco store and every vendor of tobacco products shall visibly post Business and Professions Code Section 22952 signage that expressly references Penal Code Section 308 at the entrance of any premises subject to regulation under Sections 8.05.050 and 8.05.060 of this Chapter; Section 8.06.050 of the Martinez Municipal Code; and applicable state and/or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.110 - Enforcement. 
A.  The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
B.  Notice of this Chapter will be provided to all applicants for a business license or renewal thereof. However, lack of such notice shall be no defense to a violation of this Chapter. 
C.  Any business, employer, landlord, or nonprofit entity of any establishment controlled by this Chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this Chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
D.  Enforcement of sections 8.05.050 and 8.05.060 of this Chapter shall be implemented by the City Manager or his/her designee, and may be enforced by any peace officer or code enforcement official. Prohibition of smoking in multi-unit residence common areas and private outdoor spaces shall be enforced by the landlord and/or tenant pursuant to Section 8.05.070 C(4). 
E.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under sections 8.05.050 and 8.05.060 of this Chapter may initiate enforcement with the City Manager or his/her designee. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.120 - Violations and Penalties. 
A.  The remedies provided by this Chapter are not intended to preclude any other remedy available at law or inequity. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any property subject to regulation under this Chapter to refuse to comply with any of its provisions, or to permit any employee or patron to violate this Chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited under this Chapter. 
D.  Any person, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or tobacco retailer who violates any provision of sections 8.05.050 and 8.05.060 of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
1.  A fine, not exceeding $100.00 and/or 5 days of community service, for the first violation. 
2.  A fine, not exceeding $200.00 and/or 10 days of community service, for a second violation of this section within 1 year. 
3.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or 15 days of community service, for a third violation or any subsequent violation of this section within one year. 
E.  Violations of Section 8.05.070 of this Chapter shall be enforced by the Landlord and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.130 - Non-retaliation. 
No person, employer, business, landlord or nonprofit entity shall discharge or in any manner retaliate against any person, tenant, or employee because such individual exercises any right to a smoke free environment afforded by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.140 - Public Education. 
A.  The City Manager or his/her designee will engage in a continuing educational program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this Chapter, and help guide businesses, employers, landlords, and nonprofit entities with compliance. However, lack of such education shall be no defense to a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  The City Manager shall leave the responsibility of conducting a public education campaign regarding the health consequences of smoking to other governmental and health agencies equipped with the needed expertise to conduct such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.150 - Governmental Agency Cooperation. 
The City Manager or his/her designee may annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the City to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this section. This includes urging all Federal, State, County and School District agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with current health findings regarding environmental tobacco smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.160 - Secondhand Smoke—Declaration of Nuisance. 
Secondhand smoke constitutes a nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, a private citizen may bring a legal action to abate secondhand smoke as a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
8.05.170 - Other Applicable Laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws 
(Ord. No. 1352 C.S., § 2, 5-6-2009)  
CHAPTER 8.06 - RESTRICTING THE ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS 
 
8.06.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the welfare of minors by discouraging the commercial exploitation of potential underage tobacco users and by discouraging actions that promote the unlawful sale of tobacco products to minors as well as the unlawful purchase or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Advertising display sign" means a sign, billboard, signboard, poster, placard, free-standing sign, pennant, banner, graphic display, mural, or similar device that is used to advertise or promote a product. It includes a sign which is temporary or permanent, placed on or affixed to the ground, sidewalk, a pole or post, fence, or a building, or displayed in the window or door of a commercial establishment. 
B.  "City Manager" means the City Manager or his/her designee. 
C.  "Mobile billboard" means an advertising display sign which is placed on or affixed to a vehicle if the vehicle is parked within a public right-of-way or on private property and is used primarily to advertise a product. 
D.  "Offering for sale" means that tobacco products are actually sold and or displayed in the retail establishment. 
E.  "Promotion" means a display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic, artwork, colors, scenes, or designs that are a recognized image of a particular product brand that calls the public's attention to the product brand. 
F.  "Publicly visible location" means an outdoor location that is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, or a location inside a commercial establishment that is in or adjacent to a window or doorway and is visible from any street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. To be considered "publicly visible," an inside location must be within one foot of a window or doorway. 
G.  "Tobacco product" means a substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, and smokeless tobacco. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.040 - Administration. 
This Chapter shall be administered by the City Manager. The City Manager may develop guidelines to ensure implementation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.050 - Restrictions on the Advertising of Tobacco Products. 
Restriction. No person shall place or maintain, or cause or allow to be placed or maintained, any advertising or promotion of tobacco products on any advertising display sign in a publicly visible location within 1,600 feet of the perimeter of: a public or private elementary, middle or secondary school; or a public playground or playground area in a public park (e.g. a public park with equipment such as swings and seesaws, baseball diamonds or basketball courts). 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.060 - Exceptions. 
Section 8.06.050 does not apply to advertising or promotion for tobacco products which are: 
A.  Located inside a commercial establishment, unless the advertising display sign or promotion is attached to, affixed to, leaning against, or otherwise in contact with any window or door in such a manner that it is visible from a street, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare; 
B.  On vehicles, other than mobile billboards; 
C.  On any sign located inside or immediately outside a commercial establishment if the sign provides notice that the establishment sells tobacco, so long as the sign does not promote any brand of tobacco product; or 
D.  On tobacco product packaging. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.070 - Sale and Distribution of Tobacco—Related Promotional Items Prohibited. 
A.  No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer of tobacco products may market, license, distribute, sell, or cause to be marketed, licensed, distributed or sold, any items (other than tobacco products) or service to a minor, which bears the brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), logo, symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable color or patterns of colors, or any other indicia or product identification identical with, or similar to, or identifiable with, those used for any brand of tobacco product. 
B.  No person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing tobacco products for commercial purposes shall, in the course of such business, distribute, or direct, authorize or permit any agent or employee to distribute any of the following on a public street or sidewalk, in a public park or playground, or on any other public ground or in a public building: (1) a cigarette or other tobacco product; or (2) a coupon, certificate, or other written material which may be redeemed for tobacco products without charge. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.080 - Self-Service Displays Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a person to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any packaged tobacco product by means of a self-service display, rack, counter top or shelf that allows a self-service customer access to a packaged tobacco product. All packaged tobacco products shall be offered for sale exclusively by means of seller assistance. Packaged tobacco products shall be located exclusively in a locked case, located behind counters out of reach from customers, or in a similar location that is inaccessible to customers, requiring seller assistance for the customer to obtain access to the packaged tobacco products. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.090 - Violations. 
A.  City Manager Review. A private citizen or a City officer or employee may submit a written complaint to the City Manager concerning any advertising or promotion prohibited by this article. The City Manager will review and, if determined to be appropriate, act upon the complaint in a timely manner. The City Manager may serve written notice requiring correction of any violations of this article upon the person responsible for the business or for the advertising display sign or promotion or self-service display prohibited by this article. Any notice issued shall specify a date by which the violation must be corrected. The notice shall be served by (1) personal service or by (2) certified and first class mail. 
B.  Correction. The person responsible shall correct the violation within the time specified in the notice. 
C.  Each Display and Each Day a Separate Offense. Each separate display of tobacco advertising or promotion prohibited by this article is considered a separate violation. Each day a violation continues is considered a separate violation. 
D.  Each Business Location a Separate Entity. For purposes of determining liability, each individual franchise or business entity is deemed a separate entity. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.100 - Additional Remedies—Disclaimers. 
A.  Intent as to Additional Legal Restrictions and Remedies. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to alter the obligations or restrictions that apply to any person under any other law governing signs, billboards, tobacco advertising or any other matter covered by this Chapter. The remedies set forth in this article are not exclusive. If any action prohibited by this Chapter is also unlawful under any other law, the penalties and remedies under other laws may be pursued in addition to those provided in this Chapter. 
B.  Disclaimers. By prohibiting the advertising or promotion of tobacco products in outdoor or publicly visible locations, prohibiting the distribution of tobacco-related promotional items and self-service displays of tobacco products, the City is only promoting the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing upon its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.110 - License Requirement Generally. 
A.  License Required. It is unlawful for a person or retailer who, within the last 12 months, has been determined to be in violation of a provision of this Chapter, or applicable state or federal law governing the sale and distribution of tobacco to sell or offer for sale any tobacco products within the city without first obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license from the city. 
It is unlawful for a person or retailer who is required to have a tobacco retailer's license to sell or offer for sale any tobacco products if the license has been suspended under Section 8.05.170. 
A tobacco retailer's license shall be obtained from the City Manager. 
B.  Term of License—Obligation to Maintain. A license is valid from three years, and a person or retailer subject to this license requirement must maintain the license during the three-year period. If there are no further violations of any laws regulating the sale or distribution of tobacco in that three-year period, a tobacco retailer's license will no longer be required. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.120 - License Application Procedure. 
An application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of the person or retailer, who, following a finding of violation as specified in Section 8.06.090, proposes to conduct retail tobacco sales on the business premises. The application shall be signed by the person or retailer or its authorized agent. The application shall be submitted on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The names, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  The business name, address, and telephone number where tobacco is sold; and 
C.  Such other information as the City Manager determines is reasonably necessary for implementation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.130 - Issuance of License. 
Upon receipt of a completed application for a tobacco retailer's license, including payment of the license fees, the City Manager will issue a license. A license may not be issues if there are continuing, uncorrected violations. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.140 - Fee for License. 
The fee for a tobacco retailer's license shall reflect the actual cost of processing the license, including inspection of the tobacco retailer's business premises and implementation of the licensing program, as established by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall not exceed $500 annually. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.150 - Display of License. 
The license must be prominently displayed at the location where tobacco retail sales are conducted. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.160 - License Nontransferable. 
The tobacco retailer's license is nontransferable. If there is a change in location, a new tobacco retail license will be issued for the new address upon receipt of an application for change of location. The new license will retain the same expiration dates as the previous one. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.170 - Suspension of License. 
A.  Suspension of License. In order to discourage violations of law, a tobacco retailer's license may be suspended if the City Manager finds that the licensee of his or her employee has violated any law regulating the sale or distribution of tobacco. See Section 8.05.100 A above). The City Manager may suspend the license only after giving the licensee notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter. The City Manager shall put his or her findings in writing. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.) 
B.  Time Period of Suspension. 
1.  The first time that the City Manager finds a violation occurred, the license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for up to 60 days. 
2.  After the second time that the City Manager finds a violation occurred within a 12-month period, the license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for up to 120 days. 
3.  After the third and each subsequent time that the City Manager finds a violation occurred within a 12-month period, the license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for up to one year. 
C.  Appeal of Suspension. A decision of the City Manager to suspend a tobacco retailer's license may be appealed to the City Council. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
8.06.180 - Administrative Fine. 
A.  Imposition of Fine—Amounts. If the City Manager finds a person or retailer is selling or offering tobacco products for sale without a valid tobacco retailer's license (or has a suspended license), that person or retailer may be subject to an administrative fine, as permitted under Government Code Section 53069.4. A fine may be imposed only after the City Manager has given notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
The fine amount is: 
1.  Up to a maximum $100.00 for a first violation; 
2.  Up to a maximum $200.00 for a second violation within 1 year; 
3.  Up to a maximum $500.00 for the third and subsequent violations within 1 year. 
Each day that tobacco products are offered for sale without a license by a tobacco retailer required to have a license shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  Fine Procedures. Notice of the fine shall be served on the tobacco retailer or person who is the owner of the establishment by certified and first class mail. The notice shall contain an advisement of the right to request a hearing by the City Council contesting the imposition of the fine. The hearing must be requested within 10 days of the date of the notice of the fine. 
C.  Appeals. A fine may be appealed to the City Council. A person contesting the decision of the Council may seek court review under Government Code Section 53069.4(b). 
D.  Failure to Pay Fine. Any outstanding fines must be paid before the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. 
(Ord. 1280 C.S. § 2 (part), 2001.)  
CHAPTER 8.08 - TREES AND SHRUBS—PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE 
 
8.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of planting, maintenance and removal of street trees within the City, and for the planting of street trees throughout the City, to allow the property owner maximum flexibility in the choice and placement of street trees in relation to private landscaping. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.020 - Master Street Tree Planting Plan. 
The Public Works Department (Parks Division) shall maintain a master street tree planting plan for all City streets. The plan shall provide a list of acceptable tree species. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1069 C.S. § I (part), 1986: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Street Tree" means any tree located in a City street right of way between the edge of pavement and the adjacent property line. 
B.  "Maintenance" means the regular pruning, fertilization, irrigation and normal garden management practices necessary for plant growth. 
C.  "Director" means City Engineer and/or Director of Public Works. 
D.  "Street Tree Permit" means a written or printed authorization issued by the City Parks Division. 
E.  "Certified Arborist" means someone who has successfully completed the requirements set by the Arborist Certification Board of the International Society of Arboriculture. 
F.  "Pruning Standards" means standards of pruning for certified arborists. The standards include: I. Pruning Techniques, A through J and II. Types of Pruning—Mature Trees, A. Crown Cleaning B. Crown Thinning C. Crown Reduction D. Crown Restoration, and III. Size of Pruning Cuts. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.040 - Planting Permit. 
No person shall set out or plant any street tree without first obtaining a planting permit from the Public Works Department (Parks Division). The Parks Division shall review the type, size and location of street trees. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1069 C.S. § I (part), 1986: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.050 - Street Tree Planting Standards. 
A.  The street tree shall be planted normally at 40 foot intervals. 
B.  The street tree trunk at maturity shall not be within 1 ½ feet of public sidewalk, except in existing parkway areas as approved by the Parks Division. 
C.  The street tree roots shall not be within 10 feet of any sewer or water line, or gas line. 
D.  The street tree trunk at maturity shall not be within 5 feet of a driveway, street corner, fire hydrant, or utility pole. 
E.  A newly planted street tree shall be of the following minimum size: a diameter of 1 inch measured 4 feet, 6 inches above the ground and which has a maximum height of 8 feet or 15 gallon size. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.070 - Street Tree Removal. 
A street tree not otherwise regulated may be removed with a permit, provided the tree is replaced in compliance with all provisions of this Section. All street trees removed shall be at the expense of the adjacent property owner. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1052 C.S. § II (part), 1985: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.080 - Street Tree Installation Obligation. 
All street trees installed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.090 - Street Tree Maintenance Obligation. 
A.  Maintenance Duties. Property owners or persons in possession of street trees shall be responsible for all street tree maintenance. All maintenance shall conform to International Society of Arboriculture or National Arborist Association Standards. 
B.  Scope of Duty. It shall be a public nuisance for property owners or persons in possession of street trees to permit branches of street trees to restrict access or impede the public use of adjacent sidewalks or streets, or prevent access of City street sweepers to clean the street. 
In the event of such public nuisance, the responsible person shall receive a written notice of such nuisance directing that the tree shall be pruned appropriately within 10 days from receipt of notice. The City at its option may prune the tree, in the event the responsible person has not complied with the notice of public nuisance, at the cost of the responsible person. 
C.  Sidewalk Damage. The property owner or person in possession of street trees responsible for maintenance of street trees shall also be responsible for sidewalk damage caused by street trees and shall be required to repair the sidewalk pursuant to Streets and Highways Code Sections 5601, et seq. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978.)  
8.08.091 - Abuse or Mutilation of Trees. 
A.  Topping of Trees. This practice will only be permitted when a property owner has a copy of a Certified Arborist report attached to an approval permit issued by the Parks Division. 
B.  No person may: 
1.  Abuse, mutilate or destroy street trees. 
2.  Attach or place a rope or twine (other than a rope or twine typically used to support a young or broken tree) sign, poster, handbill, paint or other substance, structure or thing to or on a street tree. 
3.  Allow a gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful come in contact with a street tree. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.100 - Moving Buildings. 
No person, firm or corporation shall move any building, house, or portion thereof without notifying the Director of Public Services at least 3 days in advance of such moving. The notice shall designate the route to be followed and all other details, pertinent to such work. The Director of Public Services shall have the authority to change such route and designate on which, in his opinion, will cause less damage to trees, shrubs or plants owned by the City along and adjacent to the route. If necessary to protect such trees, shrubs or plants, the Director of Public Services may require that the house, building or portions thereof be cut into segments small enough to fit the available width between such trees, shrubs or plants along the designated route. As a condition to approving any route for the moving of any building, house or portion thereof, the Director of Public Services may require the person, firm or corporation doing such work to enter into an agreement to pay all costs incurred for any labor, equipment or materials used to protect or preserve such trees, shrubs or plants either before or after such moving. 
(Ord. 1052 C.S. § III (part), 1985: Ord. 887 C.S. § I (part), 1978: prior code § 4409.)  
8.08.101 - Administration. 
The City Engineer/Public Works Director shall plan, administer, control and regulate the street tree programs at the City in accordance with this Chapter. The Director shall develop policies and procedures to implement this Chapter. The policies and procedures shall include an annual tree maintenance work plan and an inventory that defines community tree needs. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.102 - Authority of City Engineer/Public Works Director. 
The City Engineer/Public Works Director has the authority to maintain and care for street trees. The Director shall develop a program to encourage planting of approved street trees throughout the City. The Director has the authority to require that street trees be planted on all residential and commercial streets. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.103 - Open Ground For Trees. 
No person may place or maintain a stone, cement or other substance so that it impedes the full access of water or air to a street tree. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.104 - Penalty for Violation. 
A.  A person who violates this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  A person guilty of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than 6 months. 
C.  A person is guilty of a second offense for a violation of this Chapter with respect to each separate tree. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.105 - Civil Sanction. 
In addition to paying the penalties for violation of this Chapter, a person who removes or destroys a tree in violation of this Chapter shall at the option of the City either: 
A.  Replace the tree with one of a similar kind and size; or 
B.  Compensate the City for the value of the tree(s). The value of the tree shall be based upon the opinion of an arborist. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.106 - Public Utilities. 
When a tree interferes with and interrupts service of a public utility company providing gas, water, electricity, telephone, telegraph, or cable service within the City, the City may, without first obtaining a permit trim or remove branches of trees to the extent necessary to restore service. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.08.107 - Permit Decision. 
The City Engineer/Public Works Director or his/her designee shall grant or deny the permits in accordance with this Chapter. See Section 8.12.030 C. 
(Ord. 1301 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
CHAPTER 8.12 - TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY—PRESERVATION, PROTECTION AND REMOVAL 
 
8.12.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This Chapter governs preservation of certain protected trees in the City of Martinez. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for protection of trees on private property by controlling tree removal while allowing for reasonable enjoyment of private property rights and property development for the following reasons: 
1.  The City finds it necessary to preserve trees on private property in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve scenic beauty. 
2.  Trees provide soil stability, improve drainage conditions, provide habitat for wildlife and provide aesthetic beauty and screening for privacy. 
3.  Trees are a vital part of a visually pleasing, healthy environment for the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.020 - Permit Required. 
A.  No person shall trench, grade or fill within the dripline of any protected tree (as defined below) or cut down, destroy, trim by topping or remove any protected tree on private property within the City without a tree permit, except as provided for in Section 8.12.050. 
A protected tree is any one of the following: 
1.  On all properties within the City: 
a.  All oak trees and indigenous trees measuring 20 inches or larger in circumference (approximately 6.5 inches in diameter), measured 4 ½ feet from ground level. Oak trees include but are not limited to: Quercus agrifolia (California or Coast Live Oak), Quercus douglasi (Blue Oak), Quercus kelloggii (California Black Oak) or Quercus lobata (Valley Oak). Indigenous trees include but are not limited to: Sequoia Sempervirens (Coast Redwood), Alnus Rhombifolia (White Alder), Alnus Oregona (Red Alder), Acer Macrophyllum (Bigleaf Maple), Aesculus Californica (California Buckeye), Arbutus Menziesii (Madrone), Umbellularia Californica (California Bay or Laurel), Juglans Hindsii (California Black Walnut), Platanus Racemosa (California Sycamore), or Sambucus Calliarpa (Coast Red Elderberry). 
b.  Any tree shown to be preserved on an approved tentative map or development plan or required to be retained as a condition of approval. 
c.  Any tree required to be planted as a replacement for an unlawfully removed tree. 
2.  On any of the properties specified in Subsection 3 below: 
a.  Any tree measuring 20 inches or larger in circumference (approximately 6.5 inches diameter), measured 4 ½ feet from ground level including the oak trees listed above); 
b.  Any multi-stemmed tree with the sum of the circumferences measuring 40 inches or larger, measured 4 ½ feet from ground level; 
c.  and any significant grouping of trees, including groves of four or more trees. 
3.  Specified properties referred to in Subsection 2 above includes: 
a.  Any developed property within any commercial, professional office or industrial district. 
b.  Any undeveloped property within any district. 
c.  Any area designated on the General Plan for recreational purposes or open space. 
d.  Any area designated in the General Plan Open Space element as visually significant riparian or skyline vegetation and where the tree is adjacent to or part of a riparian, foothill woodland or oak savanna area, or cultivated orchard (within the Open space element) designated. Riparian trees include but are not limited to those listed as indigenous trees in subsection A.1.a. above. 
B.  Any person proposing to trench, grade or fill within the dripline of any protected tree or cut down, destroy, trim by topping or remove any protected tree shall apply to the City of Martinez Community Development Department for a tree permit, not less than ten days prior to the proposed tree removal or tree alterations. 
C.  The application shall include the following information: 
1.  The number, size (including height and diameter measured 4 ½ feet above ground), species, location, dripline and condition of each tree proposed to be altered or removed; 
2.  The reason(s) for alteration or removal; 
3.  A plot plan showing the approximate location of all trees on the site, including those proposed to remain; 
4.  Proposed method of tree alteration or removal; 
5.  Information indicating the effect of tree alteration or removal on soil stability and erosion if located on a steep slope or near any creek; 
6.  The signature of the property owner or if the permit is requested by someone other than the owner, a written authorization from the owner. 
7.  Additional information as may be required by the City upon review of the above information. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.030 - Review of Permit Application. 
A.  Prior to making a decision, a representative of the Community Development Department shall make a site inspection and shall review the application using the criteria below. 
B.  If the reasons for alteration or removal relate to the health of the tree or if grading, trenching or filling is proposed under the dripline of an existing tree and the Community Development Department determines that more technical expertise is necessary to make the decision, a report prepared by an arborist may be required, to be paid for by the applicant. 
C.  In granting or denying the tree permit the following factors shall be considered: 
1.  General. 
a.  The proximity and number of other trees in the vicinity; 
b.  The relationship of the subject property to open space or open space plans and policies. 
2.  Approval. 
a.  The arborist report indicates that the tree is in poor health and cannot be saved; 
b.  The tree is a public nuisance and is causing damage to public utilities or streets and sidewalks that cannot be mitigated by some other means (such as root barriers etc.); 
c.  The tree is in danger of falling and cannot be saved by some other means (such as pruning); 
d.  The tree is damaging existing private improvements on the lot such as a building foundation, walls, patios, decks, roofs, retaining walls, etc.; 
e.  The tree is a species known to be highly combustible and is determined to be a fire hazard; 
f.  The proposed tree species or the form of the tree does not merit saving (i.e. a tree stunted in growth, poorly formed, etc.); 
g.  Reasonable development of the property would require the alteration or removal of the tree and this development could not be reasonably accommodated on another area of the lot; 
3.  Denial. 
a.  The applicant seeks permission for the alteration or removal of a healthy tree that can be avoided by reasonable redesign of the site plan prior to project approval (for non-discretionary permits); 
b.  It is reasonably likely that alteration or removal of the tree will cause problems with drainage, erosion control, land stability, windscreen, visual screening, and/or privacy and said problems cannot be mitigated as part of the proposed removal of the tree. 
c.  The tree to be removed is a member of a group of trees in which each tree is dependent upon the others for survival. 
d.  The value of the tree to the neighborhood in terms of visual effect, wind screening, privacy and neighboring vegetation is greater than the hardship to the owner. 
e.  If the permit involves trenching or grading and there are other reasonable alternatives including an alternate route, use of retaining walls, use of pier and grade beam foundations and/or relocating site improvements. 
C.  Permit Decision: 
1.  The Community Development Director or his/her designee shall grant or deny tree permits in accordance with this Chapter. If a permit is granted, the Director may attach conditions to insure compliance with this Chapter. These conditions may include a requirement to replace any or all trees on a comparable ratio of either size or quantity. Permits shall be valid for a period of 90 days and may be renewed by the Director upon request by the applicant. 
2.  If a permit is denied, the Director shall state the reason for denial. 
3.  Notice of decision shall be mailed to the applicant. 
D.  Appeals: 
1.  Any person may appeal the Director's decision within ten days of the Director's decision as outlined in Section 22.06.050 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
2.  Appeals shall be made in writing and state the specific reasons why the decision does not meet the criteria for granting or denial of a permit as stated in this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.040 - Exceptions. 
A tree permit is not required for the following situations: 
A.  Any tree whose condition creates a hazardous situation which requires immediate action as determined by the Community Development Director, Director of Leisure and Community Services, Police Department or the Fire District. 
B.  Any tree whose removal was specifically approved as a part of an approved development plan, subdivision or other discretionary project. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.050 - Property Proposed for Development. 
A.  On any property proposed for development approval, tree alterations or removal shall be considered as a part of the project application. 
B.  All trees proposed to be removed, altered or otherwise affected by construction shall be clearly indicated on all grading and development plans. A tree survey shall be required as a part of the project application indicating the number, size, species and location of the dripline of all trees on the property. This survey shall be overlaid on the proposed grading and development plans. The plan shall include a tabulation of all trees proposed for removal. 
C.  The granting or denial of a tree removal program which is a part of a development proposal covered by this section shall be governed by Sections 8.12.030(B). A separate tree removal permit shall not be required. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.060 - Tree Protection. 
A.  Tree Protection Required 
On all properties where trees are required to be saved during the course of development, the developer shall follow the following tree preservation standards: 
1.  Prior to the start of any clearing, stockpiling, trenching, grading, compaction, paving or change in ground elevation on a site with trees to be preserved, the applicant shall install fencing at the drip line or other area as determined by an arborist report of all trees adjacent to or in the area to be altered. Prior to grading or issuance of any permits the fences shall be inspected and the location thereof approved by City staff. 
2.  No grading, compaction, stockpiling, trenching, paving or change in ground elevation shall be permitted within the drip line unless indicated on the grading plans approved by the City and addressed in a report prepared by a licensed arborist. If grading or construction is approved within the dripline, the arborist may be required to be present during grading operations. The arborist shall have the authority to require protective measures to protect the roots and to stop construction if necessary to protect the trees. Upon completion of grading and construction, the arborist shall prepare a report outlining further methods required for tree protection if any are required. 
3.  No parking or storing vehicles, equipment, machinery or construction materials, construction trailers and no dumping of oils or chemicals shall be permitted within the drip line of any tree to be saved. 
B.  Deposit. 
Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit for a property where trees are required to be saved, the owner or developer shall deposit cash or other acceptable security with the Community Development Department on a per tree basis in an amount determined by City Council resolution. 
The City shall hold the deposit for a two year period to guarantee the health of the trees for a two year period upon completion of construction. In addition, the applicant or developer shall be required to enter into a tree maintenance agreement secured by said deposit/bond by which they shall agree to maintain said trees in a living and viable condition throughout the term of the agreement. This agreement may be transferred to any new owner of the property for the remaining length of the agreement. 
C.  Replacement. 
The property owner or developer shall notify the Community Development Department of any damage that occurs to any tree during the construction process. The owner or developer shall repair any damage as determined by an arborist. 
Any tree not approved for destruction or removal that dies or is significantly damaged as a result of construction or grading shall be replaced with a tree or trees of equivalent size and of a species approved by the Community Development Department. If it is not possible or feasible to replace the tree, the Community Development Director may accept the equivalent monetary value as determined by the City to be used for other related improvements such as replacement or addition of street trees in the area. 
D.  Stop Work. 
If any tree is damaged or destroyed during the course of construction, the City may stop further work on the project until measures to replace the tree or mitigate the damage have occurred. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.070 - Violation 
A.  Misdemeanor. 
1.  Violation of any Section of this Chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as such. 
2.  Each tree damaged or removed in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Joint and several liability. 
1.  If two or more persons are responsible for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the penalties and remedies set forth herein. In this connection, the person(s) who actually performs the removal, damage or cutting of a tree in violation of this Chapter shall be liable for the penalties, punishment and remedies specified in 8.12.060(A) and (C), irrespective of whether or not such conduct was authorized, directed or permitted by any other person. 
C.  Restitution/Mitigation. 
1.  In addition to and not in lieu of the criminal penalties set forth in subsection A above, any person who damages or removes a tree or causes the damage or removal of a tree in violation of this Chapter shall be civilly liable to the City for (i) providing and planting a replacement tree of value equal to the tree so damaged or removed or (ii) a payment to the City of a monetary penalty equal to such value. Said value shall be determined by City council resolution. 
2.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil action brought by the City Attorney to collect the replacement fees as listed above. 
3.  Amounts recovered under this section shall be deposited into a fund which shall be used exclusively for the planting of trees in public places in the City and for tree related educational projects or programs. 
D.  Violation/City approvals. 
1.  For as long as Section 8.12.060(C)(1) has not been complied with, the owner, owner's agent, or occupant of any property on which a violation of the provisions of this Chapter was committed shall be precluded from applying for any approval or permit issued by the City for the development or further improvement of such property. Prohibited approvals or permits shall include, but not be limited to, conditional use permits, tentative maps, variances, design review approvals, building or demolition permits or grading permits. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any approval or permit which is needed or required to maintain the health or safety of those occupying existing improvements on the property. 
2.  Before criminal or civil proceedings may be initiated against the suspected violator, or before the City may institute the application preclusion specified in subsection D(1), above, a hearing shall be scheduled with the zoning administrator, on the alleged violation, giving the property owner notice thereof and a summary of the facts which indicated a violation has occurred. Said notice and hearing shall comply with any other procedural due process requirements that are determined to be applicable. Following the hearing at which the owner or any other interested party may present testimony and evidence, the zoning administrator shall determine whether a violation has occurred on the property. Notice of a violation and the restriction of development of the property shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to implement the provisions of this section. If no violation of this Chapter is determined to have occurred or have been perpetrated by the persons notified of said proceedings, then no criminal or civil proceedings may be initiated against said persons under Section 8.12.060, and the City may not apply the application preclusion described in Section 8.12.060(D)(1), above. 
E.  Liability for Costs. 
1.  Any person criminally or civilly liable hereunder shall further be liable for all costs incurred by the City in connection with the investigation and enforcement of the violation. 
(Ord. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
8.12.080 - Definitions 
As used in this chapter only, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Arborist: 1) a Certified Arborist as currently listed by the International Society of Arboriculture; or 2) a Consulting Arborist as currently listed as a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists. 
B.  Arborist Report: The report of a Certified or Consulting Arborist on (1) the possible impact of development on trees or existing tree condition; (2) the impact of any alteration; and/or (3) restorative or other remedial action that might be feasible to address tree alterations. 
C.  Development: Any changes to private property which requires the issuance of a permit from the City which permit is subject the requirements of Chapters 15 (Buildings and Construction), 21 (Subdivision) and/or 22 (Zoning). 
D.  Development Application: An application for development requiring either ministerial or discretionary approvals including Design Review, Use Permits, Subdivisions, Rezoning applications, building and/or grading permits. 
E.  Person: Person means any individual, agency, corporation, entity or organization. 
F.  Routine Pruning: The removal of dead or dying, diseased, weak or objectionable branches of a tree in a scientific manner. 
G.  Topping: The removal of the upper 25% or more of a tree's trunk(s) or primary leader. 
H.  Tree: A large woody perennial plant with one or more trunks, branches and leaves, not including shrubs shaped to tree forms. 
I.  Tree Removal: The destruction of any tree by cutting, regrading, girdling, interfering with water supply, applying chemicals, or by other means. 
J.  Undeveloped Property: 
1.  A parcel of private land which is vacant or a developed parcel which has remaining development potential; 
2.  A parcel of land which can be further divided in accordance with zoning regulations of the City; 
3.  A parcel of land on which the structures are proposed to be demolished or relocated. 
(Ord. No. 1209 C.S. § I, 1993)  
CHAPTER 8.13 - VIEW AND SUNLIGHT PRESERVATION 
 
8.13.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this Chapter are to: 
A.  Establish a person's right to preserve or restore the view or sunlight which existed at the time of that person's purchase or initial occupation of the property (or at the time which is 30 years prior to the person's claiming said right, whichever is later) from unreasonable obstruction by the growth of a tree; and 
B.  Establish a process by which one may seek restoration of such view or sunlight when unreasonably obstructed by the growth of a tree. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.)  
8.13.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the meaning and construction of words and phrases hereinafter set forth shall apply: 
A.  "Arbitrator" means a neutral person who conducts a process similar to a trial, and who hears testimony, considers evidence, and makes a binding decision for the disputing parties; 
B.  "Binding arbitration" means the legal procedure set forth in the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure section 1280 et seq. The decision which results from "binding arbitration" shall be final and not subject to appeal, review or attack, except as provided in said sections of the Code of Civil Procedure; 
C.  "Claimant" means a property owner (or legal occupant with written permission of the property owner) who alleges that trees located on the property of another person are causing unreasonable obstruction of his or her pre-existing views or sunlight; 
D.  "Crown reduction" means minimal cut back of branch crown. It should not destroy the visual proportions of the tree, adversely affect the tree's growth pattern or health, or otherwise constitute a detriment to the tree(s) in question; 
E.  "Mediator" means a neutral, objective, professionally trained third person who assists people in finding a mutually satisfactory solution to a problem; 
F.  "Pre-existing view or sunlight" means the view or sunlight (1) that existed at the time the property was first purchased by the current property owner, (2) that existed at the time the property was first lawfully possessed by the current occupant or (3) that existed any time during the year 30 years prior to the date upon which the property owner or occupier ("claimant") first makes his/her claim that he/she is entitled to the view and/or sunlight rights established herein, whichever is later (the "view/sunlight right establishment date"); 
G.  "Primary living areas" are those portions of a residence from which observed most often by the occupants relative to other portions of the residence. Primary living areas include decks or other permanent, human-made structures (1) immediately adjacent to the main residence and (2) occupied or regularly used by the occupants of the main residence. The determination of primarily living areas is made on a case-by-case basis; 
H.  "Protected tree" is a tree which has been so designated in accordance with Section 8.12.020 of the Martinez Municipal code; 
I.  "Replacement planting" means tree removal accompanied by replacement planting of appropriate plant materials to restore, to the extent feasible, the maximum level of benefits lost due to tree removal; 
J.  "Restorative action" means a task, obligation or undertaking required to resolve a tree dispute; 
K.  "Stand thinning" means the removal of a small percentage of the total number of trees from a grove of trees without any replacement planting; 
L.  "Thinning" means the selective removal of entire branches from a tree to improve visibility through the tree or improve the tree's structural condition; 
M.  "Topping" means elimination of the upper portion of a tree's trunk or main leader. Topping as a restorative action should be used with caution. Topping can have deleterious effects on a tree's health, appearance and cost of maintenance. Tree removal, with replacement plantings, may be a preferable alternative; 
N.  "Tree" means a woody plant with the potential to obstruct a view or sunlight, including but not limited to a tree, shrub, hedge, and bush; 
O.  "Tree owner" means a person owning real property upon whose land is located a tree alleged by a claimant to cause an unreasonable obstruction; 
P.  "Tree removal" means the elimination of a tree from its present location. While normally considered a drastic measure, tree removal may be the preferred solution in many circumstances; 
Q.  "Trimming" means the selective removal of portions of branches from a tree so as to alter the tree's shape or appearance. Trimming is recommended when minor unreasonable obstruction has occurred, provided that ongoing maintenance is guaranteed; 
R.  "Unreasonable obstruction" means the obstruction of a view or sunlight, or both, which is determined to be unreasonable applying the criteria set forth in Section 8.13.040. An unreasonable obstruction shall be further defined as an impairment, diminution, obscuring, interference and/or blocking of a view from or sunlight to a primary living area which, when analyzed using the criteria set forth in Section 8.13.040, is determined to (1) materially and adversely affect said views and/or sunlight and (2) so affect views and/or sunlight which have a character or quality which outweighs the benefits derived by the tree(s) which are causing the obstruction; 
S.  "View" means a scene from the primary living area of a residence. The term "view" includes both upslope and downslope scenes, but is generally medium or long range in nature, as opposed to short range. View includes but is not limited to distinctive geologic features, hillside terrains, wooded canyons, ridges, and bodies of water; 
T.  "Windowing" is a form of thinning by which openings or "windows" are created to restore a view or sunlight. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.) 
(Ord. No. 1404 C.S. , § 3, 5-17-2017)  
8.13.021 - Rights Established. 
A.  Persons shall have the right to preserve and seek restoration of pre-existing views and/or sunlight which existed on or after the "view/sunlight right establishment date," when such views or sunlight are from the primary living area and have subsequently been unreasonably obstructed by the growth of trees. 
B.  In order to establish such rights pursuant to this Chapter, the person (claimant) must follow the process established in this Chapter. In addition to the above rights, private parties have the right to seek remedial action for imminent danger caused by trees. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.)  
8.13.030 - Process for Resolution of Claims. 
To establish view and sunlight rights recognized and established herein, the claimant must follow the process established by this Chapter. First, the claimant must complete the "initial discussion" process described below. Second, if that process does not yield a result mutually satisfactory to the claimant and the tree owner, then the claimant must seek to mediate his/her view/sunlight claim in accordance with this chapter. If the tree owner refuses to mediate or if the mediation is unsuccessful in resolving their differences, then the claimant must attempt to initiate arbitration as set forth hereinafter. If arbitration is not accepted by the tree owner, and the initial discussion and mediation have proved unsuccessful in resolving the view/sunlight claim, the claimant may then initiate litigation to determine his/her view/sunlight claim rights. Except in instances regarding city owned property, no city action or decisions are required to establish or exercise a claimant's view/sunlight rights. 
A.  Initial Discussion. A claimant who believes that tree growth, maintenance or location on another person's property diminishes the beneficial use, economic value and enjoyment of views of his/her property shall first notify the tree owner in writing of such concerns. The notification should be accompanied by personal discussions to work towards a mutually agreeable solution. 
1.  If the Parties Agree: Following the initial discussion, if agreement is reached between the parties as to the existence and nature of the claimant's rights and on what restorative action is to be taken on the tree(s) in question, that agreement shall be reduced to writing and executed by all parties concerned. Said agreement must set forth the following: 
a.  Establishing the claimant's right under Section 8.13.021; 
b.  Specifying the detail of said right; and 
c.  Specifying the nature and timing of the action and the parties responsible for performing said action required to effectuate the said rights so established. 
2.  If the Parties Do Not Agree: If the parties do not agree as to the rights in question and what action should be taken regarding the tree(s) in question, the claimant must prepare and provide the tree owner a view/sunlight claim and provide a copy of the view/sunlight claim to the City. 
B.  View/Sunlight Claim. A "View/Sunlight Claim" shall consist of the following: 
1.  A description of the nature and extent of the alleged obstruction, including pertinent and corroborating physical evidence. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, photographic prints, negatives or slides. The evidence must show absence of the obstruction at a point in time during the tenure of the claimant's ownership or occupancy of the claimant's property. Evidence to show the date of property acquisition or occupancy by the claimant must be included; 
2.  The location of each tree alleged to cause the obstruction, the address of the property upon which the tree is located, and the present tree owner's name and address; 
3.  Evidence of the failure of initial reconciliation, (Section 8.13.030 A) to resolve the dispute. The claimant must provide physical evidence that a written attempt at reconciliation has been made and failed. Evidence may include a copy of and receipt for certified or registered mail correspondence; 
4.  Specific restorative action proposed by the claimant to resolve the unreasonable obstruction. 
C.  View Sunlight Claim Process. 
1.  Mediation. If the initial discussion fails to achieve agreement between the tree owner and the claimant, then the claimant, in order to preserve and perfect his/her rights hereunder, shall prepare and deliver to the tree owner a written offer ("offer notice") to submit the dispute to mediation to settle the dispute. Acceptance of mediation by the tree owner shall be voluntary, but the tree owner shall have no more than 30 days from service of the offer notice either to accept or to reject the offer of mediation. Failure to respond within 30 days after the service of the claimant's offer notice shall be deemed rejection of the offer of mediation. If mediation is accepted, the parties shall mutually agree upon a mediator within 21 days of the date the tree owner's acceptance of the offer notice, and should commence mediation within 60 days after the tree owner's acceptance of the offer notice. 
The mediator shall use and be governed by this chapter in attempting to help resolve the dispute. The mediator does not have the power to issue binding orders for view or sunlight restorative action, but shall strive to enable the parties to resolve their dispute by written agreement in order to eliminate the need for arbitration or litigation. 
2.  Binding Arbitration. Where the initial reconciliation and mediation are declined or fail, the claimant shall submit to the tree owner a written offer to propose binding arbitration ("arbitration notice"). The acceptance of binding arbitration by the tree owner is voluntary. The tree owner has 30 days from service of the arbitration notice to either accept or reject binding arbitration. Failure to respond within said 30 days shall be deemed to be a rejection of the offer of arbitration. If binding arbitration is accepted, the parties shall agree on a specific arbitrator within 21 days of the date of the tree owner's acceptance, and shall indicate such agreement in writing. If the parties do not agree on a specific arbitrator within said 30 days, either party may petition the court to appoint an arbitrator. 
The arbitrator shall use and be governed by this Chapter to reach a fair resolution of the view/sunlight claim and shall submit a complete written decision to the claimant and the tree owner. This decision shall include the arbitrator's findings with respect to the applicable provisions of Sections 8.13.040 and 8.13.050 of this Chapter, a pertinent list of all mandated restorative actions with any appropriate conditions concerning such actions, and a schedule by which the mandated actions must be completed. The decision of the arbitrator is enforceable under the California Code of Civil Procedure. A copy of the arbitrator's decision shall be submitted by the claimant to the Community Development Department immediately after it is received by the claimant. 
3.  Litigation. If arbitration is declined by the tree owner, the claimant may pursue civil action for resolution of his/her view/sunlight claim rights. The litigation must state in the lawsuit that arbitration was offered and not accepted. The litigating claimant shall file a copy of the lawsuit with the City Community Development Department. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.) 
(Ord. No. 1404 C.S. § 4, 5-17-2017)  
8.13.040 - Criteria for Determining Extent of View/Sunlight Rights and Unreasonableness of Obstruction. 
The following criteria are to be considered (but are not exclusive) in determining the (1) existence and nature of claimant's alleged rights hereunder and (2) unreasonableness of the obstruction at issue in the dispute: 
A.  No view or sunlight right may be based upon and no view or sunlight right may be exercised with respect to any tree located more than 500 feet from any boundary of claimant's real property. 
B.  The claimant shall not have a right to a greater view or access to sunlight than existed on or after the view/sunlight right establishment date. 
C.  In determining whether the claimant possesses the rights established under Section 8.13.021, the nature thereof and/or the extent to which the claimant may exercise said rights, the character of the subject view and/or sunlight and the benefits and burdens of the subject tree(s) shall be considered, and balanced against one another with due consideration given to the purposes of this chapter as set forth in 8.12.010. 
D.  The character of the view shall be determined by evaluating: 
1.  The vantage point(s) from which the view is obtained; 
2.  The extent of the view and/or sunlight obstruction; 
3.  The quality of the view being obstructed, such as the obstruction of vistas, ridge lines, or other unique features; 
4.  The view or sunlight and the size and quality of the tree(s) which existed at the time the claimant first occupied the property; 
5.  The added value the view affords to the claimant's residence; and 
6.  The length of time the claimant party has resided on the property. 
E.  The benefit derived by the tree shall be determined by evaluating: 
1.  The extent to which the tree(s) provide: 
a.  Privacy, screening and sound buffering; 
b.  Energy conservation and/or climate control; 
c.  Soil stability, as measured by soil structure, degree of slope and extent of tree(s) root system; 
d.  Wildlife habitat. 
e.  Screening of nearby residences or other structures and, if the tree(s) is restored as proposed by the claimant, the effect such restoration would have on views of the tree owner. 
f.  Visually pleasing settings or qualities in their own right. 
2.  Visual quality of the tree including but not limited to, species, size, growth, aesthetic form, vigor, location; 
3.  Potential for replacement of removed trees and the number of trees existing in the area; 
4.  The variety of tree, whether the tree is a protected tree or has historic value; 
5.  Economic value of the tree as measured by the International Society of Arboriculture; and 
6.  The hazard posed by a tree to a person or structure on the property of the claimant including, but not limited to, fire danger and the danger of falling limbs or trees. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.) 
(Ord. No. 1404 C.S. , § 5, 5-17-2017)  
8.13.050 - Guidelines Concerning Restorative Action. 
The following general guidelines shall apply to restorative action: 
A.  View and/or sunlight restorative actions must be consistent with all other provisions of this chapter. 
B.  All tree work authorized by this Chapter shall be performed, supervised or reviewed by a certified arborist. 
C.  Ongoing maintenance requirements are recommended as part of the restorative action. 
D.  By reason of tall height at maturity, rapid growth, dense foliage, shallow root structure, flammability, breakability, or invasiveness, the City has determined that certain types of trees are "undesirable," including but not limited to Blue Gum Eucalyptus, Monterey Pine, Monterey Cypress trees and other trees which generally grow more than 3 feet per year and are capable of reaching a height of over 35 feet at maturity. When considering restorative action for "undesirable" trees, aggressive action is preferred. 
E.  The city has designated certain trees to be "protected trees" as set forth in Chapter 8.12. The alteration or removal of a protected tree requires a permit from the Community Development Department. 
F.  Restorative action shall be limited to the following, typically in order of preference: 
1.  Trimming; 
2.  Thinning or Windowing; 
3.  Crown Reduction; 
4.  Stand Thinning; 
5.  Topping; 
6.  Tree Removal, with Replacement Plantings; 
7.  Removal. 
G.  In selecting the restorative action deemed best suited to the resolution of a view/sunlight claim, consideration shall be given to: 
1.  Serving the purpose of this chapter as set forth in 8.12.010; 
2.  The effectiveness of the proposed restorative action balanced against the likelihood of the claim being repeated due to rapid tree re-growth; and 
3.  The effectiveness of the proposed restorative action shall be balanced against its cost. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.) 
(Ord. No. 1404 C.S. , § 6, 5-17-2017)  
8.13.060 - Apportionment of Costs. 
A.  Cost of mediation and arbitration. The claimant and tree owner shall each pay 50% of mediation or arbitration fees and costs, unless they agree otherwise or allow the mediator or arbitrator discretion to allocate fees and costs. 
B.  Cost of Litigation. The costs of litigation is determined by the court or through a settlement. 
C.  Cost of Restorative Action. To be determined by mutual agreement, or through mediation, arbitration, court judgment or settlement. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.) 
(Ord. No. 1404 C.S. § 7, 5-17-2017)  
8.13.070 - Liabilities and Limitations. 
A.  The City shall not be liable for any damages, injury, costs or expenses which are the result of any decision made by the city or any other person (e.g., mediator, arbitrator or judge) concerning a view/sunlight claim or a claimant's assertions pertaining to views or sunlight rights granted or conferred in this Chapter. 
B.  Failure of the City to enforce this Chapter does not give rise to civil or criminal liability on the part of the City. 
C.  It is not the intent of the City in adopting this Chapter to affect obligations imposed by an existing easement or a valid pre-existing covenant or agreement. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.)  
8.13.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations of this Chapter are not misdemeanors or infractions. Enforcement of this Chapter shall be by the involved private parties. Any claimant may seek to enforce any restorative action mandated pursuant to this Chapter through ordinary legal proceedings. 
B.  Under no circumstances shall the city have any responsibility or liability to enforce or seek any legal redress, civil or criminal, for any decision it or any other person (except in a case where the City is a named party and is subject to a lawful order of a court of competent jurisdiction) makes concerning a view/sunlight claim. 
(Ord. 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000.)  
8.13.090 - Properties Subject to Ordinance Regulations. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (B) below, any and all trees located on any property situated in any district in the City are subject to this Chapter and the rights established herein. 
B.  Trees located on the following described property owned by or in which the City has an interest shall be exempt from this Chapter: (1) public rights-of-way; (2) parks, and (3) open spaces. Requests or complaints regarding trees located on property in which the City has an interest other than those listed above shall be made in writing to the Superintendent of Public Works. 
C.  To the extent a claimant and/or a predecessor in interest to the claimant, by recorded instrument or other document about which the claimant has actual knowledge, has waived the right to a view and/or sunlight as to trees located on property which is the subject of the waiver, said claimant shall enjoy no rights under this Chapter. (Ord 1270 C.S. § 1 (part), 2000)  
CHAPTER 8.14 - DRAINAGE 
 
8.14.010 - Purpose. 
This division is adopted to provide for the implementation of drainage improvements, recreational uses, protection of riparian vegetation, permit control of projects that may change the hydraulic characteristics of watercourses and drainage facilities, control erosion and sedimentation, prevent the placement or discharge of polluting matter into watercourses or the Contra Costa Canal, and require adequate watercourse drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.020 - Findings and Nuisance. 
A.  Findings. The City Council finds and declares that the unregulated obstruction, modification and use of watercourses creates conditions tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration of property, to cause flooding and drainage losses, and to be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Nuisance. Violations of this division and the resulting watercourse conditions constitute public nuisances which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and code. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.030 - Activities Requiring a Permit. 
No person, firm, corporation, or public district shall allow on its property or commit or cause to be committed any of the acts hereinafter described, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the enforcing officer or his duly appointed representative: 
A.  Impair or impede the natural flow of storm waters, or other water, running in a defined channel, natural or man-made; 
B.  Deposit any material in such channel; 
C.  Excavate, grade or otherwise alter the surface of land so as to reduce the capacity of such channel; 
D.  Destroy or significantly alter riparian or bank stabilizing vegetation, including without limitation the use of herbicides or pesticides, cutting, clearing, grubbing, burning, removing, excavating or grading; 
E.  Plant any shrub, vine or tree within a riparian corridor; 
F.  Construct, alter, or repair any storm water drainage structure, facility, or channel; 
G.  Commit any act within any easement dedicated for drainage purposes that will impair the use of such easement for such purposes; 
H.  Install or construct any new non-drainage structures, improvements thereto or expansion thereof including, but not limited to, buildings, swimming pools, patios, paving, fences, poles, retaining walls, rip-rap and similar improvements, within watercourses; 
I.  Commit any act, within the defined drainage corridor, which will reduce aesthetic values; 
J.  Make any alterations that will adversely impact any adjacent properties, private or public. (eddying, bank scouring, etc.) 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.040 - Emergency Work Authorization. 
This Chapter shall not prevent any person or the enforcing officer from performing emergency maintenance or work within, on, over, under, or through any watercourse, channel, ditch, conduit, or natural drainageway, as necessary and proper for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity arises. The person performing the emergency work shall notify the enforcing officer and the State Department of Fish and Game within the next working day and apply for a written permit within five calendar days of the beginning of work. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.050 - Fees. 
The fees for permits and inspections of the performance of acts or works under this Chapter and appeals shall be those recommended by the enforcing officer and established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.060 - Administration. 
The Community Development Department is charged with the responsibility for the administration of the provisions of this Chapter. Pursuant to this code, the Community Development Director may appoint or delegate authority to qualified persons or deputies for the purpose of the administration of this division. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.070 - Stop Work Orders. 
Whenever any watercourse work or related activity is being done contrary to this Chapter, the enforcing officer may order the work or activity stopped by notice in writing and posted served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing of the work or activity; and these persons shall stop immediately until authorized by valid permit or the enforcing officer to proceed with the work or activity. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.080 - Definitions. 
A.  Generally. Unless otherwise specifically provided, or required by the context, the following terms have the meanings set forth in this Chapter for the purposes of this Chapter. 
B.  Defined Channels. "Defined channels," natural or man-made, means any of the following: 
1.  Intermittent Stream. Any watercourse which has been verified by field investigation to: 
a.  Have a significant water flow at anytime within 30 days after the last significant storm; or 
b.  Have a well-defined channel; or 
c.  Be a watercourse designated by a broken line symbol on the largest scale USGS Map most recently published. 
2.  Perennial Stream. Any watercourse which is either: 
a.  A watercourse which has been verified by field investigation as a stream which normally flows throughout the year; or 
b.  A watercourse designated by a solid line symbol on the largest scale USGS Map most recently published. 
C.  Defined Drainage Corridor. Drainage Corridor shall include the defined channel and the defined riparian corridor, plus any special setbacks or drainage easements. 
D.  Drainage Easement. "Drainage easement" means an easement provided for the installation, preservation or maintenance of drainage facilities, including conduits or channels. 
E.  Emergency. "Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence which presents a clear and imminent danger to life, health, property, or essential public services which requires immediate action to mitigate. 
F.  Enforcing Officer. "Enforcing Officer" means the Community Development Director. 
G.  Erosion. "Erosion" means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
H.  Improved Channel. "Improved channel" means a watercourse which has been modified through man-made construction including but not limited to increasing its width and/or depth, straightening its alignment, or stabilizing its banks through grading, concrete, rip-rap or other means. 
I.  Riparian Corridor. "Riparian corridor" means an area of watercourse riparian vegetation which may be identified through field investigations in conformance with State 
Department of Fish and Game guidelines. The boundary shall be defined as the outer limit of the occurrence of riparian vegetation. 
J.  Riparian Vegetation. "Riparian vegetation" means vegetation associated with the banks, edges, or terrestrial limits of watercourses requiring or tolerating soil moisture levels in excess of that available in adjacent uplands as defined in State Department of Fish and Game guidelines. 
K.  Runoff. "Runoff" means the surface water flow or rate of flow following precipitation. 
L.  Sedimentation. "Sedimentation" means the process by which mineral or organic matter is removed from its site of origin, transported, and deposited by water, wind, or gravity. 
M.  Structure Setback Area. "Structure setback area" is as provided in Chapter 29 of the City's Building Code. Setbacks from dedicated easements will control, but in no case may structures encroach within ten feet of the upper bank. The property owner is responsible for his/her entire creek area and is responsible to assure stability of the upper bank. 
N.  Watercourse. "Watercourse" means any natural or man-made channel for transporting water, including the streambed and the banks, whether continuously flowing or intermittent. 
O.  Acts and Works. "Acts and works" means clearing or thinning of natural growth or any construction in the defined drainage corridor. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.090 - Permits. 
A.  Issuance. The written permits required by this Chapter shall be issued by the enforcing officer for any lawful use, subject to conditions set forth in this division, the permit and as required by law. The terms of the permit shall require the property owner and permittee to be responsible for all work done and to hold harmless and defend the City, and their officers, employees and agents against any damage claims. The issuance of a permit shall in no manner whatsoever imply or impute a responsibility or liability to the City of Martinez, or their officers, employees or agents, for injuries resulting from any act or condition regulated by this Chapter. 
B.  Application Form. 
1.  The enforcing officer shall prescribe and provide a standard form of application for a permit required by this division. 
2.  The application form shall state the property owner's and permittee's name, if different, together with such details which in the opinion of the enforcing officer are necessary to establish the purpose of the act or work to be performed, the location, dimensions, estimated total cost, and the dates for commencement and for completion of the act or work; except that at the enforcing officer's discretion, a completion date may be specified. 
3.  The application form shall include a right to enter to abate a nuisance created by acts or works authorized by the permit with five working days notice. 
4.  The permit form shall include right for immediate access to abate an emergency situation. 
5.  To be complete, the application shall be executed by the property owner or the owner's duly appointed agent, be accompanied with the required fee or fees, and deposited with the enforcing officer. 
C.  Exhibits and Conditions. The applicant shall attach to the application: 
1.  A copy of a State Department of Fish and Game permit or letter of exemption, and of any other agency permits required. 
2.  An exhibit as the enforcing officer may prescribe, on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, illustrate, and substantiate the right and necessity of the applicant to perform the act or work. 
3.  The enforcing officer may require to be submitted such soil investigation, tests of materials, biological reports, environmental documents, engineering plans and investigations, technical reports and other permits as the officer deems necessary and proper. 
4.  If a soils report is required, second party review will also be required. 
5.  Necessary changes, corrections, and notes may be made on any such exhibit and/or conditions inserted on the permit and these items shall become an integral part of the permit when attested to by the enforcing officer. 
6.  The applicant shall enclose with, attach, or add to the application for a permit the written consent and waiver of liability given by any and all persons political agencies having jurisdiction or any interest in the property where work is to be performed, who of themselves or their property would be affected in any manner by the acts or works to be performed. 
The granting of a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall not be construed as permission or license to enter on, occupy or otherwise utilize private, City, or property without the express consent of the owner or agent in possession thereof. 
D.  Types of Permits. Written permits required by this Chapter shall be one of the following types, depending on the decision of the enforcing officer: 
1.  "Regular permits" to do work under the provisions of this division shall be issued for the performance of those acts or works permitted by this Chapter. Regular permit include any pre-approved procedures, or mail-in permits which may be established by procedures. 
2.  "Conditional permits" shall be issued when such conditions or circumstances exist or will foreseeably occur which could in any manner be adverse to the performance of the proposed acts or works or be adverse to the purpose for which the proposed acts or works are to be performed. Such conditions or circumstances shall be attached hereto and shall be considered incorporated in the permit. 
3.  "Emergency permits" shall be issued for reasons necessitating emergency action as set out in Sections 8.14.014. 
4.  Permit must comply with CEQA requirements. 
5.  A State Fish and Game Streambed Alteration Agreement may be required. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeals and Exceptions. Any person aggrieved by the refusal or the terms of a permit required by this Chapter may appeal to the zoning administrator. 
1.  Notification of adjacent property owners will be made after acceptance of the application. Properties 300 feet upstream and downstream and effected agencies will be notified. 
2.  The applicant and or effected property owner may appeal within 10 days of receipt of notice. 
B.  Exceptions. If, in following the procedural provisions of 8.14.100 the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that all of the following are true, the permit shall be granted: 
1.  That there are unusual circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
2.  That the applicant will be substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit; 
3.  That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant or necessary for the proper design and function of an existing activity on the property; 
4.  That no other reasonable method of obtaining the desired results is available except as proposed by the applicant; 
5.  That the granting of the permit will not be materially detrimental to the public interest, safety, health, and welfare, or injurious to other property; 
6.  That the granting of the exception will not unreasonably reduce or adversely impact the riparian corridor, and there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative; and 
7.  That the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the purposes of this division and the policy and goals of the general plan; 
8.  That the project meets all building code and engineering standards and specifications; 
9.  That the design is aesthetically acceptable. 
C.  Term and Beginning Work. The permittee shall begin the act or work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter within thirty calendar days from date of issuance, unless another date is specifically indicated in the permit. The permittee shall notify the enforcing officer at least two working days prior to beginning work. Should the act or work not be commenced on or before the date indicated in the permit, the permit shall become void unless, prior to the date of expiration, the permittee presents good and sufficient reason for an extension of time and the date is extended by the enforcing officer in writing. A permit which has become void by reason of non-commencement of work prior to the stipulated date may be renewed at the discretion of the enforcing officer and upon payment of a renewal fee as provided for in the schedule of fees adopted by the City Council. 
D.  Inspection during and at completion of work. 
1.  The permittee shall notify City inspectors 24 hours prior to commencement of work. 
2.  The permittee shall complete the act or work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this division within the time and before the date stipulated in the permit. 
3.  The permittee shall notify the enforcing officer in writing upon completion of any act or work; and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received and a final inspection of the work has been made by a representative of the enforcing officer, unless such inspection is waived in writing by the enforcing officer. No permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this Chapter until such inspection has been performed and the enforcing officer is satisfied that everything required to be done has been completed. 
4.  Any work or act performed without a permit or not covered by an issued permit may be acknowledged as complete by the enforcing officer, provided that such work or act complies with the requirements of this division and is otherwise acceptable to the enforcing officer, and provided that all permit fees are paid. 
5.  In the event the work or act is unacceptable the enforcing officer may exercise any available remedies, including without limitation the procedure prescribed in Sections 8.14.100. 
E.  Performance Security. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall deposit with the enforcing officer cash or check for payment to the City of Martinez in an amount deemed adequate by the enforcing officer but not exceeding the estimated total cost, including all labor and materials, of the work to be performed. In lieu of a cash deposit, the applicant may file an approved surety bond issued by a company or corporation authorized to engage in general surety business in the State of California or an acceptable instrument of credit meeting subdivision security standards. The conditions of any cash deposit or surety bond made pursuant to this Section shall be that the permittee will diligently and in good faith comply with all provisions of this Chapter with all terms and conditions contained in the issued permit, and will pursue the work to completion without undue delay except for reasonable cause. Upon satisfactory and acceptable completion of the work as set forth in Sections 8.14.100 C., the cash deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. The permittee shall be exonerated from the surety bond or the instrument of credit released by the enforcing officer in writing upon the expiration of ninety days. The enforcing officer shall not be responsible to ascertain whether there exist unsatisfied liens against the premises upon which the work was performed. 
F.  Liability Insurance. In addition to the other requirements of this division, satisfactory proof by certificate of insurance is required that the permittee has in force a valid public liability insurance policy which includes the City of Martinez, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds. Unless such insurance coverage is waived by the enforcing officer, it shall be in an amount the officer deems sufficient to adequately protect the additional insureds from liability for damages to person(s) or property(s) arising from the activities related to the permit. 
G.  Changes. No changes shall be made in the location, dimensions, materials, or character of the work authorized in a permit, except upon written authorization to do so by the enforcing officer. 
H.  Non-transferable. A permit issued pursuant to this division shall not be transferable by, for, or on behalf of the permittee, his or her heirs, assigns, or successors. 
I.  Unsatisfactory Permit Work. If the enforcing officer determines that the performance of the work described in a permit is unsatisfactory or unacceptable, or both, the permittee shall reconstruct the work to the satisfaction of the enforcing officer. 
If the enforcing officer determines that delay in pursuit or completion of the act or work is due to lack of diligence or willful act on the part of the permittee, or that the work is unsatisfactory or unacceptable, or both, if essential to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, the enforcing officer may request the City Council for authorization to perform or contract with any licensed general contractor to complete, erect, install, reconstruct, or alter all structures or work in conformance with the permit, or to remove all structures and obliterate all work not completed. The costs (including administrative and overhead expenses) incurred thereby shall be repaid to the City from the cash, instrument of credit or surety bond deposited by the permittee with the City for the performance of the work provided that any and all costs incurred by the City which exceed the cash deposit, instrument of credit or surety bond's penalty sum shall be paid by the permittee to the City. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.110 - Nuisance Abatement. 
A.  Abatement. The enforcing officer may have nuisances, created after the effective date of the ordinance, abated and/or removed in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this Chapter. 
B.  Notice. In the event of a violation of this Chapter constituting a public nuisance, and in addition to other remedies and penalties provided in this code, the enforcing officer may deliver or mail, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the property on which the violation occurred (or is occurring) and to any involved permittee, a ten-day notice of intention to abate the nuisance unless the owner does so within ten days after the notice is received. Notice shall be provided at the address of the owner as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  Content. The notice shall contain: 
1.  A statement of the nature of the nuisance; 
2.  That the owner and any involved permittee must abate the nuisance within ten days; or if they fail to do so, the nuisance may be abated by the enforcing officer and the owner and any involved permittee shall be liable to the City for the costs thereof. 
3.  An estimate of the cost of abatement (including overhead and administrative costs). 
4.  A statement that this cost may be levied as a special assessment on the owner's land. 
5.  A statement of the property owner and any involved permittee's hearing rights and notice to them that they may appear in person at a hearing or by sworn written statement in lieu of appearing. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.120 - Hearing and Appeals. 
A.  Hearing Requests. 
1.  Request. Within ten days after the mailing, delivery and receipt date(s), whichever is later, of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the property owner or possessor of the property and any involved permittee may request the Zoning Administrator for a public hearing on the question of abatement and the estimated cost thereof. 
2.  Notice. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately notify the enforcing officer of any such request. 
B.  No Hearing. If no request for hearing is received within the ten-day period, the enforcing officer or any person the enforcing officer authorizes may abate the nuisance. Thereafter, the costs of abatement shall be collected pursuant to Sections 8.14.140. 
C.  Hearing Notice. When a hearing is requested, the Zoning Administrator shall mail notice of the hearing at least ten calendar days before the hearing date to the enforcing officer, the property owner, any known possessor of the property, and any involved permittee. 
D.  Hearings. All hearing(s) under this Chapter shall be held before the Zoning Administrator who shall receive all evidence related to the condition of the property, the circumstances of the nuisance and the location and the estimated cost of the abatement. The Zoning Administrator shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The property owner, any known possessor of the property or involved permittee or affected property owner or agency may appear in person or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing. 
E.  Decisions. The Zoning Administrator may impose such conditions and take other such action as the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator may delay the time for removal of the nuisance if, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, if the Zoning Administrator finds that there is a nuisance, the Zoning Administrator may order it abated and/or removed as a public nuisance as hereinafter provided and determine the cost of abatement to be charged against the landowner. The order requiring abatement shall include a description of the nuisance. 
F.  Notice of Decision. If an interested party makes a written presentation to the Zoning Administrator but does not appear, such interested party shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
G.  Appeals. 
1.  The enforcing officer, the property owner, any known possessor of the parcel, or any involved permittee may appeal the Zoning Administrator's decision by filing with the Zoning Administrator a written notice of appeal, accompanied with any required fee, within ten calendar days after the Zoning Administrator's decision. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit the proceedings to the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
2.  The City Clerk or designee shall promptly give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Sections 8.14.120 C. 
3.  The Council shall promptly hear such appeal, and may affirm, amend, or reverse the order, or take other action it deems appropriate. It shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.130 - Final Abatement Action. 
A.  Action. This Chapter's nuisances may be abated when: 
1.  Releases authorizing abatement and property cost collection have been signed by the involved property's owner(s); or 
2.  There is no reply to the notice of intent to abate by the end of the ten-day waiting period; or 
3.  The Zoning Administrator decides the nuisance is to be abated and no appeal is made to the board; or 
4.  After an appeal has been decided in favor of abatement. 
B.  Cost Record. The enforcing officer shall prepare an itemized written account of all expenses, including administration and overhead, incurred to abate the nuisance, plus any attorneys' fees the City seeks to recover in connection with the proceeding. 
(Ord. 1258 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 1187 C.S. § I part, 1992.)  
8.14.140 - Cost Allocation. 
A.  Submittal To Council. The enforcing officer shall forward the itemized written account to the City Council for consideration and action. 
B.  Notice To Property Owner. Before the itemized written account is submitted to the City Council, a copy shall be posted for at least three days on the bulletin board of the City Hall, with a notice of the time when the account will be considered by the City Council for confirmation. A copy of the account and notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the property, at the address shown on the last tax roll, at least ten days prior to its consideration by the City Council. 
C.  Hearing. At the time fixed for receiving and considering the written account, the City Council shall hear it and any objections by the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abatement. Thereupon, the City Council may make such modifications in the report as it deems necessary; after which, by order of resolution, the report shall be confirmed; and if the City has requested payment of its attorney's fees, attorney's fees shall be awarded to the prevailing party. 
D.  Special Assessment. The cost of such abatement, as determined by the City Council, shall become a special assessment and lien against the aforesaid property, which assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. 
E.  Assessment Notice. The enforcing officer shall send notice by certified mail to the property owner if the property owner's identity can be determined from the County Assessor's or County Recorder's records. The notice shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall state that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
(Ord. 1258 C.S. § 2, 1998.)  
CHAPTER 8.16 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
8.16.010 - Violations. 
Unless otherwise provided hereinafter, any person, including an authorized collector, violating any Sections of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day upon which a violation of this Chapter continues shall be deemed a separate offense hereunder and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
1.  Approved Recycling Collection Program. A recycling collection program operated by an authorized recycler under a contract, franchise agreement, or license with the City. 
2.  Approved Recycling Container. The bag, box, or other container supplied by or identified by the City or an authorized recycler as the container into which recyclable materials shall be placed and which shall be located at the curb or other collection station. 
3.  Authorized Collector. Any person licensed by or subject to collect, transport, store, transfer or process refuse in the City whether such activities are done with or without compensation. 
Authorized collector shall not include or mean an individual hauling refuse from his/her own home for purposes of disposing of same at an established disposal area or recycling facility; provided, however, such refuse is not produced, created, or accumulated in the course of any business operations and the individual is not engaged in the business of handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring or processing refuse. 
4.  Authorized Recycler. The City or a person authorized by a City contract or license to collect recyclable materials. 
5.  Authorized Disposal Area. A disposal area or areas identified and designated by the City for the disposal of solid waste. 
6.  Authorized Solid Waste Container. A receptacle for solid waste conforming to the specifications of this Chapter or to regulations as may from time to time be promulgated and adopted by the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
7.  Bulky Waste. Large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps and other oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods. 
8.  Collection Station. An approved location at which solid waste, refuse, or recyclable material is placed in containers for collection by the City, the authorized collector, or an authorized recycler. 
9.  Compost Operation. A process whereby the biological decomposition of organic wastes is controlled so as to yield a safe and nuisance free product. 
10.  Curbside Recycling Collection Program. The City's curbside recycling program by which recyclables are picked up from single-family residences without payment of any redemption value to the property owner. 
11.  Donor. The person taking recyclables to a recycling facility or the person placing recyclable material at the curb or other recycling collection station for scheduled collection. 
12.  Hazardous Waste. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either: 
a.  cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness. 
b.  pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
13.  Multi-Family Unit. A dwelling which includes two or more individual living units and which receives communal refuse and/or recycling services. 
14.  Non-Residential Establishment. A business, commercial, industrial and other types of premises other than single- family and multi-family residential and includes without limitation all commercial and industrial use classifications. 
15.  Place or Premises. Every dwelling house, dwelling unit, apartment house or multiple-dwelling building, trailer or mobile home park, store, restaurant, rooming house, hotel, motel, office building, department store, manufacturing, processing or assembling shop or plant, warehouse and every other place or premises where any person resides, or any business is carried on or conducted within the City. 
16.  Recyclable Material. Refuse material generated or collected at a place or premises, and in a condition such that it can be re-manufactured or reprocessed into usable materials or new products. 
17.  Recycle or Recycling. The process of separating and collection used materials which would otherwise become solid waste, for the purpose of reprocessing them to create new materials to be returned to the economic mainstream. 
18.  Recycling Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public and includes the facilities regulated by Chapter 22.37. 
19.  Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and liquid wastes (except sanitary sewage and storm water), whether combustible or noncombustible, and includes waste and recyclable material. 
20.  Single Family Unit. A dwelling which receives individual refuse and/or curbside recycling service. 
21.  Solid Waste. Except as provided in subdivision (b): 
a.  "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes, provided, however, that solid waste does not include recyclable material. 
b.  "Solid waste" does not include hazardous waste or low- level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Sections 25800) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
c.  "Solid waste" does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act Chapter 6.l (commencing with Sections 250l5) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste, whether treated or untreated, is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste which has been treated and which is deemed to be solid waste shall be regulated pursuant to this Chapter. 
22.  Transfer or Processing Station. Those facilities utilized to receive refuse, temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the refuse, or to transfer the refuse directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for transformation. 
23.  Yard Waste. Organic material from trees, shrubs, grass and similar vegetation. Yard waste may also be designated as recyclables by the City. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.030 - Ownership of Solid Waste. 
A.  All solid waste, upon being removed by the authorized collector from the premises where produced and accumulated, shall become and be the property of the City unless otherwise provided in a contract, license, or franchise agreement. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in an agreement, the City maintains the right to salvage recyclable materials placed in solid waste containers for collection by the authorized collector. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993)  
8.16.040 - Rules and Regulations—Appeal Process. 
A.  The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this Chapter. Such regulations may include: (1) the required frequency of collection from various types of places and premises; (2) the types of special containers required for certain classes of refuse; (3) the types of special containers required for certain classes of places and premises; and (4) the licensing of authorized collectors and recyclers. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in an agreement, the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall resolve all disputes concerning the administration or enforcement of this Chapter. Any affected person who is dissatisfied with the determination of the City Manager may appeal the same to the City Council. Such appeal must be in writing and set forth the reasons for such appeal. The written appeal and the appeal fee, as set by City Council resolution, must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after such decision. No alleged violation of this Chapter shall be permitted, or be continued, during the time any such appeal is pending. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.050 - Inspection for Sanitation. 
The City Manager or other duly authorized representative of the City may cause all places or premises governed by this Chapter to be inspected from time to time to determine whether the provisions of this Chapter are complied with. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.060 - Removal Generally. 
A.  All refuse shall be collected according to a schedule established by the City Manager or his/her designated representative, or as provided by license, contract, or franchise agreement between an authorized collector or recycler and the City. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer, process, accumulate, or dispose of refuse in such a manner as to cause a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.070 - Disposal Areas and Transfer Stations. 
A.  The City shall have the right to designate a disposal area or areas for the disposal of solid waste collected from within the City. 
B.  The City may designate one or more intermediary transfer or processing stations of its choice and direct any authorized collector to deposit collected refuse in said facility. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.080 - Prohibited Disposal. 
Except as authorized in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Throw, bury, deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any refuse, or allow any collection of same to remain in or upon any public right-of-way, watercourse, waterway, levees or banks of watercourses or waterways, or upon any premises whatsoever other than in an approved disposal area or collection station or an authorized solid waste container or approved recycling container. 
2.  Throw, cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City, any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, parkway, or other public place, or onto any private premises within the City. 
3.  Deposit any refuse in any City sewer or plumbing fixture or pipe connected thereto, except through a mechanical device (garbage disposal) which shreds or grinds solid waste material. 
4.  Burn refuse within the City. 
5.  Deposit any household or business refuse into street litter receptacles which the City may place and maintain, or authorize to be placed and maintained, at such locations as are deemed necessary for public convenience. 
6.  Deposit refuse in a container belonging to another person, or provided for premises in which the person does not reside, except with the permission of the owner of the container or premises. 
7.  Deposit any solid waste in a receptacle or container specifically identified for the collection of recyclable materials. 
8.  Deposit in any refuse container any hazardous waste, explosive, highly inflammable or otherwise hazardous material or substance. 
The City may, by resolution or amendment of this Chapter, add other materials as being prohibited from deposit in refuse containers to protect the public's health and safety and to achieve state mandated waste diversion goals. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.090 - Exceptions—Disposal Permitted. 
A.  Refuse may be fed to animals on the premises where such refuse is produced, provided that the premises are always kept in a sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the City Manager or other authorized agent of the City; and provided further that the keeping and feeding of such animals shall at all times conform to the applicable ordinances and regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or which thereafter may be enacted or promulgated. 
B.  Refuse may be disposed and used in a compost operation, provided that such operation at all times conforms to the applicable ordinances and regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or which thereafter may be enacted or promulgated. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.100 - Mandatory Subscription Required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, all occupied premises shall subscribe for solid waste collection service with the authorized collector as herein specified, and for such service a charge shall be collected as per a schedule of rates as shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  If any person should fail to subscribe for the collection and disposal of solid waste or violate any other provision of this Chapter, said violation shall be an infraction and shall be presumed to be a nuisance upon the premises. 
C.  The authorized collector shall give written notice to the City Manager or his/her designated representative of the address of any occupied premise within the City which is not subscribing to the collection and disposal service provided by the authorized collector. 
D.  The owner of each occupied premise shall subscribe for solid waste disposal services within 7 days of the occupancy of the premises. If the owner fails to subscribe for service, the authorized collector shall give the owner written notification that such service is required. 
E.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit an occupant or owner of any occupied premises from regularly disposing of solid waste at an authorized disposal facility or transfer station, either personally or through the uncompensated services of another, in lieu of subscribing for solid waste collection service with the City's authorized collector. Any person desiring exemption from this service shall make an application to the City Manager or his/her designated representative, indicating the reasons for such exemption. The City Manager shall grant such exemption if he/she finds that the proper sanitation of the City and the preservation of the health of the inhabitants thereof will not be affected by the exemption and is subject to the requirement that any person disposing of his/her/its solid waste at an authorized disposal facility or transfer station shall retain receipts issued by the disposal facility or transfer station for at least 1 year to demonstrate evidence of regular solid waste disposal without benefit of subscription to the solid waste collection services provided by the City's authorized collector. 
(Ord. 1317 C.S. § I, 2004: Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.110 - Failure to Pay Authorized Collector. 
It is unlawful for any person having solid waste collected and disposed of as provided in this City to willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay to the authorized collector the rate provided by agreement between the City and the authorized collector, by ordinance (if required by law) or by resolution of the City Council to be paid for such service. 
(Ord. 1272 C.S. § 1, 2000: Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.120 - Collection Billing. 
The authorized collector is responsible for the collection of any solid waste fee on behalf of the City and the collector. The collector may bill its customers in advance of service, but in no case more than 2 months in advance of service. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.130 - Collection Schedule. 
A.  Solid waste collection shall be 6 days per week, excluding Sundays, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in residential and commercial districts, and in industrial districts by hours approved by the City Manager or his/her designated representative. 
B.  Solid waste will not be collected on legal holidays as approved by the City. The authorized collector shall be required to provide collection during the week of the holiday and shall be required to provide customers with advance notice of any change to scheduling. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.140 - Solid Waste Licensing and Franchising Requirements. 
A.  Solid waste shall only be collected and transported by an authorized collector unless otherwise specified in this Chapter. 
B.  An authorized collector shall obtain a current license, contract, or franchise agreement, as determined by the City Council, authorizing the collector to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer or process solid waste within the City, except as otherwise provided by state or federal law. Such license, contract, or franchise agreement may be revoked by the City Council for noncompliance with the provisions of said license, contract, or franchise agreement or for violations of the provisions of this Chapter or any pertinent federal, state or local law. The terms and conditions under which an authorized collector is required to operate shall be specified in the applicable license, contract, and/or franchise, and shall be administered by the City Manager or his/her designated representative. Unless otherwise provided by agreement or by applicable law, the rates, if any, for such collection and disposal operations shall be established by a resolution of the City Council. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer or process solid waste within the City, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or, in the case of an emergency, as authorized by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1272 C.S. § 2, 2000: Ord. 1197 C.S. § II (part), 1993.)  
8.16.150 - Exceptions to Licensing and Franchising Requirements. 
No license, franchise or contract shall be required for a person: 
1.  Handling, hauling, or transporting solid waste from his/her own residence for purposes of disposing of same at an authorized disposal area or transfer station, provided, however, that such solid waste is not produced, created, or accumulated in the course of any business operations and the person is not engaged in the business of handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring or processing solid waste. 
2.  Transporting solid waste over the streets of the City, where all of such solid waste so transported originates or originated: (a) outside the limits of the City; or (b) landscape maintenance waste being transported to another location outside the City or to an authorized disposal area, compost operation, or transfer station. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.160 - Interference with Authorized Collector Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring, or processing of solid waste by an authorized collector. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.170 - Requirements generally for Vehicles, Conveyances, and Containers. 
All vehicles, conveyances or containers used for handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring or processing refuse within or through the City shall be: 
1.  Of such construction as to comply fully with all laws, rules and regulations of the State pertaining thereto; 
2.  Maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
3.  Uniformly painted; 
4.  Include the name and phone number of the authorized collector in letters not smaller than six (6) inches high. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.180 - Collection Vehicles and Hauling Requirements for Authorized Collectors. 
An authorized collector who conveys, handles, hauls, collects, transports, stores, transfers or processes refuse within or through the City shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Refuse shall be hauled in all-metal, watertight bodied motor trucks, of sufficient strength to withstand fire within, without endangering persons or property, and to prevent spillage, leakage or escape of noxious gases. 
2.  Each truck shall be equipped with covering drawn over the load as completed to full depth. Refuse in the truck shall be completely covered between the point of collection and the point of disposal, and in a manner so that the contents do not sift through or fall upon the street and do not blow upon the street or adjacent property. Any spillage of materials shall be immediately cleaned up at the expense of the authorized collector. 
3.  The trucks shall be registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall be kept in good repair. 
4.  In addition to the name and phone number of the authorized collector, each collection truck shall also include the truck number in letters not smaller than six inches high. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.190 - Solid Waste Container Requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any premises within the City, or any person owning, controlling, or maintaining any premises within the City where solid waste is created, produced, or accumulated upon such premises, to fail or neglect to procure a sufficient number of authorized solid waste containers, as specified in this section, for receiving and holding, without spillage, leakage, or escape of solids, liquids, or noxious gases, all solid waste, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. 
A.  An authorized solid waste container for residential use shall: 
1.  Be fully enclosed. 
2.  Have a tight-fitting cover with handle. 
3.  Have two handles adequate for lifting, one located on each side of the container. 
4.  Be covered continuously except when being filled or emptied. 
5.  Be kept in a good, usable, and sanitary condition. 
6.  Not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight when filled for removal, except when special containers are furnished or approved by the authorized collector pursuant to regulations prescribed by the City. 
7.  Meet all specifications as to size, capacity and type which the City may from time to time prescribe by regulation or by City Council action. 
B.  An authorized solid waste container for multi-family units, and non-residential establishments and industrial uses shall: 
1.  Meet all specifications as to size, capacity and type which the City may from time to time prescribe by regulation or by City Council action. 
2.  Be kept in a good, usable and sanitary condition. 
C.  With the permission of the respective owner, persons residing in a multi-family dwelling complex and tenants of a non-residential establishment may share in the use of containers furnished or approved by the authorized collector pursuant to regulations prescribed by the City. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
8.16.200 - Solid Waste Container Placement. 
A.  No solid waste container, other than one owned by the City, shall be placed or kept in or on any public street, side-walk, footpath or any public place whatsoever, or remain in public view from any public right-of-way. No person shall place a container so that either the sidewalk or street gutter is obstructed. 
B.  Authorized solid waste containers are permitted to be placed in public view and on a public street, sidewalk or footpath only during the forty-eight hour period commencing at l2:01 a.m. on the day preceding the day of scheduled pick-up and terminating at l2:01 a.m. on the day following such pick-up. 
C.  For curbside pick-up, the collection station shall be the street curb line adjacent to such premises and authorized solid waste containers shall be placed in that location by the occupant of such premises for collection by the authorized collector. 
D.  The number and location of collection stations for other than curbside collection shall be determined by the occupant of such premises, provided that the location shall be easily accessible to the authorized collector. 
E.  Each person who has a solid waste container shall keep the area where the container is located a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 1197 C.S., 1993.)  
CHAPTER 8.18 - SOURCE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING 
 
8.18.010 - Violations. 
Unless otherwise provided hereinafter, any person, including an authorized recycler, violating any Section of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day upon which a violation of this Chapter continues shall be deemed a separate offense hereunder and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section: 
1.  Approved Recycling Collection Program. A recycling collection program operated by an authorized recycler under a contract, franchise agreement, or license with the City. 
2.  Approved Recycling Container. The bag, box, or other container supplied by or identified by the City or an authorized recycler as the container into which recyclable materials shall be placed and which shall be located at the curb or other collection station. 
3.  Authorized Recycler. The City or a person authorized by a City contract or license to collect recyclable materials. 
4.  Authorized Solid Waste Container. A receptacle for solid waste conforming to the specifications of this Chapter or to regulations as may from time to time be promulgated and adopted by the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
5.  Bulky Waste. Large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps and other oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods. 
6.  CFC-Processed Food Packaging. Any food packaging which uses chlorofluorocarbons ("CFCs") as blowing agents in its manufacture. Chlorofluorocarbons are the family of substances containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine, having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds. 
7.  Collection Station. An approved location at which solid waste, refuse, or recyclable material is placed in containers for collection by the City, the authorized collector, or an authorized recycler. 
8.  Compost Operation. A process whereby the biological decomposition of organic wastes is controlled so as to yield a safe and nuisance free product. 
9.  Curbside Recycling Collection Program. The City's curbside recycling program by which recyclables are picked up from single-family residences without payment of any redemption value to the property owner. 
10.  Development Project. Means any of the following: 
a.  A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building, marina, or residential building having five (5) or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five (5) or more living units. 
b.  Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste. 
11.  Donor. The person taking recyclables to a recycling facility or a person placing recyclable material at the curb or other recycling collection station for scheduled collection. 
12.  Hazardous Waste. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical chemical, or infectious characteristics may either: 
a.  Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating, reversible illness. 
b.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
13.  Multi-Family Unit. A dwelling unit which includes two or more individual living units and which receives communal refuse and/or recycling services. 
14.  Non-Residential Establishment. A business, commercial, industrial and other types of premises other than single- family and multi-family residential and includes without limitation all commercial and industrial use classifications. 
15.  Place or Premises. Every dwelling house, dwelling unit, apartment house or multiple-dwelling building, trailer or mobile home park, store, restaurant, rooming house, hotel, motel, office building, department store, manufacturing, processing or assembling shop or plant, warehouse and every other place or premises where any person resides, or any business is carried on or conducted within the City. 
16.  Plastic Film. Plastic film includes plastic shopping and drycleaning bags, and shrink wrap used to wrap pallets for shipping. This material is generally coded "4" for low density polyethylene and "2" for high density polyethylene. 
17.  Polystyrene Plastic. A thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and a blowing agent compound which is used to produce molded expanded or extruded polystyrene plastic foam. 
18.  Post-Consumer Recycled Material. A finished material which would normally be disposed of as a solid waste having completed its life cycle as a consumer item, and which is separated or collected separately from the waste stream and made available for reuse as a raw material. 
19.  Recyclable Material or Recyclables. Refuse material generated or collected at a place or premises, and in a condition such that it can be re-manufactured or reprocessed into usable materials or new products. 
20.  Recycle or Recycling. The process of separating and collecting used materials which would otherwise become solid waste, for the purpose of reprocessing them to create new materials to be returned to the economic mainstream. 
21.  Recycling Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public and includes the facilities regulated by Chapter 22.37. 
22.  Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and liquid wastes (except sanitary sewage and storm water), whether combustible or noncombustible, and includes waste and recyclable material. 
23.  Retail Food Establishment. All sales outlets, stores, shops, restaurants, vending machines, vehicles, or other places of business located within the City which sell or convey ready-to-eat foods or beverages directly to the ultimate consumer for immediate consumption. 
24.  Returnable. Take out food packaging, such as but not limited to, soft drink bottles and milk containers that are capable of being returned to the distributor or supplier for reuse as the same food or beverage container at least once. 
25.  Single-Family Unit. A dwelling which receives individual refuse and curbside recycling service. 
26.  Solid Waste. 
a.  "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes, provided, however, that solid waste does not include recyclable material. 
b.  "Solid waste" does not include hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Section 25800) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
c.  "Solid waste" does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act Chapter 6.1 (commencing with Section 25015) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste, whether treated or untreated, is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste which has been treated and which is deemed to be solid waste shall be regulated pursuant to this Chapter. 
27.  Take-Out Food. Prepared foods or beverages requiring no further preparation to be consumed and which are normally consumed within one hour of purchase. Take-out food includes food prepared for consumption on a restaurant's premises but not entirely consumed by the purchaser, with leftovers boxed, bagged or wrapped for later consumption off premises. Take-out food does not include food packaged and sealed by a distributor or supplier prior to being received by a retail food establishment. 
28.  Take-Out Food Packaging. All containers, boxes, bags, cups, lids, cans, trays, wraps, straws, utensils, and napkins provided with take-out food and beverages sold at retail food establishments. 
29.  Transfer or Processing Station. Those facilities utilized to receive refuse, temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the refuse, or to transfer the refuse directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport, and those facilities utilized for transformation. 
30.  Yard Waste. Organic material from trees, shrubs, grass and similar vegetation. Yard waste may also be designated as recyclables by the City. 
31.  Unless defined above, the terms used in this Chapter shall have the same meaning as the same terms are defined in Chapter 8.16. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.030 - Ownership of Recyclable Materials. 
A.  All recyclable materials, upon being placed by the generator into an approved recycling container and placed at an approved collection station, shall become the property of the authorized recycler owning the recycling container, unless otherwise provided in a contract, license, or franchise agreement. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in an agreement, the City maintains the right to salvage recyclable materials placed in authorized solid waste containers for collection by the authorized collector. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.040 - Rules and Regulations—Appeal Process. 
A.  The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this Chapter. Such regulations may include: (1) the required frequency of collection from various types of places and premises; (2) the types of special containers required for certain classes of recyclable materials; (3) the types of special containers required for certain classes of places and premises; and (4) the licensing of authorized collectors and recyclers. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided in an agreement, the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall resolve all disputes concerning the administration or enforcement of this Chapter. Any affected person who is dissatisfied with the determination of the City Manager may appeal the same to the City Council. Such appeal must be in writing and set forth the reasons for such appeal. The appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the City Manager's decision and must be accompanied by the fee set by resolution of the City Council. No alleged violation of this Chapter shall be permitted, or be continued during the time any such appeal is pending. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.050 - Inspection for Sanitation. 
The City Manager or other duly authorized representative of the City may cause all places or premises governed by this Chapter to be inspected from time to time to determine whether the provisions of this Chapter are complied with. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.060 - Removal Generally. 
A.  All recyclable material placed in approved recycling containers for collection shall be collected according to a schedule established by the City Manager or his/her designated representative or as provided in a license, contract, or franchise agreement between an authorized collector or an authorized recycler and the City. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer, process, accumulate, or dispose of recyclable material in such a manner as to cause a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.070 - Recycling Facilities and Transfer Stations. 
A.  Recycling facilities must comply with all provisions in Chapter 22.37 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  The City may designate one or more intermediary transfer or processing stations of its choice and direct any authorized collector or authorized recycler to deposit collected refuse, recyclable material and/or solid waste in said facility. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.080 - Prohibited Disposal. 
Except as authorized in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Throw, bury, deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any refuse, or allow any collection of same to remain in or upon any public right-of-way, watercourse, waterway, levees or banks of watercourses or waterways, or upon any premises whatsoever other than in an approved disposal area or collection station or an authorized solid waste container or approved recycling container. 
2.  Throw, cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City, any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, parkway, or other public place, or onto any private premises within the City. 
3.  Deposit any refuse in any City sewer or plumbing fixture or pipe connected thereto, except through a mechanical device (garbage disposal) which shreds or grinds solid waste material. 
4.  Burn refuse within the City. 
5.  Deposit any household or business refuse into street litter receptacles which the City may place and maintain, or authorize to be placed and maintained, at such locations as are deemed necessary for public convenience. 
6.  Deposit refuse in a container belonging to another person, or provided for premises in which the person does not reside, except with the permission of the owner of the container or premises. 
7.  Deposit any solid waste in a receptacle or container specifically identified for the collection of recyclable materials. 
8.  Deposit in any refuse container any hazardous waste, explosive, highly flammable or otherwise hazardous material or substance. 
The City may, by resolution or amendment of this Chapter, add other materials as being prohibited from deposit in any container containing refuse to protect the public's health and safety and to achieve state mandated waste diversion goals. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.090 - Exceptions—Disposal Permitted. 
A.  Refuse may be fed to animals on the premises where such refuse is produced, provided that the premises are always kept in a sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the City Manager or other authorized agent of the City; and provided further that the keeping and feeding of such animals shall at all times conform to the applicable ordinances and regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or which thereafter may be enacted or promulgated. 
B.  Refuse may be disposed and used in a compost operation, provided that such operation at all times conforms to the applicable ordinances and regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or which thereafter may be enacted or promulgated. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.100 - Mandatory Duty to Recycle. 
A.  A mandatory obligation is imposed on each responsible person occupying any premise to separate and recycle all recyclable materials from the refuse generated on the premise. 
B.  The duty to recycle imposed herein may be discharged through the use of the City's curbside recycling collection program provided by the City's authorized recycler, an approved recycling collection program at a non-residential establishment provided by an authorized recycler licensed by the City, or at a recycling facility approved by the City. 
C.  This Chapter does not limit the right of a person to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable materials in a fashion different than that described in subsection B so long as the disposal otherwise complies with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.110 - Recycling Collection—Single-Family and Multifamily Residential Subscription Required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the owners or occupants of all single-family residential occupied premises/units shall subscribe to the approved curbside recycling program provided by the City's authorized recycler as herein specified. 
B.  The owner or occupancy of each single-family and multifamily occupied premise/unit shall subscribe for recycling services within 7 days of occupancy of the premises. If the owner occupant fails to subscribe for service, the authorized recycler shall give the owner or occupant written notification that such service is required. 
C.  Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit an occupant or owner of any single-family and multi-family occupied premise from regularly disposing of recyclables at an authorized recycling facility or other approved recycling collection service, either personally or through the uncompensated services of another, in lieu of subscribing for the approved curbside recycling collection service provided by the City's authorized recycler. Any person desiring exemption from this service shall make an application to the City Manager or his/her designated representative indicating the reasons for such exemption. The City Manager shall grant such exemption subject to the requirement that any person disposing of his/her/its recyclables at an authorized recycling facility or approved recycling collection service and shall retain receipts issued by the recycling facility and/or service for at least 1 year to demonstrate evidence of regular disposal of recyclables without benefit of subscription to the recycling collection services provided by the City's authorized recycler. 
(Ord. 1317 C.S. § II, 2004: Ord. 1272 C.S. § 3, 2000: Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.120 - Collection—Non-Residential Subscription Required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, no later than January 1, 1995, all non-residential establishments shall subscribe to an approved recycling collection program provided by an authorized recycler licensed by the City as herein specified, and for such service a charge may be collected as agreed upon between the generator and the authorized recycler. 
B.  If any person shall fail to subscribe to an approved recycling collection program provided by an authorized recycler licensed by the City or violates any other provision of this Section, said violation shall be an infraction and shall be presumed to be a nuisance upon the premises. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.130 - Failure to Pay Authorized Recycler. 
It is unlawful for any person subscribing to an approved recycling program as provided in this Chapter to willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay to the authorized recycler the rate provided by resolution of the City Council, by ordinance (if required by law), by an agreement between the City and the authorized recycler, or as determined through an agreement between the generator and the authorized recycler. 
(Ord. 1272 C.S. § 3, 2000: Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.140 - Collection Billing. 
An authorized recycler is responsible for the collection of any recycling fee on behalf of the City and the authorized recycler. An authorized recycler may bill its customers in advance of service, but in no case more than 2 months in advance of service. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.150 - Collection Schedule. 
A.  Collection of recyclables through an approved recycling collection program may occur 6 days per week, excluding Sundays, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. in residential and commercial districts, and in industrial districts by hours approved by the City Manager or his/her designated representative. 
B.  The City's approved curbside recycling collection program will not be operated on legal holidays as approved by the City. The authorized recycler shall be required to provide collection during the week of the holiday and shall be required to provide customers with advance notice of any change to scheduling. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.160 - Recycling Licensing Requirements. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, no one other than an authorized recycler shall collect and transport recyclables. 
B.  An authorized recycler shall obtain a current license from, or enter into a contract, or franchise agreement with the City, as determined by the City Council, authorizing the recycler to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer, process, or market recyclable materials within the City, except as otherwise provided by state or federal law. Such license, contract, or franchise agreement may be revoked by the City Council for noncompliance with the provisions of said license, contract, or franchise agreement or for violations of the provisions of this Chapter or any pertinent federal, state or local law. The terms and conditions under which an authorized recycler is required to operate shall be specified in the applicable license, contract, and/or franchise, and shall be administered by the City Manager or his/her designated representative. The fees and rates, if any, for such collection and processing and marketing operations shall be established by resolution of the City Council, by ordinance (if required by law) or by agreement with the City. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to handle, haul, collect, transport, store, transfer, process, or market recyclable materials within the City, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter or, in the case of an emergency, as authorized the City Council. 
(Ord. 1272 C.S. § 5, 2000: Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.170 - Nonprofit Organization Recycling Fund Raising Permits. 
A recycling fund raising permit shall be required for any nonprofit organization wishing to collect and haul recyclable materials. Such permit shall be obtained from the City Manager or his/her designee and shall be granted only if the following conditions have been, or will be, complied with: 
1.  Only recyclable materials shall be collected and hauled. 
2.  Collection schedule shall not conflict with collection by authorized solid waste collectors and authorized recyclers. 
3.  Such recycling activities shall be incidental to the main purpose of the nonprofit organization. 
4.  Reporting information on categories and volume of recyclable materials collected shall be provided to the City as prescribed by the City. 
5.  The organization demonstrates to the City Manager or his/her designee that the organization is nonprofit. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.180 - Exceptions to Licensing and Franchising Requirements. 
No license, franchise or contract shall be required for a person or business: 
1.  Handling, hauling, or transporting recyclable materials from his/her own residence or business for purposes of recycling of same at an authorized recycling facility or transfer station, provided, however, that the person or business is not engaged in the business of handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring or processing of solid waste. 
2.  Transporting recyclable materials over the streets of the City, where all of such recyclable materials so transported originates or originated: (a) outside the limits of the City; or (b) from a landscape maintenance work site and is being transported to another location outside the City or to an authorized disposal area, compost operation, or transfer station. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.190 - Interference with Authorized Recyclers Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with the handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transfer- ring or processing of recyclable materials by an authorized recycler. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.200 - Unauthorized Collection Prohibited. 
Commencing at 12:01 a.m. on the day preceding the day designated for collection of recyclable materials, no other person other than the generator or the authorized recycler shall remove recyclable material which has been placed in an approved recycling container at a designated recycling collection station. Each unauthorized collection from one or more designated recycling collection stations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.210 - Civil Action by Authorized Recycler. 
This Chapter does not limit the right of an authorized recycler to bring a civil action against a person who violates Section 8.18.200 A criminal conviction for such violation does not exempt a person from a civil action brought by an authorized recycler. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.220 - Requirements Generally for Vehicles, Conveyances, and Containers. 
Except for vehicles, conveyances, and containers used by persons described in Sections 8.18.170 and 8.18.180, all vehicles, conveyances or containers used for handling, hauling, collecting, transporting, storing, transferring or processing recyclables within or through the City shall be: 
1.  of such construction as to comply fully with all laws, rules and regulations of the State pertaining thereto. 
2.  maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
3.  uniformly painted. 
4.  include the name and phone number of the authorized recycler in letters not smaller than six inches high. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.230 - Collection Vehicles and Hauling Requirements for Authorized Recyclers. 
Except for vehicles used by persons described in Sections 8.18.170 and 8.18.180, an authorized recycler who conveys, handles, hauls, collects, transports, stores, transfers or processes recyclables within or through the City shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Recyclables shall be hauled in all-metal, watertight bodied motor trucks, of sufficient strength to withstand fire within, without endangering persons or property, and to prevent spillage, leakage or escape of noxious gases. 
2.  Each truck shall be equipped with covering drawn over the load as completed to full depth. Recyclables in the truck shall be contained in a manner so that the contents do not sift through or fall upon the street and do not blow upon the street or adjacent property. Any spillage of materials shall be immediately cleaned up at the expense of the authorized recycler. 
3.  The trucks shall be registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles and shall be kept in good repair. 
4.  In addition to the name and phone number of the authorized recycler, each collection truck shall also include the truck number in letters not smaller than six inches high. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.240 - Recycling Container Requirements. 
A.  Authorized recyclers shall provide each owner or occupant of a single-family residential unit one or more approved recycling containers to use for storage and collection of recyclables. 
B.  Authorized recyclers shall provide the management of multi-family units and other non-residential establishments sufficient approved recycling containers to use for storage and collection of recyclables. 
C.  With the permission of the respective owner, persons residing in a multi-family dwelling complex and tenants of non- residential establishments may share in the use of containers furnished or approved by an authorized recycler pursuant to regulations prescribed by the City. 
D.  An approved recycling container shall at all times be kept in good, usable and sanitary condition. 
E.  Approved recycling containers provided by an authorized recycler remain the property of the City or the authorized recycler as specified by agreement between them. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.250 - Recycling Container Placement. 
A.  No recycling container, other than one owned by the City, shall be placed or kept in or on any public street, sidewalk, footpath or any public place whatsoever, or remain in public view from any public right-of-way except as herein provided. No person shall place a container so that either the sidewalk or street gutter is obstructed. 
B.  Approved recycling containers are permitted to be placed in public view and on a public street, sidewalk or footpath only during the forty-eight hour period commencing at 12:01 a.m. on the day preceding the day of scheduled pick-up and terminating at 12:01 a.m. on the day following such pick-up. 
C.  For curbside pick-up, the collection station shall be the street curb line adjacent to such premises, and approved recycling containers shall be placed in the location by the occupant of such premises for collection by the authorized recycler. 
D.  The owners of multi-family residential complexes and other non-residential establishments which receive communal refuse and recycling services shall provide and maintain space within or adjacent to each trash enclosure, or adjacent to each dumpster or other trash container for placement of sufficient approved recycling containers. 
E.  Each person who has an approved recycling container shall keep the area where the container is located in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.260 - Recycling Collection Site Plan Required— Existing Structures. 
A.  Each owner of a multi-family residential complex and other non-residential establishments shall ensure that a recycling collection site Plan is submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The Plan shall: 
1.  Include a waste audit on a form to be prescribed by the City which shall identify the categories and volume of recyclables generated on the property. 
2.  Designate space on the property to be used for collection of all recyclable materials generated on the property. 
3.  Identify the means of recycling to be used by the property, such as reverse vending machines, off-site collection facilities, mobile recycling units, on-site or off-site processing facilities. 
4.  Identify the means and frequency of any off-site transport of recyclables. 
5.  Identify the contact person responsible for coordinating the recycling collection site plan. 
B.  The first Plan shall be submitted to the City by January 1, 1994, and thereafter upon reasonable notice by the City. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.270 - Recycling Collection Site Plan Required—New Development Projects. 
On or after September 1, 1993, in addition to the requirements of Section 8.18.260, any new development project and/or any project for which an application for a building permit is submitted for modifications that meet one or both of the conditions below shall also meet all the requirements of Section 8.18.272: 
1.  Modification to the project adds 30% or more to the existing floor area, or 
2.  The price of modification exceeds 10% of the then current assessed value of the subject parcel. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.272 - Recycling Collection Site Plan Design Standards—New Development Projects. 
A.  The design and construction of the recycling area(s) shall be compatible with surrounding land uses and shall be located so they are at least as convenient as the location where solid waste is collected. Areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials should be adjacent to the solid waste collection area(s) and shall be adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to serve the development project. 
B.  Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate an adequate number of containers consistent with current methods of collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development project. 
C.  A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area(s). 
D.  Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the authorized recycler in the area in which the development project exists. 
E.  Residential developers and property owners are encouraged to include recycling areas or systems within the residence; such as roll-out drawers below the sink for recycling receptacles; fireproof, cleanable, secure chutes from the living space to the space for collecting and loading recyclable materials, etc. The recommended internal storage space for recyclables for individual living units of residential development projects is three (3) cubic feet. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.280 - Recycling Collection Site Plan Approval. 
A.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall approve the Plan for conformance to the requirements and intent of this Chapter and consistency with provisions of the Municipal Code. 
B.  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action taken by the City Manager. Each Plan submitted under 8.18.260 must be fully implemented within three (3) months after the approval date and/or in the case of new development projects within three (3) months from receiving occupancy permit. 
C.  If the Plan is denied, the applicant must resubmit a revised Plan within one (1) month after the denial date. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.300 - Food Packaging Voluntary Phase Out Period. 
The City encourages the immediate, voluntary phase out of take-out food packaging sold or offered at retail food establishments within the City, that is neither returnable, nor made with a significant amount of post-consumer recycled material. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.310 - Returnable and Recyclable Food Packaging. 
A.  On and after January 1, 1995 at least 25% by volume of each retail food establishment's packaging in which take-out food is sold or provided to customers or which is kept, purchased or obtained for this purpose, shall be returnable or recyclable. 
B.  On and after January 1, 1997 at least 50% by volume of each retail food establishment's packaging in which take-out food is sold or provided to customers or which is kept, purchased or obtained for this purpose, shall be returnable or recyclable. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.320 - Prohibited Food Packaging. 
On and after January 1, 1995 no retail food establishment shall purchase, obtain, keep, sell, distribute or otherwise use in its business any polystyrene CFC-processed take-out food packaging. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.330 - Retail Food Establishment Reporting Requirements. 
A.  On and after January 1, 1995 a retail food establishment shall maintain a written statement from the take-out food packaging supplier or manufacturer specifying: 
1.  The identity of the packaging's manufacturer. 
2.  Whether the packaging is returnable. 
3.  Whether the packaging is recyclable. 
4.  The minimum amount of post-consumer recycled material in the packaging material. 
5.  That the packaging is not CFC-processed. 
The written statement shall be made available to any person upon request. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any food packaging manufacturer or retail food establishment to make any misstatement of material fact to the City Manager or his/her designee regarding the returnable or recyclable nature of the packaging material or the use or non-use of CFCs in the manufacture of the packaging material. 
C.  A retail food establishment shall maintain written records evidencing its compliance with this Chapter. 
D.  A retail food establishment shall confirm its compliance with this ordinance on its annual business license renewal form. 
E.  All statements and documents required by this Chapter shall be made available for inspection by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.340 - Food Packaging Exemptions. 
Except as provided in Section 8.18.320, the City Manager or designee may exempt a retail food establishment or a take-out food packaging material from the provisions of this Chapter for a one- year period, renewable annually, upon proper written application and a showing of undue hardship or a showing that no appropriate substitute take-out food packaging is available. Such application shall include a list of all food packaging suppliers or manufacturers contacted regarding the availability of substitute take-out food packaging. 
(Ord. 1198 C.S., 1993.)  
8.18.350—8.18.380 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 2, adopted June 18, 2014, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 8.18.350—8.18.380 in their entirety. Former §§ 8.18.350—8.18.380 pertained to plastic film voluntary phase out period, returnable and recyclable plastic film shopping and drycleaning bags, plastic film reporting requirements, and plastic film packaging exemptions, respectively. Former §§ 8.18.350—8.18.380 derived from Ord. 1198 C.S. of 1993.  
CHAPTER 8.19 - RECYCLING OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, adopted January 22, 2014, amended the title of Ch. 8.19. 
 
8.19.010 - Findings. 
The Martinez City Council finds the following: 
A.  The State of California through its California Waste Management Act of 1989, Assembly Bill 939 ("AB 939"), requires that each local jurisdiction in the state divert 50% of discarded materials from landfills. 
B.  In compliance with AB 939, the City Council adopted the City of Martinez Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) and Household Hazardous Waste Element (HHWE) in 1993. 
C.  Reuse and recycling of Construction and Demolition (C&D) debris is essential to reduce waste and comply with AB 939 and AB341 that establishes a 75% statewide diversion goal since construction and demolition debris make up approximately 19% of the City's waste stream and approximately 30% of the statewide waste stream, and is the second most prevalent material type being disposed. 
D.  Except in unusual circumstances, it is feasible to divert at least 50% of all construction and demolition debris from construction, demolition, and renovation projects. 
E.  The City of Martinez joined other cities in Contra Costa County and the California Integrated Waste Management Board (CIWMB), now known as the California Department of Resources, Recycling, and Recovery (CalRecycle), in adopting an ordinance in 2006 that required construction, demolition and renovation projects to recycle and divert construction and demolition debris from landfill disposal. 
F.  The passage of the new CalGreen Building Code requires that all new construction and demolition projects, and certain addition and alteration projects, be subject to the 50% recycling requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Applicant means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits or approvals to undertake construction, demolition or renovation projects within the city. 
B.  AB 939 shall mean the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Construction means the building or improvement of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure. 
D.  Construction and demolition debris (C&D debris) means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on any pavement, residential or commercial building or other structure. 
E.  Conversion factor means the value set forth in the standardized volume-to-weight conversion table approved by the City pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a Waste Management Plan (WMP). 
F.  Covered project means projects that shall be subject to the requirements of this Chapter. 
G.  Deconstruction means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse or recycling. 
H.  Demolition means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
I.  Divert means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
J.  Diversion requirement means diversion from the waste stream of at least 50% of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasibility exemption pursuant to Section 8.19.070, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project. 
K.  Non-covered project shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.19.040(B) of this chapter. 
L.  Project means any activity, which requires an application for a building, grading or demolition permit, or any similar permit from the city. 
M.  Recycling means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
N.  Renovation means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure for which a permit is required. 
O.  Reuse means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris. 
P.  Salvage means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
Q.  Solid waste shall have the same meaning as provided in the City's Municipal Code, and shall exclude recyclables placed in an approved recycling container. 
R.  Total costs means the total construction value of the project using standard commercial and residential valuation formulas. 
S.  Waste management plan (WMP) means a completed WMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
The WMP shall identify anticipated C&D debris materials that will be generated for disposal and recycling. The WMP will record actual material weight or volume and disposal and recycling receipts. 
T.  WMP compliance official (official) means the designated city employee(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.030 - Diversion Requirement. 
The applicant for a covered project, as defined below, shall divert at least 50% of construction and demolition debris unless the applicant is granted an infeasibility exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.040 - Threshold for Covered Projects. 
A.  Covered Projects. Every residential and non-residential construction and demolition project; every residential renovation project; additions to non-residential buildings or structures of at least 1,000 square feet; and alterations to non-residential buildings or structures with an estimated construction cost of at least $200,000.00 within the City of Martinez, shall be considered a covered project and shall comply with the diversion requirement and with the other requirements of this chapter. For the purposes of determining whether a project meets the foregoing thresholds for a covered project, all phases of the project and all related projects taking place on a single or adjoining parcel shall be deemed a single project. 
B.  Non-covered Projects. Construction, demolition and renovation projects within the city that do not meet the threshold for covered projects shall be considered non-covered projects. Applicants for non-covered projects shall be encouraged to meet the 50% diversion requirement. Immediate or emergency demolition required to protect the public health, safety or welfare, as determined by a public safety official or code compliance officer shall also be considered a non-covered project. 
C.  Public Projects of the City. All construction, demolition and renovation projects undertaken by the City of Martinez shall be considered covered projects for the purposes of this chapter. The project sponsor shall submit a WMP to the official prior to beginning any construction or demolition activities. 
D.  Building and Demolition Permits. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be identified as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.050 - Submission of the Waste Management Plan (WMP). 
A.  WMP Form. All applicants for covered projects shall complete and submit a WMP on a form provided by the City as part of the application requirements for a building, grading or demolition permit. The completed WMP shall include all of the following: 
1.  Identification of C&D debris material to be generated by the project; and 
2.  For each type of C&D debris material, declare whether the disposal method will be "Recycle," "Salvage" or "Landfill;" and 
3.  For each type of C&D debris material which will be diverted, identification of the vendor or facility that will collect or receive the material. 
B.  Deconstruction and Material Salvage. In preparing the WMP, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to being transported for disposal to a recycling center, transformation facility, or landfill. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.060 - Diversion Security Deposit Required. 
Each applicant of a covered project shall submit as part of the WMP a diversion security deposit, in cash or by irrevocable letter of credit, in the amount of 1% of the total costs for the project or $500.00, whichever is greater. The deposit shall be returned, without interest, in total or in proportion, upon the WMP compliance official's determination, in accordance with Section 8.19.090 that the applicant has satisfied, or failed to satisfy, the diversion requirement approved as part of the WMP. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.070 - Infeasibility Exemption. 
A.  Application. If an applicant for a covered project believes that circumstances exist which make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the WMP as required by Section 8.19.050 of this chapter. The applicant shall state on the WMP form the maximum rate of diversion the applicant believes is feasible for each type of C&D debris material and the specific circumstances why the applicant believes it is infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
B.  WMP Compliance Official Review. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement. 
C.  Granting the Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the official shall put the reasons for this determination in writing based on the criteria contained in paragraph E below. The WMP compliance official shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each C&D debris material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP application submitted by the applicant. The official shall then determine the diversion rate which will be applicable for the project. The official shall return a copy of the WMP application to the applicant marked "Approved for Infeasibility Exemption" and shall notify the building department that the WMP has been approved provided that the applicant has posted the required diversion security deposit. 
D.  Denial of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the 50% diversion requirement specified in Section 8.19.030, the official shall state the reasons therefore in writing based on the criteria contained in paragraph E below. The applicant shall have 30 days to resubmit a WMP application that complies with Section 8.19.050. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not satisfy the requirements of Section 8.19.080(B), the official shall deny the WMP in accordance with Section 8.19.080(D). 
E.  Criteria. In determining whether to approve or deny an application for an exemption from the diversion requirement, the WMP compliance official shall base his or her written determination on the following criteria. 
1.  The presence or absence of exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the project that do not apply to similar projects. 
2.  A determination of whether the granting the exemption constitutes a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations imposed on like projects. 
3.  In determining whether to approve or deny an application for an exemption, the cost to the applicant of satisfying the diversion requirement shall not be the primary reason for granting an exemption although cost may be a factor in the official's determination of whether there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the project. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.080 - Review of the Waste Management Plan (WMP). 
A.  WMP Approval Required for Issuance of Construction Permits. No building or demolition permit shall be issued or approved for any covered project unless and until the WMP has been approved. 
B.  WMP Approval. A WMP shall be approved only if the official determines that the following conditions have been satisfied: 
1.  The WMP form submitted by the applicant satisfies all of the requirements specified in Section 8.19.050 and the official has determined that the form is complete. 
2.  The applicant demonstrates to the WMP Compliance Official's satisfaction, that at least 50% of the C&D debris for the covered project, or an alternative percentage approved by the official as part of the infeasibility exemption, will be diverted. 
3.  The applicant has posted the required diversion security deposit. 
C.  Notification to Applicant and Building Official. If the official determines that these conditions have been met, the official shall approve the WMP application, issue a copy of the approved application to the applicant and notify the City building official that the WMP application has been approved. 
D.  Disapproval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP application is incomplete, fails to include the required diversion security deposit, or fails to demonstrate compliance with the diversion requirement, the official shall either: 
1.  Return the WMP application form to the applicant marked "Denied," and include a written statement of the reasons for the disapproval; or 
2.  Return the WMP application form to the applicant with the WMP marked "Further Explanation Required" and include written instructions for providing the necessary explanation. 
E.  Notification to Building Official if WMP Disapproved. If the WMP application is disapproved by the WMP compliance official in either manner specified in Section 8.19.080(D), the official shall so notify the City building official who shall immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit for the project. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.090 - Determination of Compliance and Release of Diversion Security Deposit. 
A.  WMP Final Submission. Within 30 days after the completion of construction for any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official documentation that the applicant has met the diversion requirement for the project. This documentation shall include the following: 
1.  A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project with actual material volume or weight generated by the project; and 
2.  Receipts and/or disposal weight records from both disposal and recycling facilities and/or vendors that received each material showing whether the material was landfilled or recycled; and 
3.  Any additional information that the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter. 
B.  Weighing of C&D Debris Materials. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D waste diverted or landfilled is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or to other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates provided by the City for this purpose. 
C.  Determination of Compliance. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted by the applicant and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement. 
D.  Full Compliance. If the official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project as contained in the approved WMP, the official shall release the full diversion security deposit to the applicant. 
E.  Less than Full Compliance. If the WMP compliance official finds that the applicant has not satisfied the diversion requirement for the project, the official shall calculate the applicant's percentage rate of compliance. The official shall then determine whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement. In making this determination, the official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris, the size of the project and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert the C&D debris. The official shall then authorize the release of some or all of the deposit to the applicant. At a minimum, the applicant shall be entitled to a release of that portion of the diversion security deposit which equals the applicant's percentage rate of compliance. Therefore, if the applicant has achieved 60% of the diversion requirement for the project, the official shall release at least 60% of the diversion security deposit. The official shall furnish the applicant in writing with the method by which the official calculated the applicant's percentage of compliance and the reasons for the official's determination of the amount of the deposit to be released to the applicant. 
F.  Failure to Submit Documentation. If the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Section 8.19.090(A) within the required time period of 30 days after the completion of a covered project, the entire diversion security deposit shall be deemed forfeited. The official shall inform the applicant in writing of the forfeiture of the deposit for failure to timely submit the required documentation. If the documentation is submitted after the required time period, but before the City has informed the applicant in writing, the official shall evaluate whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement for the project. However, 10% of the deposit shall be deemed forfeited to the City because of the applicant's failure to submit the required documentation within the required time period. 
G.  Withdrawal of Building or Demolition Permit Application. The WMP compliance official shall authorize the refund of the entire diversion security deposit if the building or demolition permit is withdrawn or cancelled before any work begins. 
H.  Use of Retained Diversion Security Deposits. All diversion security deposit monies retained by the City shall be used only for the purpose of administering the program established through this chapter or for the purpose of promoting recycling within the City. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.100 - Appeals. 
A.  Appeal to the City Manager or the City Manager's Designee. An applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision or determination of the WMP compliance official to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The applicant must file a notice of appeal within 10 calendar days from the date of the official's decision or determination. The notice of appeal shall state the reasons for the appeal as well as all of the evidence and legal arguments upon which the applicant bases the appeal. The appeal must also be accompanied by the appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall schedule the appeal for a hearing and provide the applicant at least 5 days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall inform the applicant in writing whether the decision or determination of the WMP compliance official shall be affirmed, denied or modified. The written determination by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall include the reasons for the determination. 
B.  Appeal to the City Council. The applicant may appeal the determination of the City Manager or the City Manager's designee to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days from the date of the City Manager's or the City Manager's designee's written determination. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee established by City Council resolution. The notice of appeal shall also include all evidence and legal arguments which the applicant wishes the City Council and any reviewing court to consider. The City Clerk shall cause the appeal to be set for hearing before the City Council. The City Clerk shall provide the applicant with no less than 10 days written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The written determination of the City Council at the conclusion of the hearing shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.110 - Administrative Fee. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit for a covered project, the applicant shall pay the City a fee, established by resolution of the City Council and equivalent to 1 "Pre-work or Site Inspection" staff hour per the city's staff cost rate table, to compensate the City for staffing expenses incurred in administering this Article. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
8.19.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  Public Nuisance. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.13 of this Code. 
B.  Civil Action. Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced by any means available to the City, including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief. In any civil action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs from the defendant if it is determined that defendant violated this chapter. 
C.  Misdemeanor. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1376 C.S., § 1, 1-22-2014; Ord. 1325 C.S., § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 8.20 - JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
8.20.010 - Abatement—Authority—Findings—Definitions. 
A.  In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State under Sections 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the legislative body of the City makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways, creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  As used in this Chapter: 
1.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
2.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
3.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
4.  "Inoperative vehicle" includes a mobile home not currently being used legally as a residence under the provisions of Chapter 22.25 of this Code. 
C.  No person shall permit the presence of or park an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property, including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted. 
(Ord. 1140 C.S. § I part, 1989: Ord. 1137 C.S. § I part,1989: Ord. 1119 C.S. § II part, 1988: Prior code § 3519.)  
8.20.020 - Exceptions to Chapter. 
A.  The following are exceptions to this Chapter: 
1.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  Nothing in this Section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Sections 22650 et seq. of the Vehicle Code and the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Prior code § 3520.)  
8.20.030 - Chapter Not Exclusive Regulation. 
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City or the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 3521.)  
8.20.040 - Enforcement—Right of Entry—Removal—Administrative Cost Assessment. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief. In the enforcement of this Chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. 
B.  When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. 
C.  The City Council shall from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof under this Chapter. 
(Prior code § 3522.)  
8.20.045 - Abatement—Authority. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the City, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.050 - Abatement—Notices. 
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE 
AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE 
OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Sections 8.20.045 of the Martinez Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ____________ , license number ____________ , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.20.010 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle is or are located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle is or are located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police within such ten (10) day period, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle on said land, with your reason for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	_____	/s/ 	_____
	(date) 		(Chief of Police) 
 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN 
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE 
VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered 
and/or legal owner of record of vehicle 
- -notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), the undersigned, pursuant to Sections 8.20.045 of the Martinez Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle or parts of a vehicle exist(s) as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitute(s) a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.20.010 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this Notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police within such ten (10) day period, the Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	_____	/s/ 	_____
	(date) 		(Chief of Police) 
 
If any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered, a hearing shall be held by the Chief of Police or his designee on the question of abatement and removal no earlier than five (5) days after receipt of the return. Further notice of the hearing need not be sent to the addressee to whom a notice was earlier sent but undelivered. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.060 - Abatement—Hearing—Procedure. 
A.  Upon request, by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land, received by the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Chief of Police or his designee on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
B.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.070 - Abatement—Hearing—Action. 
A.  All hearings under this Chapter shall be held before the Chief of Police or his designee who is designated as hearing officer in this Chapter, who shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial. 
B.  The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicles, or parts thereof, if in his/her opinion the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has (have) been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is or are inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in Sections 8.20.090 and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if available at the site. 
C.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner of the land. 
D.  The decision made after hearing shall be written and mailed to the property and/or vehicle owner. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III, part 1988.)  
8.20.080 - Abatement—Hearing—Appeal of Decision. 
A.  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the said hearing officer within five (5) days after mailing its decision. 
B.  Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
C.  The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Sections 8.20.050. 
D.  In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.090 - Removal of Vehicles—Reconstruction Restricted—Final Disposition. 
A.  Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance under Sections 8.20.060 (B) where no hearing was held, five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision pursuant to Sections 8.20.090, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed of as provided in subsections B of this Section. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Sections 5004 of the California Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
B.  Vehicles, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. 
C.  Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificate, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.100 - Assessment of Costs as Tax on Property. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Sections 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection, except under those circumstances described in Sections 8.20.070(C). The assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.110 - Penalty for Failure to Remove. 
It is unlawful and an infraction punishable as provided in Sections 1.12.030 for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance, and citations may be issued and served for such violations at any time, irrespective of whether or not abatement proceedings have been initiated hereunder. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III part, 1988.)  
8.20.115 - Administration and Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of Sections 8.20.045 through 8.20.110 shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police or his designee. In the enforcement of Sections 8.20.045 through 8.20.110 such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to Sections 8.20.045 through 8.20.110, and/or remove or cause the removal of such a vehicle or part(s) thereof. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III (part), 1988.)  
8.20.120 - Removal of Vehicles from Streets When. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of this City may remove, or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing on a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing on a street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway, or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that such signs giving notice that such vehicles may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 1119 C.S. § III (part), 1988.)  
CHAPTER 8.22 - LARGE VENUE AND LARGE EVENT RECYCLING 
 
8.22.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Applicant" means any individual, association, club, business, government agency, or any other public or private entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permit to hold a large event within the City. 
B.  "AB 939" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time. 
C.  "AB 2176" means AB 2176, Montanez, (Statutes of 2004), as it may be amended from time to time. 
D.  "Diversion requirement" means redirection from the waste stream of at least 50% of waste materials generated by large events or venues through reuse or recycling. 
E.  "Individual" means a person who works at (with or without compensation), or attends, a large venue or large event, or a customer who is seated or served at the large venue or large event. 
F.  "Jurisdiction" means a City, County, a combined City and County, or a group of cities or counties acting as a Board-approved regional agency with the responsibility for meeting AB 939 State Integrated Waste Management Act requirements. 
G.  "Large event" means an event that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency, and serves and/or is attended by an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of the event, including, but not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or other open space when being used for an event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a flea market. 
H.  "Large venue" means a permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this Chapter, a venue facility includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes of this Chapter, a site under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. 
I.  "Large event and venue recycling plan" or "plan" means a plan developed by the large venue owner or the large event organizer or his/her designated representative that describes how materials will be segregated and collected for reuse or recycling. 
J.  "Recycling" or "recycle" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
K.  "Recyclables or recyclable material" shall have the same meaning as provided in the City's Municipal Code and includes materials which are reused or processed or are in the future reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. The term "recyclables or recyclable material" includes mixed paper, glass, aluminum, cardboard, chipboard (e.g., cereal and shoe boxes), newsprint, plastic food and beverage containers No. 1-7, tin/bimetal containers, compostable materials, used motor oil, oil filters, automotive batteries, antifreeze, latex paint, brick, stone, wood, soil, or concrete in reusable condition, and such other materials designated by City's AB 939 Coordinator, or designated as recyclables by the California Integrated Waste Board, or other agency with jurisdiction. 
L.  "Reuse" means further or repeated use of materials in their original form. 
M.  "Solid waste" shall have the same meaning as provided in the City's Municipal Code, and shall exclude recyclables placed in an approved recycling container. 
N.  "Commercial recycler" means a licensed business which specializes in accepting waste materials for recycling or reuse and is authorized to operate in the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1343 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
8.22.020 - Large Event and Venue Recycling Procedure. 
An applicant who wishes to conduct a large event or conduct an event in or at a large venue must first apply for and obtain a special event permit from the City. As a condition to the issuance of said permit (along with any other conditions imposed by the City pursuant to any other permitting authority it may have) the applicant must prepare a recycling plan in the form approved by the City. Among other things, the plan shall include an estimate of the amount and types of waste anticipated to be generated by the event and a description of the proposed actions or services to be used by the applicant to reduce or recycle the solid waste generated by or at the event. The recyclables that shall be subject to and addressed in said plan include, but are not limited to, glass, aluminum, plastic food and beverage containers, newspaper/magazines, mixed paper waste, cardboard, and organic waste, including food waste. The applicant shall comply with the terms and conditions of the plan. Within 10 days after the large event or the event in the large venue has terminated, the applicant shall submit the plan to the City, properly filled out and executed. 
(Ord. 1343 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
8.22.030 - Applicability. 
Any applicant seeking permission for the temporary or periodic use or occupancy of a public, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or other open space within the City of Martinez for a civic, commercial, recreational, or social event which meets the definition of a "large event" shall be required to comply with this Chapter. 
Large venue facilities include, but are not limited to, stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction. Any owner or operator of a permanent facility located within the City of Martinez which meets the definition of a "large venue" shall be required to comply with this Chapter. When a large venue owner provides space for a tenant, event management subcontractor, or otherwise permits the large venue to be used by a third party, that owner shall be jointly responsible for user's compliance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1343 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
CHAPTER 8.23 - CARRYOUT BAGS 
 
8.23.010. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter only, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Carryout Bag" means any bag, including a plastic bag, provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food, merchandise, or other goods out of a retail establishment or a public eating establishment. Carryout bags do not include product bags or plastic garment bags. 
B.  "Customer" means any person purchasing goods from a retail establishment or a public eating establishment. 
C.  "Inspector" means an individual designated by the City Manager to conduct any inspections required or permitted under this Chapter. 
D.  "Operator" means the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a retail establishment or public eating establishment, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of a retail establishment or a public eating establishment. 
E.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group however organized. 
F.  "Plastic Bag" means any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum, ethylene derived from natural gas, or a biologically-based source, such as corn or other plant sources. The term "plastic bag" includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable bags, recycled paper carryout bags, produce bags, or products bags. 
G.  "Postconsumer Recycled Material" means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. Postconsumer recycled material does not include materials and by-products generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process. 
H.  "Prepared Food" means foods or beverages which are prepared on premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further preparation to be consumed, other than heating. Prepared food does not include any raw, uncooked meat product or fruits or vegetables which are chopped, squeezed or mixed. 
I.  "Produce Bag" means any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a retail establishment or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items. 
J.  "Product Bag" means a bag integrated into the packaging of the product or a bag used: 
1.  To hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; or 
2.  To segregate food or merchandise that could damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag or recycled paper carryout bag (examples include small paper bag for greeting cards, paper bags to protect glass bottles, plastic bags around ice cream or other wet items, paper bags used to weigh candy, etc.); 
3.  Plastic garment bags. 
K.  "Public Eating Establishment" means a restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other business that received 90% or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises. 
L.  "Recyclable" means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purposes of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. Recycling does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste. 
M.  "Recycled Paper Carryout Bag" means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Contains no old growth fiber; 
2.  Is 100% recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40% postconsumer recycled material; 
3.  Displays the word "Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag; and 
4.  Displays the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used. 
Recycled paper carryout bags do not include produce bags or product bags. 
N.  "Retail Establishment" means any commercial establishment that sells perishable or nonperishable goods including, but not limited to, clothing, food, and personal items directly to a customer; and is located within or doing business within the geographical limits of the City of Martinez. Retail establishment does not include nonprofit charitable reuser organization. 
O.  "Reusable Bag" means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all the following requirements: 
1.  Has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capability of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times over a distance of at least 175 feet; 
2.  Is machine washable or capable of being cleaning and disinfected; 
3.  Does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts as defined by applicable state and federal standards and regulations for packaging or reusable bags; and 
4.  If made of plastic, a minimum of 2.25 mils thick. 
P.  "Nonprofit Charitable Reuser" means a charitable organization, as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or a distinct operating unit or division f the charitable organization, that reuses and recycles donated goods or materials and receives more than 50% of its revenues from the handling and sale of those donated goods or materials. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.020 - Plastic Carryout Bags Prohibited. 
Effective January 1, 2015, no retail establishment or public eating establishment shall provide any carryout bag to a customer except as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.030 - Permitted Bags. 
All retail establishments or public eating establishments shall provide or make available to a customer only recycled paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that they bring to the retail establishment or public eating establishment themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.040 - Regulation of Recycled Paper Carryout Bags for Retail Establishments. 
A.  Any retail establishment that provides a recycled paper carryout bag to a customer must charge the customer for each bag provided, except as otherwise as exempted in paragraph D below. 
B.  Except as exempted in paragraph D below, the minimum charge per recycled paper carryout bag will initially be $0.10. The City Manager may increase the minimum charge up to no more than $0.25 if he or she finds the amount should be increased to appropriately disincentivize consumers from electing to use recycled paper carryout bags. All collected monies will be retained by the retail establishment. 
C.  All Retail Establishments must indicate on the customer receipt the number of recycled paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the bags. 
D.  All Retail Establishments must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, either reusable bags or recycled paper carryout bags or both, at the retail establishment's option, to any customer participating either in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code or the Supplemental Food Program Pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutional Code, the State Department of Social Security's Food Stamp program, other government-subsidized purchase programs for low income residents. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.050 - Use of Reusable Bags. 
A.  All retail establishments must make reusable bags available to customers for purchase. Exemptions will be made for sanctioned reusable bag giveaway events that are intended to promote the use of reusable bags not exceeding a total of 90 days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
B.  Each retail establishment is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.060 - Inspection. 
An inspector shall have the right to enter any retail establishment or public eating establishment during regular business hours, without a search or inspection warrant, to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
8.23.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  The City Manager and Chief of Police or their designees are authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this Chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing citations, and entering the premises of any retail establishment or public eating establishment during business hours. Other City staff may assist with this enforcement responsibility by entering the premises of a retail establishment or public eating establishment as part of their regular inspection functions and reporting any alleged violations to the City Manager, Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
B.  If any of those individuals specified above determine that a violation of this Chapter has occurred, he/she will issue a written warning notice to the operator of the retail establishment or public eating establishment that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that will apply for future violations. 
C.  Any retail establishment or public eating establishment that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of the Chapter after a written notice has been issued for a previous violation shall be guilty of an infraction punishable as specified in Title 1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1381 C.S., § 3, 6-8-2014)  
CHAPTER 8.24 - PARK AND RECREATION AREA REGULATIONS 
 
8.24.010 - Purpose. 
In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the many residents and nonresidents who utilize the various City park facilities, it is necessary to regulate the specific use(s) within the municipal park system. The purpose of this Chapter is to control animals, vehicular traffic, equestrian traffic, dumping garbage and the requiring of permits for use of specific areas within the parks by groups. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.012 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall apply in this Chapter: 
A.  "Director" means the Recreation Director of the City. 
B.  "Legal authority" means the City Council, the Recreation and Park Commission, or any person or persons authorized by the City Council to enforce the rules and regulations promulgated under this Chapter. 
C.  "Park and Recreation Area" means any public area in the City devoted or dedicated to park and recreational purposes. 
D.  "Skate board" means a board-like object which the user rides or stands upon, which has 2 axles attached to the bottom of the board-like object with 2 wheels attached to each axle. 
E.  "In-line skates" means footwear containing 4 or more axles mounted in a straight line extending generally from or behind the heels of the footwear to or in front of the toe of the footwear with a single wheel attached to each axle. 
F.  "Skate Park Facility" means the area located in the Martinez Marina Park Facility adjacent to North Court Street which is surfaced with concrete and which contains dips, bowls and jumps designed for use by skateboarders and in-line skaters. 
G.  "Designated Dog Park Facility" means a park and recreation area facility set aside (temporarily or otherwise) for dogs to exercise and play off-leash in a controlled environment under the supervision of their owners/handlers. 
(Ord. 1300 C.S. § 1, 2003; Ord. 1052 C.S. § V (part), 1985: Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.) 
(Ord. No. 1405 C.S. , § 1, 6-7-2017)  
8.24.014 - Rules and Regulations. 
The rules and regulations contained in this Chapter shall apply to and be in full force and effect at all park and recreation areas which now are or which may hereafter be under the jurisdiction and control of the City, and shall govern the use of all such park and recreation areas, and it is unlawful to violate the rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.020 - Reservations and Permits Required. 
No group of more than 30 persons shall use a recreational facility without first obtaining a written permit from the Director, and then only under the terms and conditions set forth in Sections 8.24.180 of this Chapter. Fees shall be established by resolution when deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.022 - Control of Dogs and Other Domestic Animals. 
The owner/handler of all dogs and other domestic animals shall maintain such animals under such owner/handler's complete control at all times. Said animals shall be controlled by use of a leash, excepting those dogs within a designated dog park facility. Domestic animals shall not be permitted in picnic or play areas, or any other areas so designated, with the exception of a designated dog park facility. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.) 
(Ord. No. 1405 C.S. , § 2, 6-7-2017)  
8.24.024 - Horses and Livestock. 
Horses and other livestock shall be permitted only on those trails and in those areas specifically designated for equestrian use. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.030 - Motorized Vehicles. 
It is unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any motorized vehicle of any kind to use any area of the park(s) other than those areas clearly established for public vehicular use. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.040 - Parking and Hours. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with any posted directions or with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
B.  No person shall cause any private vehicle to enter or remain on any recreational facility between those hours posted and/or without written permission of the Director. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.050 - Boating. 
Boating shall be permitted only in those areas specifically designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.060 - Refuse, Trash and Litter. 
No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or any trash anywhere on the park grounds, but it shall be placed in proper receptacles provided for such purposes. No such items, refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters contiguous to any park or recreation area. Where receptacles are not provided, all such items, refuse or trash shall be carried away from the park or recreation area by the person or persons responsible for its presence. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II part, 1976.)  
8.24.070 - Exhibitions. 
No person shall conduct or maintain any show, performance, concert, place of amusement or exhibition, or make any public speech or address any group or gathering of persons within any recreation facility without written permission of the Director. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II part, 1976.)  
8.24.080 - Trees, Plants and Property. 
It is unlawful for any person to pick, dig, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, seed, plant, shrub, rock, wood, soil, or leaf mold without authorization of the Parks Division, or deface, mar, move or remove any sign or public property in any recreation facility. 
(Ord. 1052 C.S. § VI part, 1985: Ord. 838 C.S. § II part, 1976.)  
8.24.090 - Wild Animals and Birds. 
No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles or objects at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in possession the young of any animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II part, 1976.)  
8.24.100 - Fires. 
No person shall light or maintain any fire in any recreation facility unless such fire is lighted and maintained in a place specifically provided for that purpose. Fuel shall be of such types and kindled in such a manner as to prevent the danger of fire in the surrounding vegetation. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.110 - Swimming. 
Swimming, bathing or wading is permitted only in those areas and at such times specifically designated and posted for such purposes. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.120 - Interference With Activities Prohibited. 
No person shall willfully interfere with any person or persons lawfully using the park and recreation areas pursuant to these rules and regulations, nor shall any person interfere with any park maintenance or recreation activities being carried on by any employee or agent of the City by refusing to move from any park and recreation area when requested to do so. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.122 - Use of Electronic Sound Amplification. 
The use of electronic sound amplification equipment, portable speakers, and other accessories which have for their purpose the amplification of any sound, including but not limited to the amplification of sound produced by the playing of musical instruments, voices, calls and other sound producing devices, whether mechanical or electronic, is prohibited within the boundaries of any City park, playground or recreational area without the issuance of a permit for the specific use of any amplification equipment by the director. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.130 - Vending and Peddling. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, article or thing whatsoever, or to station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such goods, wares, merchandise, article or thing on any park or recreation areas, without first having obtained permission to do so from the director and securing the necessary City and/or state permits. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.140 - Camping, Mass Picnics and Meetings. 
No person shall camp or lodge within any park or recreation facility except by written permission of the director. Further, no mass picnics or meetings shall be held except as provided in Section 8.24.180 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.150 - Hours of Use. 
A.  All City parks, open spaces and public parking lots serving City parks or open space areas, and cemeteries shall be closed for public use from 1 hour after sunset to sunrise. It is unlawful for any person to enter, loiter or remain in any City park, open space area, public parking lot adjacent to such areas, or cemetery during hours of closure except as permitted and pursuant to restrictions of a permit issued by the Park and Recreation Commission or as stated in subsection B of this Section. 
B.  Subsection A does not apply to: 
1.  Persons engaged in playing tennis, basketball, playgrounds, tot lots, baseball on courts or fields specifically designed for nighttime use prior to 10:30 p.m. or until the completion of a bona fide game in progress. 
2.  Lighted picnic areas until 10:30 p.m. when bona fide picnicking is in progress. 
3.  Public parking lots while the driver or passenger is engaged in the activities authorized in this subsection. 
C.  The City Engineer may close any park, open space or cemetery to the public prior to the time specified herein, when after consultation with the City Manager and Chief of Police, it is determined that such closure will protect the public health, safety and/or welfare or is necessary to protect park facilities or cemetery from misuse or destruction. The City Engineer shall cause notice of amended park hours or cemetery hours to be posted in conspicuous locations in the affected park, open space or cemetery at least 24 hours prior to the effective date of such change. 
(Ord. 1314 C.S. § 1, 2004; Ord. 1052 C.S. § VII (part), 1985: Ord. 935 C.S. § I (part), 1981: Ord. 878 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978.)  
8.24.160 - Exemption. 
These rules and regulations shall not apply to any City employee, agent or representative in the duly authorized performance of their duties under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.170 - Posting of Signs. 
Any signs required to be posted by the City pursuant to this Chapter shall be placed at or near the entrance to the park and/or area requiring any posting. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.180 - Mass Picnics, Meetings and Overnight Camping. 
No persons or organizations of any type shall hold, conduct or address any assemblage, meeting or gathering in any public park or recreation area nor hold a picnic when the number of participants exceeds 30 persons, or shall any person or organization conduct any overnight camping activities without a written permit granted by the legal authority of the City, as provided in this Section as follows: 
A.  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the legal authority on a form provided for that purpose. 
B.  Standards of Issuance. The legal authority shall issue a permit under this Section when it finds: 
1.  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general enjoyment of the park by the public; 
2.  That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
3.  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
4.  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the City; 
5.  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
C.  Appeal. Within 7 days after receipt of an application which is denied, the legal authority shall apprise an applicant in writing of its reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within 5 days thereafter to the City Council, which shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection B of this Section and sustain or overrule the legal authority's decision within 14 days. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
D.  Effect of Permit. The permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the permits. 
E.  Liability of Permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
F.  Certificate of Insurance. If, in the opinion of the legal authority, the event or program would constitute a hazard to public safety, then the applicant for a permit shall provide the City with certificates of insurance evidencing bodily injury liability in the amount of $250,000.00 for each person and $500,000.00 for each occurrence. Such certificates of insurance shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to the granting of said permit. 
G.  Revocation. The legal authority shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of a violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
H.  Copy of Permit. Permittee shall have a copy of the permit in his possession and shall produce same upon request made by any duly authorized City employee, representative or agent. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.190 - Supplemental Rules and Regulations. 
The City Council, by resolution, may establish such supplemental rules and regulations as may from time to time be required or necessary for the proper administration and regulation of conduct in the City's parks and recreation areas. 
(Ord. 838 C.S. § II (part), 1976.)  
8.24.200 - Skate Park Facility Regulations. 
A.  All users of the skate park facility are required to wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads at all times while present in the skate park facility. 
B.  The skate park facility is for use by persons using skateboards and in-line skates only. All other uses and equipment are prohibited in the skate park facility. 
C.  Smoking is prohibited in the skate park facility. 
D.  All persons using the skate park facility shall do so at their own risk. 
E.  No person shall be present in the skate park facility between dusk and 8:00 a.m. 
F.  No person between the ages of 5 and 18 shall be present in the skate park facility between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday while the Martinez Municipal School District and/or the Mount Diablo Unified School District is in regular session. 
G.  Any violation of this Section shall be an infraction as set forth in Section 1.12.030(A)(2) of the Martinez Municipal Code. In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.030, for a third of subsequent offence within any 12-month period, the offender's right to use the skate park facility shall be suspended for a period of 6 consecutive months. 
(Ord. 1300 C.S. § 2, 2003.)  
8.24.210 - Designated Dog Park Facility Regulations. 
A.  Hours of Operation. Notwithstanding Section 8.24.150, hours of operation of designated dog park facilities shall be 7 days a week, from dawn to dusk, except as set forth herein. Designated dog park facilities shall be closed each Monday from 8:00 a.m. to noon, and on days/times designated by the City Manager in the exercise of his/her discretion, including, but not limited to, periods of extreme/inclement weather conditions or as otherwise posted. Owners/handlers shall remove dogs from the designated dog park facility during hours that such facility is closed. 
B.  Designated Users. Use of a designated dog park facility is limited to dog owners/handlers and their guests. 
C.  Separate Areas. Designated dog park facilities containing 2 areas shall include 1 designated for small dogs and 1 designated for larger dogs. Small dog areas are for dogs under 30 pounds only; large dog areas are for dogs 30 pounds and up. Dogs weighing under 30 pounds are allowed in large dog areas at the discretion of the owners/handlers. Dogs weighing 30 pounds and up are not allowed in small dog areas for any reason. Owners/handlers shall observe these weight restriction requirements. 
D.  Limit on Number of Dogs. Each owner/handler is limited to no more than 3 dogs. 
E.  Age of Dogs-Vaccinations Required. Dogs under the age of 6 months are not permitted to be present in the designated dog park facility. Owners/handlers shall not permit a dog under the age of 6 months or a dog in heat to be present in the designated dog park facility. Owner/handler shall ensure that all dogs are up-to-date on all vaccinations and free of contagious conditions, with current licensing/registration tags displayed on their collar. 
F.  Owners/handlers are legally responsible for the behavior of their dog(s) at all times. Aggressive dogs must be immediately removed by the owner/handler. 
G.  Owners/handlers must be within the designated dog park facility and supervising their dog(s) with leash readily available. Owner/handler shall not leave a dog unattended in the facility at any time. Owner/handler shall place dogs on a leash while entering and exiting the designated dog park facility. 
H.  Dog owners/handlers must immediately clean up after their dog(s) and dispose of waste in the provided trash receptacles. 
I.  Dog owners/handlers must be at least 16 years of age. 
J.  Children under 13 must be accompanied by an adult and supervised at all times. 
K.  No alcohol is allowed in designated dog park facilities, except as authorized by a valid event permit issued by the City. 
Any violation of this section shall be an infraction as set forth in Section 1.12.030(A)(2) of the Martinez Municipal Code. In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.030, for a third of subsequent offence within any 12-month period, the offender's right to use the designated dog park facility shall be suspended for a period of 6 consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. 1405 C.S. , § 3 6-7-2017)  
CHAPTER 8.26 - CAMPING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
8.26.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
1.  "Camp" shall have the definition stated by Section 8.26.020. 
2.  "Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters. 
3.  "Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
4.  "Park or recreation facility" means any space, facility, structure or improvement open to the public for use for any recreational, educational, cultural or community activity. 
5.  "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
6.  "Street" means any street, highway, road or sidewalk as defined in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1390 C.S. , § II, 12-2-2015; Ord. 1222 C.S. § 1, 1995)  
8.26.020 - Unlawful Camping. 
A.  Restrictions. No person shall camp anywhere in the City, whether on public or private property, except as hereinafter expressly permitted. "To camp" means to do any of the following: 
(1)  Sleeping (11:00 p.m. to 8:30 a.m.) . To sleep at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. in any of the following places: 
(a)  Outdoors, with or without bedding, tent, hammock, or other similar protection or equipment; 
(b)  In, on, or under any structure not intended for human occupancy, whether with or without bedding, tent, hammock, or other similar protection or equipment. 
(2)  Setting up bedding. To establish or maintain, outdoors or in, on, or under any structure not intended for human occupancy, at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m., a temporary or permanent place for sleeping by setting up any bedding, sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock, or other sleeping equipment in such a manner as to be immediately usable for sleeping purposes. 
(3)  Setting up campsite. To establish or maintain, outdoors or in, on, or under any structure not intended for human occupancy, at any time during the day or night, a temporary or permanent place for cooking or sleeping by setting up any bedding, sleeping bag, blanket, mattress, tent, hammock, cot, bed, collapsible shelters, or other sleeping equipment or by setting up any cooking equipment, with the intent to remain in that location. 
(4)  Violations. No person shall be in violation of this section unless: 
(a)  The person is informed of the whereabouts of homeless shelters within Contra Costa County; 
(b)  Such a shelter is actually available to such a person; and 
(c)  Such a person willingly refuses to stay in such a shelter. 
B.  Permitted camping. Camping is permitted in the City only in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Camping in public areas specifically set aside and clearly marked for public camping purposes; 
(2)  Camping events authorized by the City; 
(3)  Camping in the yard of a residence, with the consent of the owner or occupant of the residence, where the camping is in the rear yard of the residence or where the camping is in an area of a side yard of the residence that is separated from view from the street by a fence or hedge or other obstruction; except that camping shall not be permitted under this subsection where it is conducted in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance because of noise, inadequate sanitation, or other matters offensive to persons of ordinary sensibility; nor shall camping be permitted under this subsection where the camping in any yard is of such frequency, intensity, or duration as to constitute a use of land prohibited by any provision of this Code; nor shall camping be permitted under this subsection where any fee, charge, or other monetary consideration is collected for the privilege of camping or for any services or the use of any facilities related thereto; 
(4)  Camping events for minors sponsored by any nonprofit organization; except that camping shall not be permitted under this subsection where it is conducted in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance because of noise, inadequate sanitation, or other matters offensive to persons of ordinary sensibility; nor shall camping be permitted under this subsection where the camping at any location is of such frequency, intensity, or duration as to constitute a use of land prohibited by any provision of this Code. 
C.  Penalty. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter and in addition to all other remedies or penalties available under this Code or under any other laws, a violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, provided that in the discretion of the enforcing authority a violation may be charged and/or prosecuted as an infraction. In either case, violations shall be punishable as set forth by Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1390 C.S. , § I, 12-2-2015; Ord. 1222 C.S. § 1, 1995)  
8.26.030 - Storage of Personal Property in Public Places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas: 
1.  Any park or recreation facility, except as provided in Section 8.24.140. 
2.  Any street; 
3.  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. 1222 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
8.26.040 - Violations. 
Violations of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor or infraction, in the discretion of the prosecuting authority. 
(Ord. 1222 C.S. § 1, 1995.)  
CHAPTER 8.28 - DECLARATION OF WEEDS AS BEING A NUISANCE 
 
8.28.010 - Findings—Definition. 
A.  The City Council of the City of Martinez hereby finds and declares that all weeds growing or placed upon private or public property and all rubbish on private or public property to be a public nuisance because such rubbish and/or weeds tend to promote a harborage for rodents and insects and to create conditions tending to reduce the value of private property. 
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying, renting, managing or controlling any real property in the City to cause or permit any weeds or rubbish to remain on said property. 
B.  "Nuisance" shall be defined in Webster's Dictionary. "Rubbish" shall be as defined elsewhere in this Title. 
(Ord. 1084 C.S. § IV (part), 1986.)  
CHAPTER 8.30 - MOSQUITO AND VECTOR HABITATS 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose. 
The City recognizes that the potential emergence of the West Nile Virus, as well as the continuing presence of vectors such as rodents and skunks, in the County of Contra Costa are matters of increasing public health concern. Mosquitoes have the ability to transmit the West Nile Virus to humans and to other species. Vectors, such as rats, carry disease to humans and other species. 
It is in the interest of the public health safety and welfare of the citizens of Martinez as well as the area as a whole to reduce or eliminate the presence of vectors in the City and to abate nuisances supporting the development, attraction, or harborage of mosquitoes of other vectors in circumstances constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 1305 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as set forth in this Section. 
"Vector" means any animal capable of transmitting the causative agent of human disease or capable of producing human discomfort or injury, including, but not limited to, mosquitoes, flies, mites, ticks, other arthropods, and rodents and other vertebrates. 
(Ord. 1305 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.30.030 - Public Nuisance. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter and a public nuisance for anyone to create, cause, commit, or maintain any one or more of the following: 
A.  Any artificial alteration of property, excluding water, from its natural condition, resulting in it supporting the development, attraction, or harborage of vectors, with the presence of vectors in their developmental states on property being prima facie evidence that the property is a public nuisance; 
B.  Any water that is a breeding place for vectors, with the presence of vectors in their developmental stages in the water being prima facie evidence that the water is a public nuisance; 
C.  Any activity that supports the development, attraction, or harborage of vectors, that facilitates the introduction or spread of vectors. 
(Ord. 1305 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
8.30.040 - Vector Abatement. 
A.  The Chief Building Official or his/her designee is hereby authorized to issue citations on behalf of the City to address violations of this Chapter and to abate public nuisances supporting the development, attraction or harborage of mosquitoes or other vectors, in accordance with Chapter 1.13 or by any other remedy provided by law. 
B.  Upon the specific, prior request of the City in a circumstance constituting an immediate threat to public health or safety, field employees of the Contra Costa Mosquito and Vector Control District are hereby authorized to assist the City to abate and to abate public nuisances supporting the development, attraction or harborage of mosquitoes or other vectors, in accordance with Chapter 1.13 or by any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. 1305 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003.)  
CHAPTER 8.32 - HAZARDOUS WASTE ABATEMENT ACT 
 
8.32.010 - Purpose and Findings. 
We, the people of Martinez, find the passage of this Act is necessary in order to protect and defend the health and safety of ourselves and our posterity by prohibiting the importation of hazardous wastes and requiring that any hazardous waste facility be approved by a majority vote of the people. 
(Ord. 1143 C.S., 1990.)  
8.32.020 - Prohibition of Importation of Hazardous Wastes. 
All substances commonly known as "toxic wastes", "chemical wastes", and/or "hazardous wastes" (defined herein below in Sections 8.32.040) which originate and/or are generated outside the City limits of the City of Martinez, shall not be: (a) incinerated; (b) stored for incineration; or (c) otherwise disposed of and/or stored within the City limits of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1143 C.S., 1990.)  
8.32.030 - Vote Required for Approval of Hazardous Waste Facility. 
All proposed facilities intended for the: (a) incineration; (b) storage; or (c) disposal by other means, of substances (defined herein below in Sections 8.32.040) which originate and/or are generated outside the City limits of the City of Martinez, shall not be approved without a majority vote of the electorate at a regularly scheduled municipal election. 
(Ord. 1143 C.S., 1990.)  
8.32.040 - Hazardous Wastes Defined. 
Hazardous waste subject to this Act shall include those defined by current Sections 25117 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and/or as defined by current regulations adopted pursuant to Sections 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended (P. L. 94-580), and/or any additional hazardous wastes defined by substantially similar laws and regulations enacted or adopted hereafter. Therefore, substances subject to this Act, include but are not limited to, the following representative list: 
Verbal Description of Waste 	EPA 
Hazard Code 	EPA Hazardous 
Waste Number 
		
Aniline 	I,T 	UO12 
Arsenic trioxide 	- 	PO12 
Chloroacetaldehyde 	H 	PO23 
Chlorodibromomethane 	T 	UO40 
DDT 	T 	UO61 
EP Toxic, 2,4-D 	E 	D016 
EP Toxic, Arsenic 	E 	D004 
Ethyl cyanide 	H 	PO52 
Hexachlorobenzene 	T 	U127 
Lead Acetate 	- 	U144 
Methyl parathion 	H 	B071 
Nitrobenzene 	I,T 	U169 
Pentachloronitrobenzene 	T 	U185 
Phosgene 	- 	PO95 
Tetraethyl lead 	H 	P110 
 
(Ord. 1143 C.S., 1990.)  
CHAPTER 8.34 - NOISE CONTROL 
 
8.34.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the City, in the exercise of its police power, to control, and in some instances, prohibit, noise and vibration, in order to protect properties and the general health, safety and welfare of persons from unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise disturbances. At certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and, in the public interest, shall be prohibited or systematically proscribed. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the goals of the Noise Element of the General Plan by prescribing standards prohibiting detrimental levels of noise and by providing an effective and readily available remedy for violations. The provisions of this Chapter and the remedies contained herein shall be cumulative and are not intended to replace any otherwise available remedies for public, private, or mixed nuisances, nor any other civil or criminal remedies otherwise available. 
In addition, the regulations contained herein are not intended to substitute for any noise analysis conducted as a part of the City's environmental review process for discretionary permit approvals, nor intended to limit more strict noise control requirements for discretionary permit approvals, should more strict measures be found to be necessary, in order to maintain noise levels that are not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.020 - Noise Standards. 
A.  Acceptable standards for noise levels shall be as follows: 
1.  A day-night noise level (Ldn) of 45 dB is the standard for interior noise levels. An Ldn of 45 dBA is achieved by an allowable interior noise level of 35 dBA between 10 p.m. — 7 a.m. and 45 dBA between 7 a.m. — 10 p.m. 
2.  A day-night level (Ldn) of 60 dB is the standard for exterior noise. An Ldn of 60 dBA is a maximum noise level of 50 dBA between 10 p.m. — 7 a.m. and 60 dBA between 7 a.m. — 10 p.m. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.030 - Noise Regulations. 
The following specific acts are declared to be pubic nuisances and are prohibited, subject to the exemptions set forth herein. 
A.  No person shall cause or allow to cause, any source of sound at any location within the City or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which when measured within public or private indoor or outdoor space on the property where the noise disturbance is being experienced, causes the noise level to exceed the standards set forth in Section 8.34.020. 
B.  The operation or use of any of the following before 7:00 a.m., or after 7:00 p.m. daily (except Saturday, Sunday, and State, Federal or Local Holidays, when the prohibited time shall be before 9:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m.). 
1.  A hammer or any other device or implement used to repeatedly pound or strike an object. 
2.  An impact wrench, or other tool or equipment powered by compressed air. 
3.  Any tool or piece of equipment powered by an internal-combustion engine such as, but not limited to, chain saw, backpack leaf blower, and lawn mower. Except as specifically included in this Chapter, motor vehicles, powered by an internal-combustion engine and subject to the State of California Vehicle Code, are excluded from this prohibition. 
4.  Any electrically or battery powered tool or piece of equipment used for cutting drilling, or shaping wood, plastic, metal or other materials or objects, such as but not limited to a saw, drill, lathe or router. 
5.  Any of the following: the operation and/or loading or unloading of heavy equipment (such as but not limited to bulldozer, road grader, back hoe), ground drilling and boring equipment, hydraulic crane and boom equipment, portable power generator or pump, pavement equipment (such as but not limited to pneumatic hammer, pavement breaker, tamper, compacting equipment), pile-driving equipment, vibrating roller, sand blaster, gunite machine, trencher, concrete truck, and hot kettle pump and the like. 
6.  Construction, demolition, excavation, erection, alteration or repair activity. 
7.  Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles including but not limited to cars, aircraft and boats. 
8.  Use or operation of a loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound-amplifying equipment, public address system or similar device, in a fixed or movable position or mounted on a sound truck for the purpose of transmitting sound to a person in or on a street, sidewalk, park or public property in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance, unless specifically approved by the City of Martinez (i.e. Use Permit, City Council approval, or permit obtained under Section 8.34.050. Any amplified sound within a public park with a permit issued by the City is exempt from this Section. 
9.  Use, operation or maintenance of any horn, radio, machine or device used for the production or reproduction of sound which is directed to, or cast upon, public streets or highways which distracts, or is intended to distract, the attention of drivers of motor vehicles, unless operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. 
10.  The operation of any licensed motor vehicle in violation of the State Vehicle Code or the operation of stereo, public address or other such amplified equipment on or within a motor vehicle in violation of the State Vehicle Code. 
C.  Owning, possessing or harboring, any animal or bird which frequently or for long duration howls, barks, meows, squawks, bays, or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance. 
D.  Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily in such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.040 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following types of noise: 
A.  Aerial warnings which are required by law to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An emergency signaling device, standby machinery or equipment operated only in emergency situations. 
C.  Emergency vehicle responses and all necessary equipment utilized for the purpose of responding to a declared state of emergency are exempt from this chapter. 
D.  Uses established through the discretionary review process containing specific noise conditions of approval and/or mitigation measures. 
E.  In the case of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, the Noise Control Officer may grant an exemption to the requirements of this Chapter for the duration of the emergency. The Noise Control Officer may limit time of use and/or permitted action, depending upon the nature of the emergency and the type of action requested. The Noise Control Officer may at any time, revoke said authorization or impose requirements for continuance of the permitted action, depending upon the nature of the emergency and the type of action requested. 
F.  Noises permitted by permit granted under Section 8.34.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.050 - Permits. 
A.  Authority. The Noise Control Officer is authorized to issue permits granting exceptions to any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations of proximity to noise sensitive uses, noise levels, time limits and other terms and conditions as the Noise Control Officer determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any other permit or license required by law for such activities. 
B.  Application. 
1.  Any person seeking a permit pursuant to this section shall file an application with the Noise Control Officer consistent with the provisions and requirements of Chapter 22.06. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the permit is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by Council Resolution. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. 
2.  Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by approval of the permit may file a statement with the Noise Control Officer containing any information to support his/her claim. 
3.  If at any time the Noise Control Officer finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be required in accordance with Chapter 22.06. 
C.  Decision Criteria. The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to grant or deny the application for a noise permit: 
1.  The adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of other persons affected; 
2.  The reasonableness of compliance with this code given the existing conditions and scope of the necessary improvements to comply; 
3.  The adverse impact on property affected; 
4.  Any other adverse impacts of granting the exception; and 
5.  Consistency with the General Plan. Applicants for permits and persons contesting permits shall be required to submit such information as the Noise Control Officer may reasonably require to adequately address the above five areas of consideration. 
D.  Approval/Findings. Permits shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions. The permit shall not become effective until all conditions (if any) are agreed to in writing by the applicant. Non-compliance with any condition of the permit shall terminate the permit and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the permit was granted. 
E.  Revocation/New Conditions. The Noise Control Officer may at any time, revoke said permit or impose additional requirements for continuance of the permitted action, as necessary to adequately address the above five areas of consideration. 
F.  Term of Permit. The term of the permit shall run continuously with the associated use and shall terminate upon cessation of the use for a period of one (1) month or more. A permit shall only be transferred to a similar use at the same location upon the Noise Control Officer receiving sufficient information to find that: the new use is of the same or lesser intensity; and, the new use will not substantially alter the pattern of noise generation established by the previous use (i.e., increase evening or morning noise over the previous use). 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.060 - Noise Standards for New Construction. 
A.  All new multi-family residential development, hotels and motels, subject to California Administrative Code Title 25, which are to proposed be located in zones exceeding 60 dB CNEL, or residential developments which are proposed to be located within 500 feet of any major arterial, highway, railroad or mass transit line shall submit, to the Community Development Department, as part of a development application, on-site noise measurements to determine existing and future noise levels, and shall include noise attenuation provisions in the design of those developments if they are found to exceed the adopted standards set forth herein. 
B.  All new commercial or industrial development to be located within 500 feet of any residential development shall be designed and operated within the acceptable standards for noise. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.070 - Noise Measurement. 
Noise level shall be measured in accordance with the following: 
A.  Noise level shall be measured with a sound level meter satisfying at least the applicable requirements for Type 1 sound level meters as defined in American National Standard Section 1.4-1971 or the most recent revisions thereof. The meter shall be set for slow response speed, except that for impulse noises or rapidly varying sound levels, fast response speed may be used. Prior to each measurement, the meter shall be verified, and adjusted to +0.3 decibel by means of an acoustical calibrator. 
B.  Utilizing the "A" weighting scale of a sound level meter, the ambient noise level shall first be measured at a position or positions at any point on the receiver's property. 
1.  For outside measurements, the microphone shall be located no less than 4 feet above the ground; 10 feet or more from walls or similar large reflective surface where possible, and shall be protected from the effects of wind, noise and other extraneous sounds by the use of screens, shields or other appropriate devices. 
2.  For inside measurements, the microphone shall be at least 3 feet distant from any wall, and the average sound measurement shall be determined from at least 3 microphone positions throughout the room. 
3.  If possible, the ambient noise shall be measured with the alleged offending noise source inoperative. If for any reason the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise must be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source is at least 10dB below the ambient in order that only the ambient level be measured. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.080 - Violations. 
Violations of the Chapter shall be enforced as provided in Chapter 1.12 and/or may be declared a nuisance and subject to enforcement as provided in Chapter 1.13. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
8.34.090 - Noise Control Officer. 
The Community Development Director, Chief Building Official or Chief of Police or their designee, are hereby appointed the Noise Control Officers of the City. It shall be the responsibility of the Noise Control Officer or his/her designated representative to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to perform all other functions required of the Noise Control Officer by this Chapter. Such duties shall include, but not be limited to, investigating potential violations of this Chapter and referring evidence of violations either to the Police Department or City Attorney for initiation of legal action.  
8.34.100 - Definitions. 
A.  "A-Weighted sound level (dBA)" is a decibel scale that approximates the way the human ear responds to frequency levels. A—weighted scales are used for measurement of overall noise levels. 
B.  "Ambient noise" is the total noise occurring over any hourly time period from all sources within a given area. 
C.  "Community noise equivalent level (CNEL)" is another 24-hour average which includes both an evening and nighttime weighting. Appendix A of the General Plan Noise Element shows the day-night levels that were calculated from the field data for each of the 21 survey locations at a specified distance from the center-line of the road. Establish as the basic exterior and interior noise standards for residential uses a day-night level (Ldn) of 60 dB for exterior noise levels and 45 dB Ldn for interior noise levels. Ensure that all non-residential development proposals comply to the extent feasible with the exterior. 
D.  "Community noise ratings" Various criteria are available for noise measurement. In some situations a simple sound level meter reading is adequate and in other times the spectrum of the noise and time characteristics are needed. Rating scales require info on the distribution of levels of fluctuation noise, time duration repetitive rate for impulsive and intermittent noise background levels at the time of occupancy etc. 
E.  "Decibel (dB)" shall mean the measurement unit used for loudness of sound/noise. 
F.  "Ldn (day/night average sound level)" Ldn accounts for human sensitivity to nighttime noise, calculated from the cumulative noise exposure measured over a 24 hour day in terms of A—weighted sound energy. The 24 hour day is divided into two subperiods, the daytime period from 7:00 a.m. to 10 p.m. and the nighttime period from 10 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. A 10 dBA weighting factor is applied to the noise levels during the nighttime period. This is the noise scale used in the City of Martinez Noise Element. 
G.  "Noise disturbance" shall mean any sound which, as judged by the Noise Control Officer, (a) endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals, or (b) annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities, or endangers or injures personal or real property. 
H.  "Noise level meter" An instrument including a microphone, amplifier, output meter and frequency weighting device for the measurement of noise levels satisfying at least the applicable requirements for Type 1 sound level meters as defined in American National Standard Section 1.4-1971 or the most recent revisions thereof. The meter shall be set for slow response speed, except that for impulse noises or rapidly varying sound levels, fast response speed may be used. Prior to each measurement, the meter shall be verified, and adjusted to ±0.3 decibel by means of an acoustical calibrator. 
(Ord. 1288 C.S. § 1 (part), 2001.)  
CHAPTER 8.36 - PROPERTY NUISANCES 
 
8.36.010 - Findings. 
The City Council finds and declares that it is in the public interest and necessary to protect public health and safety, promote civic pride, and preserve property values, to establish minimum standards for the maintenance of real property by prohibiting specified activities and declaring these activities to be public nuisances subject to abatement or enforcement by any lawful means. 
(Ord. 1309 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Attractive nuisance" means any condition, machine or instrumentality which is unsafe or unprotected and thereby dangerous to young children, and which may reasonably be expected to attract young children to the property and to risk injury by playing with, in or on it. 
B.  "Building Official" means the Director of the Building Department or his or her designated representative who is authorized and directed to enforce this Chapter. 
C.  "Dwelling" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 22.04.150. 
D.  "Dwelling unit" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 22.04.160. 
E.  "Real Property" means a lot located in any zoning district upon which is located a dwelling or dwelling unit, or other structure. 
(Ord. 1309 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.36.030 - Property Nuisance. 
No person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of real property shall maintain or allow the maintenance of the property in such a manner that any of the following conditions exist on the property and are visible from a street, highway, or private road: 
A.  Peeling paint, cracked or broken stucco, or other deteriorating exterior covering or finish, in excess of 4 square feet of any single facade (i.e., any exterior side) of a structure; 
B.  Broken, cracked, or missing windows or doors; 
C.  Roofs missing shingles, tile, or other material used as roof composition or the material is loose or unstable or roofs covered with material not manufactured as a roofing product; 
D.  Improperly maintained (torn, tattered, shredded, broken, rusted) awnings; 
E.  Fences, walls, and gates with peeling paint, broken bricks, broken mortar, cracked or broken stucco, or which are not constructed of uniform materials or in a uniform manner; 
F.  The storing or allowing the storage of any abandoned or broken appliances and equipment or neglected machinery; 
G.  Accumulating any human or animal waste material or substances, stagnant water, or any combustible or hazardous materials or substances, fluid or solid on any part of or in any structure on real property; 
H.  A pond, spa, swimming pool, fountain or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise properly maintained, resulting in polluted or stagnant water; 
I.  Maintaining or allowing the maintenance of any paved areas for vehicle parking and access, porches, steps or walkways in a hazardous condition due to cracked, raised or missing surface material; 
J.  Overgrown, dead, decayed or diseased vegetation on private property. There shall be a conclusive presumption that vegetation is overgrown or dead if it has not been cut and trimmed, not responded to adequate watering and maintenance, or not replaced within 15 days after notification by the Building Official that the vegetation is overgrown or dead; 
K.  Refuse and waste material which by reason of its location or character may constitute a fire hazard or threat to the health, safety, and general welfare, including aesthetic impacts, of the surrounding area. Compost piles are not considered refuse and waste; 
L.  Land, the topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, modifications or excavation, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems that may be potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties. Allowing obstructions to water flow to occur or develop within a natural drainage whether from a natural state, vegetative growth, placement of fill or any structures, or an object from an upstream location; 
M.  Shopping carts, broken or discarded appliances and furniture, or furniture not intended and manufactured for outdoor use; 
N.  Garbage or trash cans in violation of Sections 8.16.190 or 8.16.200; 
O.  Boats, trailers, vehicle parts or other articles of personal property that are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair; 
P.  Construction and wood debris, vegetation cuttings or clippings, not contained within a waste containers meeting the requirements of Chapter 8.16; 
Q.  Weeds and rubbish in violation of Chapter 8.28; 
R.  An attractive nuisance dangerous to children, including, but not limited to, open excavations, unsecured refrigerators or freezers or unsecured storage containers. 
S.  The outdoor cultivation of marijuana plants in any stage of growth whatsoever, including, but not limited to, mature or immature plants, clones, seedlings or germinating seeds. 
(Ord. No. 1380 C.S., § 4, 5-7-2014; Ord. 1309 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.36.040 - Nuisance Declaration—Abatement. 
Any real property maintained in a condition that violates Section 8.36.030 is declared to be a public nuisance. The condition may be abated pursuant to Chapters 1.12 or 1.13 or by any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. 1309 C.S. § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
CHAPTER 8.38 - REGULATION OF VACANT STRUCTURES 
 
8.38.010 - Findings. 
The City Council finds and declares that vacant structures attract vagrants, gang members and criminals as prime locations to conduct illegal activities; that vacant and improperly secured structures are vulnerable to being set on fire by unauthorized persons; that vacant structures are a blight and cause deterioration and instability in neighborhoods; that vacant structures invite the dumping of garbage and trash; and that vacant structures pose serious threats to the public's health and safety and therefore constitute public nuisances. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to require that, pursuant to a permit, vacant dwellings and buildings in the City of Martinez are properly secured and boarded during temporary periods of vacancy, and that dwellings and buildings do not remain vacant and unoccupied for extended periods of time without proper regulation. 
(Ord. 1340 C.S. § I, 2007: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Building Official" means the Director of the Building Department or his or her designated representative who is authorized and directed to enforce this Chapter. 
B.  "Owner" means a person, persons, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or any other entity holding fee title to the subject real property. If more than one person or entity owns the subject real property, "owner" refers to each entity holding any portion of the fee interest in the property, and the owners' obligations in this Chapter are joint and several as to each owner. 
C.  "Property" includes tracts, lots, easements, or parcels of land and any and all improvements thereon. 
D.  "Vacant structure" means any building, dwelling, or other structure that has remained for a period of at least 6 months unoccupied by any person, firm, or entity having a legal right to possess or occupy the structure and that is described by any of the following: 
1.  Service from 1 or more of the following utilities has been discontinued: electrical, gas, water, or sewer; 
2.  Has doors, windows, or other openings that are broken or missing, so as to allow uncontrolled access to the interior or exposure to the elements; or 
3.  Has doors, windows, or other openings that have been secured by boarding. 
As used in this definition, "unoccupied" means not having human habitation in reference to any residential building and shall mean not utilizing the building for any commercially related purpose in reference to any nonresidential building. 
Vacant structure shall not include any building, dwelling, or other structure that is the subject of a valid and unexpired work permit issued by the City. 
(Ord. 1340 C.S. § II, 2007: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.040 - Application. 
This Chapter applies to all property in the City of Martinez where any of the conditions specified in this Chapter exist. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.050 - Duty of Property Owner. 
Every owner shall maintain property in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and correct all violations of the standards listed in this Chapter, and is liable for violations of this Chapter regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party concerning the property. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.060 - Duty to Maintain Property. 
It is unlawful for an owner to maintain property or to permit property to be maintained in such a manner that any 1 or more of the conditions described in the following subsections are found to exist: 
A.  Any vacant structure that is not secured by boarding in compliance with Section 8.38.070; 
B.  Any vacant structure whose interior contains waste, rubbish, or debris of such quantity or stored in such a manner as to cause a health concern or harborage for vectors; 
C.  Any vacant structure whose doors, windows or other openings are secured by boarding in compliance with Section 8.38.070 or by any other method permitted by Section 8.38.070, at any time at which there is no current and valid boarding permit as required by Section 8.38.090. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.070 - Standards for Securing a Building. 
Except as provided in Section 8.38.070 (L), the owner shall secure a vacant structure according to all of the following specifications and requirements: 
A.  Remove all waste, rubbish or debris from the interior of the structure; 
B.  Remove all waste, rubbish, debris or dead, dying or overgrown vegetation from the premises surrounding the vacant structure; 
C.  Barricade all unsecured doorways, windows, or exterior openings with minimum ½ inch thickness exterior grade plywood which shall extend to the molding stops or studs; 
D.  Mount at least 2 wood stocks of minimum 2x4 inch thickness to the reverse face of the plywood with minimum 3/8 inch carriage bolts mated with nuts and 2 flat washers; 
E.  Extend the stock a minimum of 8 inches on each side of the interior wall; 
F.  Cause all hardware to be galvanized or cadmium plated; 
G.  Paint all exterior barricade material the predominant color of the structure; 
H.  Be in compliance with all conditions of a boarding permit issued to the owner under Section 8.38.090; 
I.  If applicable, cap the sewer in a manner approved by the Building Official to prevent the accumulation of methane gas in the dwelling or building; 
J.  Post the premises. One or more metal signs must be posted at or near each entrance to the structure and on fences or walls as appropriate. The signs must remain posted until the structure is either lawfully occupied or demolished. Signs must contain the following information: 
DO NOT ENTER. It is illegal to enter or occupy this building or premises or to remove or deface this notice. Trespassers will be prosecuted. (California Penal Code.) 
K.  The Building Official may require the owner to erect a fence that meets the specifications of the Building Inspection Department on the property where the vacant structure is located. Any fence erected in accordance with this Section shall be maintained in a safe condition without tears, breaks, rust, or dangerous protuberances; 
L.  In lieu of requiring the owner to board a vacant structure as set forth in Sections 8.38.070 (A) through (K), the Building Official may allow the owner to board the vacant structure in a manner that the Building Official determines adequately prevents unauthorized entry or vandalism. In any event, an owner shall post the premises as set forth in this Section. 
(Ord. 1340 C.S. § III, 2007: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.080 - Prohibited Acts. 
A.  Entry Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner, to enter or occupy any structure or premises that has been posted pursuant to Section 8.38.070(J), except to repair or demolish the structure under proper permit or for a purpose authorized by the owner. 
B.  Interference with Notice Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to remove or deface any notice posted pursuant to Section 8.38.070(J) until the required repairs or demolition have been completed or a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.090 - Permit Required for Securing a Dwelling or Building. 
A.  No owner of a vacant structure shall install, place or maintain boards over the doors, windows or other openings of any vacant structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the dwelling or building without having first applied for and received a boarding permit from the Building Official. 
B.  An owner of a vacant structure must apply to the Building Official for a boarding permit within 30 days of the date that a structure becomes a vacant structure as defined by this Chapter. 
C.  The application for a boarding permit shall include all of the following information: 
1.  The expected period of vacancy; 
2.  A plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy; 
3.  A plan and time-line for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or demolition of the vacant structure, or alternatively, a plan and time-line for sale of the property to another person or entity with provision in the sale for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or demolition of the structure. 
D.  The Building Official will issue a boarding permit required by subsection A upon the submission of a complete and accurate boarding permit application by the owner of the structure and upon payment of the required fee. 
E.  The owner of a vacant structure must board or otherwise secure the vacant structure in compliance with Section 8.38.070 within 10 days of receiving a boarding permit. The Building Official will confirm through inspection that the boarding or other method of securing the structure has been completed in compliance with Section 8.38.070. 
F.  Except as may be renewed or extended pursuant to subsection G or H, the boarding permit issued pursuant to this Section shall authorize the boarding or other securing of a structure for a period of no greater than 6 months from the date of issuance. The Building Official may establish reasonable conditions for issuance of the boarding permit as may be warranted by the facts and circumstances of each individual case to achieve the purposes of this Chapter, including but not limited to the termination or continuation of electrical, gas, water, or sewer service to the vacant structure, and conditions that guarantee the permittee's compliance with the standards set forth in Section 8.38.070 or with any other section in this Chapter. 
G.  The boarding permit may be renewed after the initial period for up to an additional 6 months, upon the submission of a written application by the owner of the structure. The submission of the application must occur no later than 10 business days before the original permit expires, upon the payment of the required fee and upon the confirmation through inspection by the Building Official that the boarding or other method of securing the structure has been completed in accordance with Section 8.38.070. The application shall include the information required by subsection C. 
H.  A boarding permit may not be extended beyond the renewal period nor may a new application for the same structure be accepted by the Building Official within 1 year of the expiration date of the prior permit, unless all of the following occur: 
1.  The owner of the structure submits a written application for extension that includes the information required by subsection C. 
2.  The owner of the structure pays the required fee. 
3.  The Building Official confirms through inspection that the boarding or other method of securing the structure has been done in compliance with Section 8.38.070. 
4.  Good cause for the renewal exists. "Good cause" shall require a showing by the owner that the permit renewal is made necessary by conditions or events beyond the owner's control, such as inability to obtain financing for repair or rehabilitation, inability to locate a suitable buyer, unanticipated delays in construction or rehabilitation or unanticipated damage to the property. In addition, where appropriate, "good cause" shall also require a showing by the owner that he or she has exercised reasonable and due diligence in attempting to complete the needed repair, rehabilitation or correction or in attempting to sell the property. If the Building Official determines that good cause exists to renew the permit and that all other conditions are met, the permit may be renewed by the Building Official for a period of up to, but not more than, an additional 6 months, subject to all of the same conditions imposed on the original renewal permit. 
(Ord. 1340 C.S. § IV, 2007: Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.100 - Authority. 
The Building Official is authorized to administer and enforce this Chapter. The Building Official may promulgate rules and procedures implementing this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.110 - Entry on Premises. 
To the extent allowed by law and as outlined in Section 1.08.010, whenever necessary to enforce any provision of this Chapter or, whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this Chapter exists, the Building Official or his or her designated representative may inspect any vacant structure and its associated premises to determine whether the structure or its premises complies with applicable provisions and requirements of this code or of statutes or regulations enforced by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.120 - Notice to Comply. 
A.  If the Building Official determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, the Building Official may transmit a notice to comply to the owner by first class mail or by personal service by an authorized representative of the Building Official. 
B.  The notice to comply will contain the following information: 
1.  The date and street address and such other description as is required to identify the property; 
2.  A statement of the conditions constituting the violation; 
3.  An order that the owner obtain a boarding permit within 30 days of the date of the notice to comply, and board or otherwise secure the vacant structure in compliance with Section 8.38.070 within 10 days of receiving the boarding permit. The order may require the owner to erect a fence in accordance with Section 8.38.070 (K); 
4.  A statement that, if the vacant structure is not boarded or otherwise secured within the time specified, the City of Martinez may seek compliance with any remedy allowed by this Code and any other remedy allowed by law, including the securing, repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal of the vacant structure; 
5.  A statement that the owner has the right to submit in writing, any information relating to a determination of the existence of a violation and his or her right to appeal as provided in Chapter 1.13. C. If the Building Official determines that an effort is being made to correct the violation, he or she may grant an additional period of time for correction in excess of that set forth in the notice to comply. Any such additional period of time shall be in writing delivered in the same manner as the notice to comply. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.130 - Remedies. 
A.  If, after a notice to comply, a property owner fails to correct the violation within the time allowed, the City of Martinez may seek compliance by any remedy allowed under this Code, including, but not limited to, securing of the vacant structure pursuant to Section 8.38.140, enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.12 and nuisance abatement pursuant to Chapter 1.13. B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the securing of a substandard vacant structure prior to an abatement of the building under other sections of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
C.  If a substandard building becomes a vacant structure before or during abatement, the notice and order to abate may require the securing of the building in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 8.38.070. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.140 - Securing by City of Martinez. 
A.  If, after a notice to comply, an owner fails to correct the violation within the time allowed, the Building Official may secure the property, issue a boarding permit in the name of the owner, erect a fence, and recover costs. 
B.  After securing the vacant structure, the Building Official will transmit a notice to the owner of the subject property. The notice will be transmitted to the owner by certified mail and be posted at the site or by personal service by an authorized representative of the Building Official. The notice will inform the owner of all of the following: 
1.  The boarding permit is effective for 6 months. 
2.  Prior to the expiration of the 6-month period, the structure must be lawfully occupied, rehabilitated or demolished, or alternatively be sold to another person or entity with provision in the sale for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or demolition of the sale within the 6-month period. 
3.  The owner must maintain the boarding in a condition that complies with this Chapter. 
4.  If the Building Official erects a fence, the notice will inform the owner that the owner must maintain the fence in a condition that complies with this Chapter. 
C.  If a vacant structure previously secured by the owner or Building Official in accordance with a notice to comply again becomes unsecured and open to unauthorized entry, the Building Official may seek compliance by any remedy allowed under this Code, including, but not limited to, securing of the vacant structure pursuant to Section 8.38.140. 
D.  If the premises surrounding a vacant structure again contain debris, rubbish, waste or excessive vegetation, the Building Official may, without further notice to the owner, proceed to remove the debris, rubbish, waste or excessive vegetation and recover costs as provided for in this Chapter or by any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.150 - Receipt of Notice. 
The failure of a person to receive a properly addressed notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.160 - Reinspections. 
The Building Official may periodically reinspect vacant structures to ensure compliance with this Chapter and all applicable court and administrative orders. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.170 - Summary Abatement. 
Nothing in this Chapter prohibits the summary abatement of a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.180 - Appeals. 
The property owner may appeal any determination of the Building Official made pursuant to this Chapter as provided in Chapter 1.13. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.190 - Costs and Fees. 
Abatement costs and summary abatement costs may be recovered by way of civil action against the owner or may be assessed against the subject property as a lien. Abatement costs include the cost to perform the actual work, the cost of materials, and all administrative costs. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.38.200 - Permit Fees and Reinspection Fees. 
The fee for an initial boarding permit and any renewal boarding permit or any reinspection fee shall be an amount established by the City of Martinez in the Building Department's fee schedule as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
CHAPTER 8.40 - REGULATION OF VACANT PROPERTY 
 
8.40.010 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the vacant property ordinance of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.020 - Findings. 
The City of Martinez finds and declares that vacant property can attract vagrants, gang members and criminals and can be a prime location to conduct illegal activities; that vacant property can be a blight and cause deterioration and have a negative effect of property values; that vacant property can invite the accumulation of garbage, trash, discarded vehicles or boats, weeds, and other nuisance conditions; and that vacant property can pose a serious threat to the public's health, safety and welfare and therefore constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to identify vacant properties where nuisance conditions frequently occur and to require the proper securing of those properties to prevent additional nuisance conditions from occurring on the property. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
A.  "Building Official" means the Director of the Building Department or his or her designated representative who is authorized and directed to enforce this Chapter. 
B.  "Nuisance condition" is 1 or more of the following conditions occurring on a vacant property: 
1.  Accumulation of substantial amounts of trash, debris, rubbish, or garbage; 
2.  Presence of discarded vehicles or boats, discarded trailers, vehicle or boat parts, vehicle or boat hulks, or other articles of personal property that are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair; 
3.  Presence of an attractive nuisance dangerous to children, such as abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators or freezers, or unsafe pools, ponds or excavations; 
4.  Shopping carts, discarded household equipment, or broken or discarded furniture; 
5.  Weeds and rubbish in violation of Section 8.28.010; 
6.  Any nuisance condition included in Section 8.36.030. 
C.  "Owner" means a person, persons, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or any other entity holding fee title to the subject real property. If more than 1 person or entity owns the subject real property, "owner" refers to each entity holding any portion of the fee interest in the property, and the owners' obligations in this Chapter are joint and several as to each owner. 
D.  "Vacant property" means any property that is unimproved and includes unimproved tracts, lots, easements, or parcels of land. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.050 - Application. 
This Chapter applies to all property in the City of Martinez where any of the nuisance conditions specified in this Chapter exist. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.060 - Duty of Property Owner. 
Every owner shall maintain property in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and correct all violations of the standards listed in this Chapter, and is liable for violations of this Chapter regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party concerning the property. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.070 - Duty to Maintain Property. 
A.  No owner shall maintain or allow the maintenance of vacant property in such a manner that any nuisance condition exists on the vacant property. 
B.  If a notice and order to abate has been transmitted to an owner, the vacant property must remain secured in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.080 - Standards for Securing Vacant Property. 
Any vacant property that must be secured pursuant to this Chapter shall be secured according to the following specifications and requirements: 
A.  A fence that meets the specifications of the Building Department shall be erected on the vacant property; 
B.  One or more signs must be posted on the fence and must contain the following information: 
DO NOT ENTER. It is illegal to enter or occupy this property or to remove or deface this notice. Trespassers will be prosecuted. 
C.  Any fence erected in accordance with this Section shall be maintained in a safe condition without tears, breaks, rust, or dangerous projections. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.090 - Prohibited Acts. 
A.  Entry Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner, the Building Official, or a designated representative of the Building Official, to enter or occupy any vacant property that has been posted pursuant to Section 8.40.080 (B), except for a lawful purpose authorized by the owner. 
B.  Interference with Notice Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to remove or deface any notice posted pursuant to Section 8.40.080 (B). 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.100 - Enforcement Authority. 
The Building Official is authorized to administer and enforce this Chapter. The Building Official may promulgate rules and procedures implementing this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.110 - Entry on Premises. 
To the extent allowed by law and as outlined in Section 1.08.010, whenever necessary to enforce any provision of this Chapter, the Building Official, or his or her designated representative, may inspect any vacant property to determine whether it complies with applicable provisions and requirements of this code or of statutes or regulations enforced by the Building Official or to enter for the purpose of abatement. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.120 - Notice to Comply. 
A.  If the Building Official determines that any nuisance condition exists on a vacant property, the Building Official may transmit a notice to comply to the owner by first class mail or by personal service by an authorized representative of the Building Official. 
B.  The owner must remove or remedy the nuisance condition specified on the notice to comply within the time specified in the notice to comply. 
C.  The notice to comply will contain the following information: 
1.  The street address and such other description as is required to identify the property; 
2.  A statement of the nuisance condition existing on the vacant property; 
3.  An order that the owner remove or remedy the nuisance condition within 10 days of the date of the notice to comply; 
4.  A statement that if the nuisance condition is not removed within the time specified, the City of Martinez may issue a notice and order to abate ordering the securing of the vacant property; 
5.  A statement that the owner has the right to submit in writing, any information relating to a determination of the existence of a violation and his or her right to appeal as provided in Chapter 1.13. D. If the Building Official determines that an effort is being made to correct the violation, he or she may grant an additional period of time for correction in excess of that set forth in the notice to comply. Any such additional period of time shall be in writing delivered in the same manner as the notice to comply. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.130 - Notice and Order to Abate. 
A.  The Building Official may transmit a notice and order to abate to the owner by certified mail and posting at site, or by personal service by an authorized representative of the Building Official, if either of the following occur: 
1.  The nuisance condition specified in the notice to comply has not been removed or remedied within the time specified. 
2.  Any nuisance condition occurs or reoccurs on the vacant property within 12 months of the date of the notice to comply. 
B.  The owner must remove or remedy the nuisance condition specified in the notice and order to abate and secure the vacant property in accordance with the standards listed in Section 8.40.080 within 10 days of the transmittal date of the notice and order to abate or within a reasonable time specified by the Building Official. 
C.  The notice and order to abate will contain the following information: 
1.  The date and street address and such other description as is required to identify the property; 
2.  A statement that the nuisance condition specified in the notice to comply has not been removed or remedied within the time specified, or that a nuisance condition has occurred or reoccurred on the vacant property within 12 months of the date of the notice to comply; 
3.  An order that the owner remove or remedy the nuisance condition and secure the vacant property within the time specified in the notice and order to abate; 
4.  A statement that, if the vacant property is not secured in accordance with the standards listed in Section 8.40.080 within the time specified, the City of Martinez may seek compliance with any remedy allowed by this Code and any other remedy allowed by law. The statement will inform the owner that the City of Martinez may secure the vacant property and recover all costs, including the cost of the fence, from the owner; 
5.  A statement that the owner has the right to appeal as provided in Chapter 1.13. D. If more than 12 months have passed from the date of the first notice to comply and no notice and order to abate has been issued, no notice and order to abate will be issued until after another notice to comply has been issued in accordance with Section 8.40.120. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.140 - Remedies. 
A.  If, after a notice and order to abate, a property owner fails to correct the violation in the manner and within the time specified in the notice and order to abate, the City of Martinez may seek compliance by any remedy allowed under this Code, including, but not limited to, securing of the vacant property (Section 8.40.150) and any other remedy allowed by law. 
B.  If a nuisance condition occurs on a secured vacant property, the City of Martinez may seek compliance by any remedy allowed under this Code, and any other remedy allowed by law. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.150 - Securing by City of Martinez. 
A.  After issuing a notice and order to abate, the Building Official may secure the vacant property and recover costs as provided for in Section 8.40.200 if the owner does any of the following: 
1.  Fails to erect a fence in the manner and within the time specified in the notice and order to abate; 
2.  Fails to erect a fence that meets the specifications of Section 8.40.080; 
3.  Fails to maintain a fence in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.080. 
B.  If a notice and order to abate a substandard building includes an order to secure the property with a fence that meets the specifications of the Building Department, the Building Official may secure the vacant property and recover costs as provided for in Section 8.40.200 after abating the substandard building. 
C.  If a vacant property previously secured by the owner or Building Official again becomes unsecured within 24 months of any previous securing, the Building Official may resecure the vacant property and recover costs as provided for in Section 8.40.200. When re-securing a vacant property within 24 months of any previous securing, the Building Official is not required to transmit a notice and order to abate before re-securing the vacant property. 
D.  After securing or re-securing a vacant property, the Building Official will transmit a notice to the owner of the vacant property. The notice will be transmitted to the owner by certified mail and posted at the site or by personal service by an authorized representative of the Building Official. The notice will inform the owner that the vacant property must be maintained in a condition that complies with this Chapter. 
E.  If more than 24 months have passed from the date of a previous securing of a vacant property by the owner or Building Official, the Building Official will not secure or re-secure the vacant property until after a notice to comply and notice and order to abate have been issued in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.160 - Receipt of Notice. 
The failure of a person to receive a properly addressed notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.170 - Reinspections. 
The Building Official may periodically reinspect vacant properties to ensure compliance with this Chapter and all applicable court and administrative orders. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.180 - Summary Abatement. 
Nothing in this Chapter prohibits the summary abatement of a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.190 - Appeals. 
The property owner may appeal any determination of the Building Official made pursuant to this Chapter as provided in Chapter 1.13. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.200 - Costs and Fees. 
A.  Abatement costs may be recovered by way of civil action against the owner or may be assessed against the subject property as a lien. Abatement costs include the cost of materials including the fence, the cost to perform the actual work, and all administrative costs. 
B.  Summary abatement costs may be recovered by way of civil action against the owner or may be assessed against the subject property as a lien. Summary abatement costs include the cost of materials including the fence, the cost to perform the actual work, and all administrative costs. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.)  
8.40.210 - Reinspection Fee. 
The fee for any reinspection shall be an amount established by the City of Martinez in the Building Department's fee schedule adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1306 C.S. § 1 Exh. A (part), 2003.) 
TITLE 8 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding adoption of County codes by reference, see Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding authorized expenditures for shade trees, see Government Code § 40401. 
3.  For zoning provisions regarding trees and shrubs, see Title 22 of this Code. 
4.  For statutory provisions prohibiting dumping on public property, see Health & Safety Code § 4475 et seq.; for provisions prohibiting littering, see Pen. Code § 374(b); for statutory provisions authorizing cities to contract for garbage and rubbish disposal and to prescribe terms for such services, see Health & Safety Code § 4250; for statutory provisions requiring cities to preserve and protect public health and regulate local sanitation matters, see Health & Safety Code § 500. 
5.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to provide for removal as public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, see Vehicle Code § 22660. 
6.  For statutory provisions regarding the jurisdiction of a City over its parks, see Public Resources Code § 5302. 
7.  Prior Codes related to Chapter 8.16 are 5400, 5401, 5401(a), 5401(b), 5401(c), 5401(d), 5401(e), 5402(a), 5402(b), 5402(c), 5402(d), 5403(a), 5403(b), 5403(c), 5403(d), 5404, 5405, 5406, 5407, 5408, 5409, 5410.  
CHAPTER 8.50 - SEISMIC HAZARD RETROFIT PROGRAM FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS 
 
8.50.010 - Purpose. 
The city of Martinez is located in a geographic area of high seismic risk, due to its proximity to the Hayward, Calaveras and Concord faults, and may reasonably be expected to experience moderate to severe ground shaking in the event of a significant local earthquake. Such ground shaking could result in the serious injury or loss of life due to damage or collapse of buildings. Historically, unreinforced masonry buildings have been shown to be especially vulnerable. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety by requiring mandatory strengthening of those buildings in the city of Martinez that exhibit structural deficiencies in their capacities to resist damage during an earthquake. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.020 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to those buildings on the city of Martinez inventory list of Unreinforced Masonry Buildings prepared in 1989 as required by SB547 (Chapter 12.2 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code (Government Code Section 8875 et seq.) and any other building determined by the Building Official to be a URM building under this chapter and deemed a possible threat to public health and safety which is not included in any of the following exceptions. 
Notwithstanding the above, the following buildings are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter. 
1.  Residential buildings with five or fewer dwelling units. 
2.  Buildings which have already been completely upgraded to not less than the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, Appendix Chapter 1 standards in effect at the time the work was done, provided that such work has been completed with all required permits and inspection approvals. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Building Official" means the Director of the Public Works Department or his or her designated representative who is authorized and directed to enforce this Chapter. 
B.  "Civil engineer or structural engineer" means a licensed civil or structural engineer registered by the state of California 
C.  "California Existing Building Code (CEBC)" is the 2007 California Existing Building Code or version contained in the California Building Standards Code most recently adopted by the State of California. 
D.  "Unreinforced masonry" includes adobe or burned clay, concrete or sand-lime brick; hollow clay or concrete block; plain concrete; stone masonry; and hollow clay tile. 
E.  "Unreinforced masonry (URM) building" means any building containing walls and/or columns which relies on the tensile strength of masonry units, mortar and grout in resisting design loads, and in which the area of reinforcement is less than 25 percent of the minimum ratio for reinforced masonry required by the most recently adopted Building Code. 
F.  "Risk Categories" are defined as follows: 
1.  Essential building: any building housing a hospital or other medical facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas; fire or police stations; municipal government disaster operation and communication centers. 
2.  High risk building: any non-essential building having an occupant load of one hundred persons or more. 
3.  Medium risk building: any non-essential building having an occupant load less than one hundred and not included within the definition of "low risk building" below. 
4.  Low risk building: any non-essential building not open to the public and used as a warehouse/storage building. Warehouses /storage buildings housing emergency services equipment or supplies are considered Medium risk buildings. 
G.  "Owner" means a person, persons, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or any other entity holding fee title to the subject real property. 
H.  "Seismic strengthening" is all work necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
I.  "Adoption Date" shall refer to July 15, 2009, the date that this Chapter was adopted by an ordinance of the City Council. 
J.  "Appeals Board" refers to a panel of no less than three persons, selected by the Building Official, who shall serve without compensation. The persons serving on the panel shall be knowledgeable, employed or formerly employed in one of the following fields: construction, architecture, engineering, planning, law enforcement or related fields. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.040 - Engineer's Report Required. 
A.  Within two years after the Adoption Date of this ordinance, owners of URM buildings subject to this ordinance shall be required to have an engineering report submitted to the city's Building Department which evaluates the existence, nature, and severity of any structural deficiencies in their buildings' capacities for earthquake resistance which could result in damage or collapse and potentially cause injury or loss of life. The engineering report shall include the following information: 
1.  Time frame: Engineering reports shall be submitted within twenty-four months after the Adoption Date. 
2.  Authorized Preparers: Engineering reports shall be prepared by a civil or structural engineer who is familiar with seismic analysis and design. 
3.  Purpose: The purpose of each such engineering report shall be to investigate, in a thorough and unambiguous fashion, a building's structural systems that resist earthquake forces, and to evaluate their adequacy to resist the seismic forces. 
4.  Engineering standards: The minimum engineering standards to be used in preparation of engineering reports or drawings shall be those contained in the California Existing Building Code (CEBC), Appendix Chapter A1. 
5.  Format: The written engineering report shall include all portions of the building and any measures necessary to correct deficiencies to not less than the minimum engineering standards. 
B.  The Building Official shall review the engineering report for each identified building to insure conformance with this chapter. The Building Official may, at its option, engage the services of a consulting civil or structural engineer to assist in evaluation of the submitted report at the sole Cost of the owner. If the Building Official in consultation with the consulting civil or structural engineer determines that the building needs to be seismically strengthened to be in compliance with this Chapter despite the conclusions of the engineering report, the Building Official may require the owner to submit construction drawings and repair any deficiency in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
C.  Owners of each URM building shall provide each of their tenants with written notification that an engineer's report has been completed and submitted to the city of Martinez and is available for review at the Building Department. Such notification shall occur within ninety days of submission of the engineering report to the City. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.050 - Construction Drawings Required. 
A.  Owners of those buildings needing seismic strengthening as determined by the engineer's reports outlined in section 8.50.040 are required to submit a complete set of construction drawings to the city of Martinez Building Department no later than 5 years after the Adoption Date of this ordinance. Required drawings must be professionally prepared and stamped and signed by a civil or structural engineer licensed to do work in the State of California. Construction drawings must be complete and include all improvements to be made to comply with this Chapter. Drawings shall include engineering calculations. 
B.  Construction Drawings shall include: 
1.  Dimensioned floor and roof plans showing existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof framing members and sheathing materials. 
2.  All existing and new crosswalls and their materials of construction. The location of the crosswalls and their openings shall be fully dimensioned or drawn to scale on the plans. 
3.  Dimensioned wall elevations showing openings, thickness, heights, the type of veneer, its thickness and its bonding, and/or ties to the structural wall masonry. 
4.  The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof when used in the design. 
5.  The extent and type of any parapet corrections which were previously performed, if any. 
6.  Repair details, if any, of cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry walls. 
C.  Design standards applicable to the work to be performed under this Chapter shall be at a minimum those contained within the California Existing Building Code (CEBC), Appendix Chapter A1. 
D.  The Building Official shall review the construction drawings for conformance with this chapter and, at its option, engage the services of a consulting civil or structural engineer to assist in evaluation of the drawings. The costs of each such review shall be recoverable from the building owner. 
E.  A building permit shall be required for the work shown on the construction drawings. The fee for this permit and plan review shall be established by the City Council. Any outside consulting or special inspection shall be services retained by the City to review the permit application plans or to inspect the work performed under this permit at the expense of the permit applicant or permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 1374 C.S., § 1, 11-6-2013; Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009.)  
8.50.060 - Repair of Deficiencies Required. 
A.  Any owner of building which requires seismic strengthening as determined by engineers report or the Building Official pursuant to section 8.50.040 shall complete work required by approved construction drawings within the following time frame that is applicable: 
1.  Essential buildings and High risk buildings: work must be completed and receive a final approval from the Building Official within four years of the Adoption Date. 
2.  Medium and Low risk buildings: work must be completed and receive a final approval from the Building Official within six years of the Adoption Date. 
B.  If, after review of the engineer's report required in section 8.50.040 a building is determined to pose an immediate threat to public health or safety the Building Official may require repairs be made in a more timely manner than set forth in 8.50.060 (A). 
C.  If a building owner determines that the cost to seismically strengthen the building is not financially reasonable, the building owner can submit documentation and apply for a demolition permit to remove the building. Such documentation/application shall be made to the Martinez Building Official for review and must follow all applicable procedures for building demolition under this code. Approved demolition work must be completed within the time frames outlined in subsection (A). The Building Official may modify or extend time frames for demolition based upon the specific circumstances of the demolition work. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.070 - Application to Building Permits for URM Buildings. 
Whenever an owner applies for a building permit under Title 15 to make any alteration, modification or renovation of any URM building, the owner shall submit an engineering report pursuant to section 8.50.040 as part of the permit application. The report shall include an evaluation of whether the proposed work is in any portion of the building needing seismic strengthening. If the Building Official determines that the proposed work does include an area where seismic strengthening is required the building owner shall submit the construction drawings required by section 8.50.050 with the permit application. The Building Official will determine which portions of the required seismic strengthening work must be included as part of the proposed project. All other provisions of this Chapter shall also be applicable to any construction drawings or work required by this section. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.080 - Failure to Comply. 
Any violation of this Chapter is a public nuisance and the Building Official can order the building vacated. Vacated buildings must comply with the provisions of the Martinez Municipal Code Chapter 8.38 and other applicable codes and regulations. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
8.50.090 - Appeal. 
Appeals of the requirements, determinations or actions pursuant to this Chapter shall be made to the Building Official. Such appeal shall be filed with the Public Works Department within sixty (60) days of the rendering of the decision, action, or order that is the subject of the appeal. The written appeal shall include a clear and concise statement of the grounds, material facts and specific reason for the appeal. 
The appeal shall include an address at which the appellant agrees notice of any additional proceedings, decisions or orders relating to the imposition of the appeal may be received by first class mail. The Building Official shall bring the appeal to the appeals board within thirty (30) days following the filing of the written appeal. The appeals board shall render a decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the appeals hearing. The decision of the appeals board shall be final. 
(Ord. 1353 C.S., § 1, 7-15-2009)  
TITLE 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
I. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT  
CHAPTER 9.04 - FALSE INFORMATION 
 
9.04.010 - Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to give information, either orally or in writing, to any officer or employee of any law enforcement agency of the City, County, or State, concerning a felony or a misdemeanor knowing such information to be false. 
(Prior Code § 1202.)  
CHAPTER 9.08 - INTERFERENCE WITH CANINE UNITS 
 
9.08.010 - Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the City Police Department while any such dog is in the performance of the functions or duties of the Police Department or to willfully interfere with any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the department. 
(Ord. 753 C.S. § I, 1972: prior code § 3529.1.)  
III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY  
CHAPTER 9.28 - GAMBLING 
 
9.28.010 - Restricted. 
No person shall deal, play, carry on, open or cause to be opened, conduct or bet at or against any game prohibited by laws of the State, with cards, dice or any device, for money, checks, credit or other representative of value, except draw poker played in a cardroom licensed under Chapter 5.48 of this code. 
(Prior code § 3500)  
CHAPTER 9.30 - BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITY 
 
9.30.010 - Enabling Act. 
Pursuant to the initiative entitled Proposition 9 approved by the State electorate on June 8, 1976, at the State primary election, provision has been made for the operation of bingo games pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the State Constitution which authorizes the enactment of an ordinance to allow bingo games only for the benefit of organizations exempted from the payment of Bank and Corporation Tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution of a gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1952 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.020 - Penalty. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the State Constitution 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.030 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any minor to participate in any bingo game 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.040 - Location of Bingo Games. 
Any nonprofit, charitable organization qualified to operate a bingo game under this chapter shall conduct such bingo game only on property owned or leased by it and if property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of purposes to which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.050 - Open to Public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public not just to members of the nonprofit charitable organization. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, 1976.)  
9.30.060 - Staffing. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.070 - Financial Interest. 
It is unlawful for any individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game to hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.080 - Special Fund. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept by the nonprofit charitable organization in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.090 - Personally Present. 
It is unlawful for any person to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.100 - Prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.110 - Public Notice For Games. 
Any organization conducting a bingo game pursuant to this chapter shall post a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter in a conspicuous place at the location of any and all games conducted pursuant to this Chapter 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976)  
9.30.120 - Definition. 
As used in this Chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
9.30.130 - License Fees. 
The City may impose a license fee, not to exceed the actual cost of issuing such license, on each nonprofit, charitable organization which it authorizes to conduct bingo games. 
(Ord. 839 C.S. § 1 part, l976.)  
CHAPTER 9.32 - PUBLIC BILLIARD ROOMS 
 
9.32.010 - Defined. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, a "public billiard room" is defined to be any place open to the public where billiards, bagatelle or pool is played, or in which any billiard or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play thereon, whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such table or not; provided, however, that a public billiard room as used herein shall not include any place operated and maintained on the same premises with and strictly incidental to another lawful principal use of the premises and only during the hours that such principal use is open to the public. 
(Prior code § 350l.)  
9.32.020 - Hours. 
A.  No owner, manager or proprietor or other person having charge of any public billiard room shall keep the same open or allow or permit the same to be kept open or allow or permit any game to be played therein from 2 A.M. until 6 A.M., or allow or permit any person except such owner, manager, proprietor or persons in charge thereof or the servants regularly employed in and about the same, to be or remain therein between the hours aforesaid. 
B.  This Section shall not apply to any public billiard room operated and maintained as a family-style billiard parlor having carpeted floor and a brightly lighted interior completely visible from the outside of the premises through large adequate windows. 
(Prior code § 3.502.)  
9.32.030 - Minors—Restrictions. 
No person under the age of 18 years, shall be in, remain in, enter and visit any public billiard room unless such minor is accompanied by one of his parents or by his legal guardian. No person under the age of 21 years shall be in, enter or visit any public billiard room in which any alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale, nor in any public billiard room which adjoins a room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale, and in which there is an opening connecting the billiard room with the premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale. 
(Prior code § 3502.l.)  
9.32.040 - Minors—Responsibility of Proprietor to Prohibit on Premises—Exceptions. 
No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any public billiard room shall allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be in, remain in, enter or visit such place unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his parents or by his legal guardian. Every owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of a public billiard room, in which any alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale, or such billiard room adjoining a building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale, and in which there is an opening connecting such public billiard room with the room, in which alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale, shall prohibit and prevent every person under the age of 21 years from being in, remaining in, entering or visiting such public billiard room. 
(Prior code § 3502.2.)  
9.32.050 - Minors—Exceptions From Provisions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 9.32.030 and 9.32.040, any person of the age of 16 years or over may be in, enter, visit or play in any family-style billiard parlor as described in section 9.32.020 after the hour of 8:00 A.M. and prior to the hour of 10:00 P.M. of any day, and may be permitted to do so without being accompanied by parent or guardian providing no alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or offered for sale on the premises or in any adjoining room, connected by a door or opening to the premises. 
(Prior code § 3502.3.)  
CHAPTER 9.34 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS  
Article 1. - General Provisions 
 
9.34.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
It is the intent of this Chapter to provide special design guidelines, standards and development regulations to regulate the time, place and manner of the operation of adult-oriented businesses in order to minimize the negative secondary effects associated with such uses including, but not limited to, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools, parks, playgrounds, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this Chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas. Additionally, it is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Adult Arcade. The term "adult arcade," as used in this Chapter, means any business establishment or concern containing 1 or more coin or slug-operated or manually or electronically controlled still or motion picture projectors, video machines, projector or similar image-producing devices, that are maintained to display images to an individual or group of individuals when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  Adult Bookstore. The term "adult bookstore," as used in this Chapter, means any establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, sexually oriented material, books, periodicals, magazines, or other printed materials, or photographs, drawings, sculptures, films, motion pictures, videos, discs, cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas (See "adult-oriented business" for definition of regular and substantial course of conduct.) 
C.  Adult Cabaret. The term "adult cabaret," as used in this Chapter, means a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant, or similar business establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, computer-generated images, videos, discs, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
D.  Adult Dance Studio. The term "adult dance studio," as used in this Chapter, means any business establishment or concern which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
E.  Adult Hotel/Motel. The term "adult hotel/motel," as used in this Chapter, means a hotel, motel or other similar business establishment or concern offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, videos, discs, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than once in a 24-hour period. 
F.  Adult Modeling Studio. The term "adult modeling studio," as used in this Chapter, means any business or premises where there is furnished, provided or procured, a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where such model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, photographed, painted, drawn, sculpted, filmed or videotaped or otherwise depicted for a fee, compensation, gratuity or other thing of value as consideration for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or to remain on the premises. "Adult modeling studio" does not include any live art class or any studio or classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. 
G.  Adult-Oriented Business. The term "adult-oriented business" means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel/motel, adult modeling studio, adult theater; any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes or offers for sale or distribution sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. "Adult-oriented business" does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. For the purposes of this Section, a business establishment or concern has established the provision of products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as a regular and substantial course of conduct when 1 or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The area devoted to adult merchandise and/or sexually oriented material exceeds more than 20% of the total display or floor space area open to the public; and 
2.  The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas at least 4 times in any month; and 
3.  The regular and substantial course of conduct of the business consists of or involves the sale, trade, display or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
H.  Adult Theater. The term "adult theater," as used in this Chapter, means a business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents live entertainment performances, motion pictures, videos, computer images, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual representations or reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
I.  Adult-Oriented Business Operator. The term "adult-oriented business operator" (hereinafter "operator") means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. 
J.  Applicant. The term "applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this Chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business. 
K.  Bar. For the purposes of this Chapter, a "bar" means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
L.  Church. The term "church" as used in this Chapter, means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
M.  Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis Upon. As used in this Chapter, the term "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character or theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See "Pringle v. City of Covina (1981) 115 Cal.App.3d 151." 
N.  Entertainer. As used herein, "entertainer" means any person who dances, models, entertains, and/or performs specified sexual activities or displays specified anatomical areas in an adult-oriented business. 
O.  Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. As used herein, to "establish an adult-oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; and 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein; and 
3.  The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
4.  The relocation of any such adult-oriented business. 
P.  Figure Model. The term "figure model," as used in this Chapter, means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
Q.  Live Art Class. The term "live art class" as used in this Chapter, means any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical areas; instruction is offered in a series of at least 2 classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and preregistration is required at least 24 hours in advance of participation in the class. 
R.  Nudity or a State of Nudity. "Nudity" or "state of nudity," as used in this Chapter, means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola. 
S.  Operate an Adult-Oriented Business. As used in this Chapter, "operate an adult-oriented business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business. 
T.  Permittee. The term "permittee," as used in this Chapter, means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued. 
U.  Person. The term "person," as used in this Chapter, means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
V.  School. The term "school," as used in this Chapter, means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university, but it does not include a vocational institution. 
W.  Semi-Nude. The term "semi-nude," as used in this Chapter, means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
X.  Sexual Encounter Center. "Sexual encounter center," as used in this Chapter, means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where 3 or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Y.  Sexually Oriented Material. The term "sexually oriented material," as used in this Chapter, means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, disc, computer-generated image, or other written, oral or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Z.  Sexually Oriented Merchandise. The term "sexually oriented merchandise," as used in this Chapter, means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, including, but not limited to, dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery or electrically operated vaginas or penises, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
AA.  Specified Anatomical Areas. As used in this Chapter, "specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human (a) genitals or pubic region, (b) buttocks, and/or (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
3.  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (AA)(1) or (2) above. 
BB.  Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
4.  Fondling, or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or 
7.  The presence of any person who performs, or appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
Article 2. - Limitations on Location 
 
9.34.040 - Prohibited Areas and Minimum Proximity Requirements. 
A.  Subject to the limitations set forth in this Chapter, adult-oriented businesses may be established in the service commercial (SC) or light industrial (LI) zoning districts of the City. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above, no adult-oriented business shall be established or located within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below: 
1.  No such business shall be established or located within a 300-foot radius from any existing residential zone or use. The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and a residential zone or use shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line included within a residential zoning district or property in current residential use, along a straight line extended between the 2 points. 
2.  No such business shall be established or located within 1,000 feet of any other adult-oriented business as defined in this Chapter which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the City of Martinez. The distance between the 2 adult-oriented business uses shall be measured between the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use and proposed adult-oriented business use along a straight line extended between the 2 uses. 
3.  No such businesses shall be established or located within 1,000 feet from any existing park, playground, church or school uses or property zoned recreational facilities (RF). The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and park, playground, church or school uses or property zoned recreational facilities (RF), shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line where the park, playground, church or school use is located, or property zoned recreational facilities (RF) is located, along a straight line extended between the 2 points. 
C.  The above distance limitations shall also apply to residential districts or uses and parks, playgrounds, schools, and church uses or property designated as such in the general plan land use element of an adjacent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
Article 3. - Application and Permits 
 
9.34.060 - Adult-Oriented Business Permit Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, establish, carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, established or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Martinez, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect both an adult-oriented business permit and a business license from the City of Martinez. 
No adult-oriented business may be established within the City of Martinez by right. All persons wishing to establish an adult-oriented business within the City must first apply for and receive an adult-oriented business permit pursuant to this Chapter. 
It is the burden of the applicant for an adult-oriented business permit to supply sufficient evidence to justify the grant of an adult-oriented business permit. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.080 - Application Requirements. 
A.  Application Submittal. Any person desiring to operate or establish an adult-oriented business within the City of Martinez shall file with the Community Development Department an adult-oriented business permit application on a standard application form supplied by the Community Development Department. 
B.  All applications shall include the following information: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age; 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names and current addresses of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names, addresses and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
4.  The notarized signature of the property owner and proof of ownership; 
5.  A nonrefundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council; 
6.  Signed statement by the applicant verifying that applicant intends to and will comply with all adult-oriented business development standards of this Chapter; 
7.  A description of the adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of all the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site; 
8.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed; 
9.  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business; 
10.  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches; 
11.  A straight-line drawing prepared within 30 calendar days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (a) the property line of any residential zone or use within 300 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business, (b) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a business permit is requested, and (c) the property lines of any church, school, park or playground within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business; 
12.  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by this Chapter. 
C.  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a 10% or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. 
D.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
E.  All applicants for an adult-oriented business permit must also fill out the City's environmental information form for purposes of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"). 
F.  The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall determine whether the application contains all the information required by the provisions of this Chapter. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, within 30 days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have 30 calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the 30-day period shall render the application automatically void. Within 30 days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the Community Development Director or his or her designee shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. The applicant shall be notified within 10 days of the date the application is found to be complete. All notices required by this Chapter shall be deemed given upon the date that they are either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided. 
G.  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business permit. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.100 - Investigation and Action on Application. 
A.  The Planning Commission ("the Commission") shall grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for an adult-oriented business permit ("permit"). Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this Chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
B.  Upon the filing of a completed application, the Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, an appropriate investigation, including consultation with the Building, Police, Fire and Health Departments and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation is not grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. 
C.  Within 45 days of receipt of the completed application, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for an adult-oriented business permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with California Government Code Section 65091, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
D.  In reaching a decision on an application for an adult-oriented business permit, the Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
E.  The Planning Commission shall render a written decision on the application for an adult-oriented business permit within 60 days of receiving a completed application. The failure of the Commission to render such a decision within this time frame shall be deemed to constitute a denial of the application. 
F.  The Commission's decision shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.110 - Permit-Appeal. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council in writing within 10 days after the Commission's written decision. In addition, within 10 days after the Commission's written decision, any member of the City Council shall have the authority to direct that the City Council review the decision of the Commission on the grounds that the individual council member believes that the matter should be decided by the City Council. 
B.  Consideration of an appeal of the Commission's decision shall be at a de novo public hearing which shall be noticed in the same manner as the public hearing of the Commission and shall occur within 30 days of the filing of the appeal or initiation of review by the City Council. 
C.  The City Council action on the appeal of the Commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum, and upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the application. The City Council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.120 - Permit-Judicial Review of Decision to Grant, Deny or Revoke. 
A.  The time for court to challenge a decision by the City Council to grant, deny or revoke an adult-oriented business permit is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  Notice of the City Council's decision and its findings shall be mailed to the applicant and shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  The petitioner may seek prompt judicial review of the City Council's action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.140 - Permit-Expiration. 
Any adult-oriented business permit approved pursuant to this Chapter shall become null and void unless the proposed use is established within 6 months from the date of approval. As to facilities that are a reuse of existing facilities, the adult-oriented business permit shall become null and void unless the proposed use is established within 6 months from the date of approval, unless prior to said expiration date the permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the applicant has a good faith intent to presently commence the proposed use. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of 2 6-month extensions. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.160 - Permit-Approval Criteria. 
A.  The Commission or City Council shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an adult-oriented business permit where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates all of the following findings: 
1.  That the applicant is over the age of 18 years; and 
2.  That the required application fee has been paid; and 
3.  That the proposed use complies with the development and design requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is located and with the applicable development standards of this Chapter; and 
4.  That the proposed site is not located within a 300-foot radius from any existing residential zone or use. The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and a residential zone or use shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line included within a residential zoning district or property in current residential use, along a straight line extended between the 2 points; and 
5.  That the proposed site is not located within 1,000 feet of any other adult-oriented business as defined in this Chapter which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the City of Martinez. The distance between the 2 adult-oriented business uses shall be measured between the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use and proposed adult-oriented business use along a straight line extended between the 2 uses; and 
6.  That the proposed site is not located within 1,000 feet from any existing park, playground, church or school uses or property zoned recreational facilities (RF). The distance between a proposed adult-oriented business use and park, playground, church or school uses or property zoned recreational facilities (RF), shall be measured from the nearest exterior wall of the facility housing the adult-oriented business use or proposed adult-oriented business use to the nearest property line where the park, playground, church or school use or property zoned recreational facilities (RF) is located, along a straight line extended between the 2 points; and 
7.  That the proposed site is not located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or use or within 1,000 feet of a park, playground, church or school use located in or property designated for such use in the general plan land use element of an adjacent jurisdiction; and 
8.  That neither the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past 4 years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense. 
B.  Any conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this Chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.180 - Registration of New Employees. 
A.  As a further condition of approval of every adult-oriented business permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, every owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall register every employee with the Police Department within 5 business days of the commencement of the employee's period of employment at the adult-oriented business. 
B.  Each employee shall be required to provide 2 recent color passport-quality photographs and, at the discretion of the Police Chief, shall allow himself or herself to be fingerprinted by the Police Department for purposes of identification. In addition, each new employee shall provide the following information in a form provided by the Police Department: 
1.  Name, current resident address, telephone number; and 
2.  Date of birth; and 
3.  Social Security number; and 
4.  Height, weight, color of eyes and hair; and 
5.  Stage name, if applicable, and other aliases used within the previous 2 years. 
C.  Each owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall maintain a current register of the names of all employees currently employed by the adult-oriented business, and shall disclose such registration for inspection by any Police Officer for the purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
D.  Failure to register each new employee within 5 days of the commencement of employment, or to maintain a current register of the names of all employees shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the adult-oriented business permit and may be considered grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.200 - Adult-Oriented Business Development Standards. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any operator or employee of an adult-oriented business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day. 
B.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Martinez. 
C.  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
D.  All off-street parking areas and other exterior areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of 1 footcandle of light evenly distributed at ground level. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas, walkways and outdoor areas serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
E.  The operator of an adult-oriented business shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement official. 
F.  The adult-oriented business shall post in plain view inside the front portion of the business, a sign, in 2-inch print which shall reference California Penal Code Section 314 which shall read as follows: 
Every person who willfully and lewdly either: (1) exposes his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or (2) procures, counsels, or assists any person so as to expose himself or take part in any model artist exhibition, or to make any other exhibition of himself to public view or the view of any number of persons, such as is offensive to decency, or is adapted to excite to vicious or lewd thoughts or acts, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Upon the second and each subsequent conviction under subsection (1) above, or upon a first conviction under subsection (1) above after a previous conviction under (California Penal Code) Section 288, every person so convicted is guilty of a felony, and is punishable by imprisonment in state prison. California Penal Code Section 314. 
G.  All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms and customer changing rooms, if any, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
H.  Any adult-oriented business which is also an "adult arcade," shall comply with the following additional provisions: 
1.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms and customer changing rooms. Rest rooms and customer changing rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has 2 or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least 1 of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
2.  The view area specified in subsection (H)(1) shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
3.  No viewing room or changing room may be occupied by more than 1 person at any 1 time. 
4.  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths, changing rooms, rest rooms and stalls or spaces contained therein shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any 2 such rooms such as would allow viewing from 1 booth or room into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any 2 such booths or rooms. 
5.  Customers, patrons or visitors who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing, shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the rest rooms. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
6.  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the adult-oriented business permit. 
I.  All interior areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following footcandles, adequately maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area 	Footcandles 
Bookstores and other retail establishments 	20 
Theaters and cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 footcandles) 
Adult arcades 	10 
Motels/hotels 	20 (in public areas) 
Modeling studios 	20 
 
J.  The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any adult-oriented material. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this Section shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of sexually oriented material or merchandise which is not used or consumed on the premises and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
K.  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission: 
1.  No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment shall allow any person below the age of 18 years upon the premises or within the confines of the business if no alcoholic beverage is served, or under the age of 21 if alcoholic beverages are served. 
2.  No entertainer shall dance with or otherwise be within 4 feet of a patron while performing for compensation or while on the adult-oriented businesses premises. This 4-foot separation shall be marked by a railing or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the entertainer and the patron(s). 
3.  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall permit or allow at licensed premises any patron to approach within 4 feet of an entertainer, or permit or allow an entertainer to approach within 4 feet of a patron. 
4.  All employees, other than entertainers while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas. 
5.  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
6.  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
7.  The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum 3-foot-wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
8.  No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either or before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
9.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
L.  Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least 1 security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
2.  All adult-oriented businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. The individual designated as the on-site manager shall be registered with the City's Community Development Director by the owner to receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises. 
3.  All adult-oriented businesses shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors the exterior premises of the property including all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, uniformed security guards to patrol and monitor the exterior premises of the property, including the parking lot areas during all business hours. A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the premises. The sign shall not exceed 2 by 3 feet and shall at a minimum be 1 foot by 1 ½ feet. 
4.  Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
M.  X-rated movies or videos shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays videos or other motion picture media that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the motion picture rating industry ("MPAA"), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, said videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited. All access to sexually oriented material or merchandise shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age. 
N.  Any and all sexually oriented materials or sexually oriented merchandise discarded by an adult-oriented business shall be fully contained within a locked garbage receptacle at all times so that minors are not exposed to sexually oriented materials or sexually oriented merchandise. 
The foregoing applicable requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the business permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.210 - Display of Business Permit. 
Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the business permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.220 - Employment of and Services Rendered to Persons Under the Age of 18 Years Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires a business permit, to any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.240 - Transfer of Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permits. 
A.  A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the adult-oriented permit. 
B.  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the Planning Commission stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the Planning Commission in accordance with Sections 9.34.060 and 9.34.080, accompanies the application with a transfer fee as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the City Council, and the Planning Commission determines in accordance with Sections 9.34.100 through 160 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original adult-oriented business permit. Said transfer fee shall be paid in lieu of the filing fee set forth in Section 9.34.080(B)(5). 
C.  No adult-oriented business permit may be transferred when the permittee has been notified that the business permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer an adult-oriented business permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void, and the adult-oriented business permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.260 - Permit—Revocation. 
A.  Any adult-oriented business permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the City on the basis of any of the following: 
1.  That the business or activity has been conducted in a manner which violates 1 or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit or which fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits for the building in which the use is located set by the Fire Marshal; and 
2.  That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or in any report required to be filed with the City or has not answered each question in the application truthfully; and 
3.  That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required City, County, and state licenses and permits; and 
4.  That the permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued; and 
5.  That the building or structure in which the adult-oriented business is conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public under the standards set forth in the Uniform Building, Uniform Plumbing or Uniform Fire Code; and 
6.  That the permitted business creates sound levels which violate the noise ordinance of the City; and 
7.  That the permittee, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership is found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense during the period of the adult-oriented business's operation; and 
8.  That the permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business: 
a.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation, and 
b.  Use of the adult-oriented business site as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur, and 
c.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code, and 
d.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code, and 
e.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions of the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4, and 
f.  Any conduct prohibited by this Chapter; 
9.  Failure to abide by any action previously imposed by an appropriate City official; 
10.  That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for 6 months or more. 
B.  Written notice of hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the permittee shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee at least 10 days prior to the hearing. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation of the permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with California Government Code Section 65091, as the same may be amended from time to time. In reaching a decision on the proposed revocation, the Planning Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
D.  The Commission shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permittee's adult-oriented business permit. Any additional conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this Chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
E.  The Commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall be hand-delivered or mailed to the applicant and mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the use. 
F.  The Commission shall make its final decision within 30 days of the public hearing. 
G.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council in writing within 10 days after the Commission's written decision. In addition, within 10 days after the Commission's written decision, any member of the City Council shall have the authority to direct that the City Council review the decision of the Commission on the grounds that the individual council member believes that the matter should be decided by the City Council. 
H.  Consideration of an appeal of the Commission's decision shall be at a de novo public hearing which shall be noticed in the same manner as the public hearing of the Commission and shall occur within 30 days of the filing of the appeal or initiation of review by the City Council. In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
I.  The City Council action on the appeal of the Commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum, and upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the permittee's adult-oriented business permit. Any additional conditions imposed upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development standards of this Chapter and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. The City Council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
J.  In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this Chapter, another adult use development permit to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the permittee within 12 months after the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.300 - Violations. 
Any person who violates any section of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36901, as it may be amended from time to time, or any other legal remedy available to the City. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.320 - Applicability to Other Regulations. 
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the adult-oriented business uses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning ordinance, other City ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.340 - Conduct Constituting a Public Nuisance. 
The conduct of any business within the City in violation of any of the terms of this Chapter is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the City Attorney or the District Attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult-oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an adult-oriented business contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.360 - Amortization of Legal Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Any adult-oriented business or establishment regulated under the provisions of this Chapter which is a nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be subject to an amortization period expiring 1 year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
B.  An adult-oriented business or establishment operating as a conforming use with an approved adult-oriented business permit from the City shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the location of a religious institution or school, within the locational limitations of this Section. 
C.  The Community Development Department shall provide written notice to the owner (and lessee/operator, if known by reference to City's business license records) at least 120 days prior to the expiration of this amortization period. This notice is not mandatory and lack of notice shall not be deemed to prevent the City from initiating an action seeking declaratory or injunctive relief against the owner and/or operator of such business. However, if notice of expiration of amortization period is not given, any application by the owner or lessee/operator of the business for an extension of the amortization period shall not be denied on the grounds that it is untimely. 
D.  Amortization-Application for Extension. 
1.  The owner may file an application with the Community Development Department for an extension of the amortization period. The applicant must state: 
a.  Whether a previous extension has been requested and granted, as well as the date of the previous request; and 
b.  The efforts that will be made to conform by the conclusion of the extended period. 
2.  The owner's application shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  Any application for an extension of the amortization period shall be made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the Commission determines that good cause exists for the late filing of the application. 
E.  Amortization-Decision to Grant or Deny. 
1.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing at which time it shall consider the evidence and testimony regarding the request for an extension of the amortization period. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with California Government Code Section 65091 as the same may be amended from time to time. In reaching its decision, the Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The Commission shall grant or deny an application for extension of the amortization period. The Commission shall make its decision within 30 days of the filing of the request. 
2.  In rendering its decision, the Commission shall determine whether the adult-oriented business has been provided with a reasonable amortization period commensurate with the investment involved. If the Commission determines that the amortization period is not reasonable, it shall prescribe an amortization period that is commensurate with the investment involved. The burden shall be on the applicant to establish that the extension should be granted. 
3.  The Commission shall consider the following factors in making its determination: 
a.  The adult-oriented business owner's financial investment in the business; and 
b.  The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements; and 
c.  The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedules; and 
d.  The remaining useful life of the business improvements; and 
e.  The remaining lease term; and 
f.  The cost of relocating the business to a site conforming with the provisions of this Section; and 
g.  The ability of the business and/or land owner to change the use to a conforming use; and 
h.  The secondary effects of the adult-oriented business on the health, safety and welfare of surrounding businesses and uses if the adult-oriented business is permitted to extend the amortization period. 
4.  The commission's decision shall be in writing, and shall be hand-delivered or sent by certified mail to the applicant. 
F.  Amortization-Appeal. 
1.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council in writing within 10 days after the Commission's written decision. In addition, within 10 days after the Commission's written decision, any member of the City Council shall have the authority to direct that the City Council review the decision of the Commission on the grounds that the individual council member believes that the matter should be decided by the City Council. 
2.  Consideration of an appeal of the Commission's decision shall be at a de novo public hearing which shall be noticed in the same manner as the public hearing of the Commission and shall occur within 30 days of the filing of the appeal or initiation of review by the City Council. 
3.  The City Council action on the appeal of the Commission's decision shall be by a majority vote of the quorum. The City Council's decision shall be final and conclusive. 
4.  In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. 
G.  Amortization-Public Nuisance. 
The City Council declares to be a public nuisance any parcel where an adult-oriented business is operating and where the amortization period as a legal nonconforming use has expired and (1) no application for an extension is on file or has been granted, or (2) no application for an adult-oriented business permit is on file or has been granted. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
9.34.380 - Inspection. 
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Community Development Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. 1339 C.S. § 3 (part), 2007.)  
IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE  
CHAPTER 9.40 - PUBLIC MEETINGS 
 
9.40.010 - Permission Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or take part in any public meeting held on any public street, or in any square, park, lane, alley, court or other public place, or at, or in front of the entrance to any public building in the City unless permission to hold such public meeting shall first have been obtained in writing, signed by the City Manager or his designee and the Chief of Police. Such permission in writing shall designate the time and place when and where such meeting shall be held. 
(Ord. 1052 C.S. § VIII, 1985: Prior Code § 3505.)  
CHAPTER 9.44 - PARADES 
 
9.44.010 - Permit Required. 
It is unlawful for any person or organization to conduct or participate in any parade on the public streets without first obtaining therefor a permit from the Chief of Police. 
(Prior Code § 3506.)  
CHAPTER 9.48 - POSTERS AND HANDBILLS 
 
9.48.010 - Posting of Bills. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause to be posted, stuck, stamped, painted or otherwise affixed, any bill, poster, placard, notice or advertisement to or upon any house or part thereof, wall, fence, gate, post, sidewalk, trees or boxes around trees, curbs, or curbstone, lamppost, hydrant or any post supporting electric wires in any part of the City, without first obtaining permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the premises to do so. 
(Prior code § 3510.)  
9.48.020 - Distribution of Handbills. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or throw upon any private yard, lawn or driveway, or upon any sidewalk, or upon any porch or steps of any residence, or upon or in any part of any structure, or in any automobile, or in any public place, or in any receptacle, or upon any vacant property, in the City any notice of commercial advertising or any handbill, dodger, circular or booklet, provided that nothing herein shall prohibit the distribution and delivery of any newspaper which has been entered as second class matter in the United States Post Office. 
(Prior code § 3511.)  
CHAPTER 9.50 - TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
9.50.010 - Refusal to Leave Private Commercial Establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or refuse to leave any private commercial establishment after concluding any lawful business with the commercial establishment and after having been requested to leave by (1) a peace officer at the request of the owner, the owner's agent or the person in lawful possession of the commercial establishment, and upon being informed by the peace officer that he or she is acting at the request of the owner, the owner's agent or the person in lawful possession of the commercial establishment, or (2) the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession of the commercial establishment. As used herein, "commercial establishment" shall include any property for the parking of motor vehicles by the customers of such commercial establishment. The owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession of the commercial establishment shall make a separate request to the peace officer on each occasion when the peace officer's assistance in dealing with the trespass is required. 
(Ord. 1155 C.S. § I part, 1990.)  
9.50.020 - Trespass upon private property. 
A.  No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises after being notified by the owner, or lessee, or other person in charge thereof, to remove therefrom. 
B.  No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner, or lessee, or other person in charge of private property or business premises shall enter upon such private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner, or lessee, or other person in charge thereof, to keep off or keep away therefrom. 
C.  This section shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
(1)  Where its application results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry, or national origin; 
(2)  Where its application results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by Penal Code § 365 or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers; 
(3)  Where its application would result in an interference with, or inhibition of, peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities; 
(4)  Where its application would result in an interference with, or inhibition of, any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech, such as (but not limited to) peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions not involving offensive personal conduct; 
(5)  Where the person who is upon another's private property or business premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable to (but not limited to) the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies; marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or visitation disputes; disputes regarding title to or rights in real property; landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute; employer-employee disputes; business-type disputes such as those between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree, or process of a court. 
D.  In addition to all other remedies or penalties available under this Code or any other laws, a violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, provided that in the discretion of the enforcing authority a violation may be charged and/or prosecuted as an infraction. In either case, violations shall be punishable as set forth by Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1390 C.S. , § III, 12-2-2015)  
CHAPTER 9.52 - CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES* 
*  Editor's note: The title of Ch. 9.52 was amended by Ord. 1346 C.S. 
 
9.52.010 - Prohibitions Designated. 
A.  Consumption and Possession of Alcoholic Beverages. Except as provided by Section 9.52.020, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume, drink or imbibe any alcoholic beverage in any quantity in any of the following places: 
1.  On any property that is owned by the City and open to public use, including but not limited to, any public park, parking lot or area designated for recreational use of the public, or on any public street, sidewalk, way or alley; 
2.  On the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee; 
3.  On other private property open to the public, including but not limited to, parking lots and shopping centers where the sale of alcoholic beverages has not been licensed; or 
4.  On private property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, his agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof. 
B.  Possession of an Open Container in a Public Park or Recreation Area. Except as provided by Section 9.52.020, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, handle, display, or exhibit any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage in any quantity, that has been opened or the seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed, in any of the following places: 
1.  On any property that is owned by the City or open to public use, including but not limited to, any public park, parking lot, or area designated for recreational use of the public, or any public street, sidewalk, way, or alley; or 
2.  On the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee. 
C.  The provisions in subsection B above are enacted pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 25620 and Penal Code Section 647e and do not make unlawful any act that is expressly made inapplicable under either of these sections. 
D.  Nothing in this Section shall make unlawful any act which may be not regulated by a general law city under state law. 
E.  Any violation of this Section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as provided by Section 1.12.030 of this Code. 
F.  For the purposes of this Section, "alcoholic beverage" shall refer to any liquid substance that is intended for consumption and contains more than ½ of 1% of alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. 1346 C.S. § 1, 2008: Ord. 1109 C.S. § I, 1988: Prior Code § 3507.)  
9.52.020 - Exceptions to Prohibitions. 
The following are exceptions to the provisions of Section 9.52.010: 
A.  Beer and wine may be possessed and consumed in public parks and recreation areas where permitted by a resolution adopted by the City Council. 
B.  Possession of any liquid substance that contains more than ½ of 1% of alcohol by volume is allowed in a public park or recreational area only after a person(s) has applied, at least 24 hours before using the park or recreational area for a permit for such use, and a written permit to possess alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in a specific park or recreation area has been obtained from the City, and the fee established by the resolution establishing fees and charges for various municipal services of the City of Martinez for said permit have been paid. 
C.  Possession of any liquid substance that contains more than ½ of 1% of alcohol by volume is allowed in any area approved in writing by the City Manager as long as said possession is incidental to a specified use or event. 
D.  Possession of any liquid substance that contains more than ½ of 1% of alcohol by volume is allowed in any establishment in accordance with a lawfully obtained permit issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. 1346 C.S. § 2, 2008: Ord. 1109 C.S. § II, 1988: Prior Code § 3507.1.)  
CHAPTER 9.53 - URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC 
 
9.53.010 - Urinating or Defecating in Public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building or publicly maintained facility, or any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not be construed as to prohibit the use for urination or defecation of lawfully constructed restroom facilities designed for sanitary disposal of human waste. This section shall not be construed to permit activity which is otherwise deemed unlawful pursuant to relevant provisions of the Penal Code or other State law. 
In addition to all other remedies or penalties available under this Code or any other laws, a violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, provided that in the discretion of the enforcing authority a violation may be charged and/or prosecuted as an infraction. In either case, violations shall be punishable as set forth by Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1390 C.S. , § IV, 12-2-2015)  
CHAPTER 9.54 - LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITIES 
 
9.54.010 - Acts Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity defined as offenses in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 1199 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
9.54.020 - Circumstances. 
Among such circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are that the person: 
A.  Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this Chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of said Sections or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia. 
B.  Is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
C.  Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, acting as a "lookout." 
D.  Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang" or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; 
E.  Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion; 
F.  Takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; 
G.  Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
H.  Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking; 
I.  Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity; and/or 
J.  Is in or within six feet of any vehicle registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(Ord. 1199 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
CHAPTER 9.56 - SLEEPING IN VEHICLES 
 
9.56.010 - Sleeping in Vehicles. 
No person shall sleep or doze in any vehicle at any time between the hours of 11 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. while parked on any roadway, street, alley, or parked in any parking lot, whether privately or publicly owned. For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be as defined by Vehicle Code § 670 as it may be amended from time to time. In addition to all other remedies or penalties available under this Code or under any other laws, a violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, provided that in the discretion of the enforcing authority a violation may be charged and/or prosecuted as an infraction. In either case, violations shall be punishable as set forth by Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1390 C.S. , § V, 12-2-2015; Prior code § 3528)  
CHAPTER 9.58 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
9.58.010 - Findings. 
A.  The City Council finds that there has been a recent rise in instances in which persons have been the victims of begging or soliciting through harassing, threatening, or intimidating tactics calculated to deprive the person of property against his/her will and out of fear for his/her personal safety or physical property. 
B.  The City Council finds that some of these instances have resulted in discouragement of residents and visitors to frequent certain areas of the City and the loss of business to those businesses where such harassing solicitation tactics are being employed. 
C.  The City Council finds that harassing forms of begging and soliciting should be prohibited to safeguard the health and welfare of residents, visitors and the business community. 
D.  The City Council finds that direct personal solicitation of drivers at intersections is distracting and threatens the safe and orderly flow of traffic along City streets. 
(Ord. No. 1367 C.S., § I, 12-5-2012.)  
9.58.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Agressive Solicitation. An aggressive solicitation occurs whenever a solicitor (as defined by subsection (B) of this section) commits any act which places a person who is the object of the solicitation in reasonable fear for his/her personal safety or property. An aggressive solicitation may occur under the following circumstances, provided that the object of the solicitation is in reasonable fear for his/her personal safety or property: 
1.  The solicitor intentionally blocks the path of the person who is the object of the solicitation; or 
2.  The solicitor persists in following closely the person who is the object of the solicitation, while the solicitor continues to demand money or other thing of value, after the person has informed the solicitor by words or conduct that the person does not want to give money or other thing of value to the solicitor. 
B.  "Solicit" means to ask for the immediate donation or payment of money or other thing of value in a coercive, threatening, or harassing manner, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means. 
C.  "Solicitor" is one who solicits as defined in subsection (B) of this section. 
D.  "Fear for His/Her Personal Safety" Defined. The following facts, among others, may be considered in deciding whether a reasonable person would be caused to fear for his or her safety or property: 
1.  The occurrence of threatening gestures or other threatening conduct of the solicitor, including physically following the object of the solicitation. 
2.  The proximity of the solicitor to the object of the solicitation and the duration of the solicitation. 
3.  The solicitor's making of physical contact with the object of the solicitation. 
E.  "Intentionally block" means to walk, stand, sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or to require another person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. 
(Ord. No. 1367 C.S., § I, 12-5-2012.)  
9.58.030 - Prohibition of Aggressive Solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person on the streets, sidewalks, or other places open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, to engage in any act of aggressive solicitation as defined by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1367 C.S., § I, 12-5-2012.)  
9.58.040 - Prohibition of Solicitation in Intersections. 
A.  In order to promote the safe and orderly flow of traffic and to prevent disruptions of traffic occurring while vehicles are operating at intersections within the City, no person may request, ask, demand, or beg for any money, goods or services, including offering any services in exchange for money, goods or services, from any driver or passenger of any vehicle that is in operation within 10 feet of any intersection of city highways, including intersections of city streets and state highways or state highway on- or off-ramps. 
B.  As used in this Section, "highway" shall be defined by Vehicle Code Section 360. 
C.  As used in this Section, "intersection" shall be defined by Vehicle Code Section 365. 
(Ord. No. 1367 C.S., § I, 12-5-2012.)  
9.58.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1367 C.S., § I, 12-5-2012.)  
V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
CHAPTER 9.60 - PARTIES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
9.60.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Party, Gathering or Event. A group of persons who have assembled, or are assembling, for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
B.  Police Services. Police services include the salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at the party, gathering, or event at a rate established by Resolution of the City Council; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property. 
C.  Person Responsible for the Event. The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering, or event takes place, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1167 C.S. § I, 1991.)  
9.60.020 - Police Services at Parties, Gatherings or Events Requiring a Second Response. 
When a party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) responsible for the event will be held liable for the cost of providing police services during a second response by the police, after a first warning to the person(s) responsible for the event to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. The return of second response may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators of the State Penal Code, or other provisions of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1167 C.S. § I, 1991.)  
9.60.030 - Police Services Fee. 
The police services fee shall include the cost of personnel and equipment but shall not exceed $500.00 for a single incident, provided however that the City does not hereby waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding $500.00 through other legal remedies. The amount of such fee shall be deemed a debt to the City of the person responsible for the event and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person owing such fees shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such fees, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 1167 C.S. § I (part), 1991.)  
VI. - CONSUMER PROTECTION  
CHAPTER 9.70 - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
9.70.010 - Purpose and Scope. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to set forth regulations governing alarm systems both commercial and residential within the City, require licenses therefor, and provide for enforcement of violations of provisions of this Chapter. 
This Chapter is not enacted pursuant to the power to license or tax business for revenue purposes. Any fee or charge authorized by this Chapter is for the sole purpose of defraying the cost and expense of investigation of applicants for licensing or registration, processing of applications, issuance of licenses or registrations, and regulation of the activities of the above mentioned alarm systems. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
9.70.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
A.  "Alarm Agent" means any person employed as an agent or employee by an alarm business or the owner of such business and whose duties include altering, installing, maintenance, moving, repairing, replacing or servicing an alarm system, responding to an alarm system or the sale or leasing of an alarm system to the subscriber. 
B.  "Alarm Business" means any business operated by a person or corporation for a profit which engages in the activity of altering, installing, responding to, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing an alarm system. 
C.  "Alarm Systems" means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention. 
D.  "Applicant" means a person who files an application for a new or renewal license or registration as provided in this chapter. 
E.  "Audible Alarm" means any alarm system which generates a sound which is designed to be perceptible outside the building wherein such device is installed. 
F.  "Automatic Dialing System" means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of an alarm system, automatically dials a pre-determined telephone number assigned, and transmits a message or signal to Martinez Police Department indicating a need for emergency response. 
G.  "Commercial Alarm" means an alarm installed on premises which are primarily used for one or more of the following: 
1.  Business providing sales, service or both; 
2.  Public agency or non-profit entity or organization providing service to the general public. The term "Commercial Alarm" does not include any alarm installed on premises primarily used for residential purposes. 
H.  "Panic Alarm" is a manually activated switch (possibly portable and battery operated) which signals an alarm to the main alarm system and is activated by persons when a crime or personal harm is eminent. 
I.  "False Alarm" means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or the negligence of the owner, lessee, or his employees or agents. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other violent uncontrollable acts of nature. 
J.  "Police Alarm Board" means the alarm receiving center located in the police department communication Section. It receives by direct connection, alarm and trouble signals from those locations that contract with the City for this service. The "Police Alarm Board" is restricted to commercial and business structures only. 
K.  "Subscriber" means any person, business or other entity which owns or is entitled to possession of any premises on which an alarm system has been installed. 
L.  "Telephone Number" includes any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect with the subscriber to the primary number(s) when the number(s) are in use. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.040 - Alarm Systems/Requirements. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, install, or cause to be installed, an alarm system on any premises without registering that alarm system with the Police Department at least twenty-four (24) hours before the system is activated. 
Alarm systems installed in emergency situations for temporary use not to exceed thirty (30) days may be registered at any time prior to activation. Alarm systems installed prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall have fifteen (15) days in which to register their alarm system after notification of the registration requirement by the Police Department. 
Failure to register any alarm system as set forth in these requirements can be grounds for violation and penalty as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.050 - Alarm Systems/Registration. 
The subscriber or alarm business acting on behalf of the subscriber shall provide in writing, on a form prescribed by the Police Department, the following information required for compliance of the alarm system requirements: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm subscriber. 
B.  Name, address and telephone number of the alarm business installing the alarm (if known). 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.060 - Certain Types of Sound Prohibited. 
No alarm system shall be installed or used which emits a sound which is similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense waning system. The Chief of Police or his representative shall make final determination in regard to any question about the sound emitted from an audible alarm. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.070 - Back-Up Power Supply. 
Any new alarm system installed in a commercial business shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electric service will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four (4) hours of operation. 
Alarm systems installed in commercial businesses prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall have six (6) months to comply with this requirement. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.080 - Automatic Dialing System. 
No person shall use or operate, cause to be used or operated, arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices, including alarm systems that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electrically, automatically, or by any other means initiate the intrastate calling, dialing, or connection to any telephone number, line, or instrument assigned to the City or Police Department, without prior written consent from the City or the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.090 - Consent Withdrawn (Automatic Dialing System). 
The Police Department may withdraw its consent by written notice to the person to whom consent was given and such person shall have the service(s) disconnected within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice to withdraw. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.100 - Assigned Telephone Number/Fee. 
The Chief of Police may assign a specific number(s) for connection from the automatic dialing device to the Police Department. Only the specific number(s) assigned shall be allowed; any other telephone number receiving an alarm shall be considered a violation of this Chapter. An annual fee shall be required of subscribers using automatic dialing systems. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.110 - Police Alarm Board. 
All alarms terminating at the Martinez Police alarm board will be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police. 
The Chief may designate a specific alarm system business to regulate the alarms terminating at the Communication Center to insure consistency of equipment and procedures. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.120 - False Alarms/Service Assessment. 
Any subscriber or person who maintains or has an alarm connected to the Police Alarm Board or who has an alarm system which requires police response created by any signal, message or alarm and transmitted to emergency units and which proves to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm service assessment fee to the City as follows: 
The maximum number of allowable false alarms reported shall be no more than two (2) in any thirty (30) day period with a maximum allowable of no more than eight (8) in a twelve (12) month period. 
Any number of false alarms in a twenty-four (24) hour period shall be deemed as one (1) false alarm for purposes of this Section. 
The Chief of Police shall notify in writing any subscriber that has exceeded the number of allowable false alarms in a thirty (30) day period. False alarms shall result in a service assessment fee, in accordance with the current City fee schedule. 
A new alarm system or owner may be given a thirty (30) day grace period for the purposes of training of parties responsible for the alarm and testing of their new equipment. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.130 - Non-Response. 
The Chief of Police may designate that a subscriber's alarm is an alarm warranting a "non-response" by emergency units. 
The Chief of Police may establish a non-response status in lieu of the service assessment fee. This non-response status will be based on any of the following: 
A.  Improper training of personnel at the location of the alarm system, improper maintenance of the alarm system resulting in an excess number of false alarms as set forth in this Chapter; 
B.  Failure to pay prescribed fees; 
C.  Failure of responsible individuals to respond to the location of an errant alarm for maintenance repair; 
D.  The alarm system has been activated for reasons or offenses other than probable burglaries or robberies; 
E.  Failure to comply with any other provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.140 - Non-Response Notification. 
The Chief of Police shall notify in writing to any subscriber who is deemed subject to the non-response status that five (5) days after receipt of notification, emergency units will no longer respond to the alarm system. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.150 - Delays in Transmission or Response/Liability Limitation. 
The City shall be under no duty or obligation to subscribers or any other person by reason of any provision of this Chapter or privileges of a subscriber hereunder, including, but not limited to, any defects in the Police Alarm Board or any delays in transmission or response to any alarm. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 part, 1983.)  
9.70.160 - Denial/Revocation/Appeal. 
Any subscriber, alarm agent, or alarm business, aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in denial, revocation, change of response, or service assessment fees, may file a written appeal to the City Manager within thirty (30) days of notification of denial, revocation, or change of status of emergency unit response as notified by the Chief of Police. 
The City Manager shall either deny or concur with the appeal within thirty (30) days and shall so advise the applicant in writing within that time period. The City Manager may authorize the continuance of police response during the appeal process. 
A subscriber, alarm agent or alarm business, filing an appeal with the City Manager and receiving authorization for continued response during the appeal time period, shall agree to pay the service assessment fee for each false alarm during the appeal period. 
The City Council shall have the final decision on all appeals providing the aggrieved party has filed a notice of appeal after denial by the City Manager, within 10 days. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
9.70.170 - Preventative Assessment/Collection Process. 
The City may withhold the annual business license of any business until the complete payment of any false alarm service assessments are made in full. 
The City is authorized to collect and sue any parties who have failed to pay any false alarm service assessments or comply with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
9.70.180 - Severability. 
If any Section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Article or any part thereof is, for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Article or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each Section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of these Sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
9.70.190 - Punishment/Public Nuisance. 
A.  Any violation of this Chapter shall be considered an infraction. 
B.  Violations of this Chapter are misdemeanors if a defendant has been convicted of 3 or more violations of this Chapter within a 12 month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense, and such prior convictions are admitted by the defendant or alleged in the accusatory pleading. For this purpose, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed a conviction of the offense charged. 
C.  Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedies provided in this Chapter, the City may summarily abate and bring civil suit to enjoin or abate the violation. 
D.  Each day that a violation of this Chapter is committed or continues, is a separate offense and is punishable as a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. 1000 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
VII. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS  
CHAPTER 9.80 - CURFEW 
 
9.80.010 - Offenses. 
A.  A minor commits a misdemeanor and is subject to the provisions of Chapter 2, Division 2, of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State of California if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Martinez during curfew hours. 
B.  Any person assisting, aiding, abetting, permitting or encouraging a minor to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter commits a misdemeanor, which violation shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this Code. 
C.  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits a misdemeanor, which violation shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this Code, if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. 1263 C.S. § 2 (part), 1999.)  
9.80.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Curfew hours" is defined as 11:00 p.m. on any day of the week until 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
B.  "Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident. 
C.  "Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment, or any cafe, restaurant, eating place, tavern or bar. 
D.  "Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
E.  "Minor" means any person under 18 years of age. 
F.  "Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the member or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
G.  "Parent" means: 
1.  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or 
2.  A person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
H.  The word "permitting" is not limited to its affirmative meaning, but includes passivity, abstaining from preventive action or allowing by insufficient control. 
I.  "Public place" is defined as any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, public squares, parks, and the common areas of schools, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
J.  "Remain" means to: 
1.  Linger or stay; or 
2.  Fail to leave the public place or the premises of the subject establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the public place or the premises of the subject establishment. 
(Ord. 1263 C.S. § 2 (part), 1999.)  
9.80.030 - Defenses. 
A.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.80.010(a) that the minor was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
2.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
3.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
5.  Involved in an emergency; 
6.  Attending a school, religious, sports, cultural, amusement or recreational activity sponsored by adults, or traveling directly to or returning directly home, without a detour or stop, from a school, religious, sports, cultural, amusement or recreational activity supervised by adults; 
7.  Within 100 feet of the minor's residence; 
8.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and/or the right of assembly; or 
9.  Emancipated as provided under state law. 
B.  It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.80.010(C) of this Chapter that: 
1.  Subsection A of this Section provides the minor one or more defense(s) to prosecution under Section 9.80.010(A) of this Chapter, regardless of whether the minor has been or will be prosecuted; 
2.  That the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. 1263 C.S. § 2 (part), 1999.)  
9.80.040 - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under Section 9.80.010(A) of this Chapter, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in Section 9.80.030(A) of this Chapter is present. 
(Ord. 1263 C.S. § 2 (part), 1999.)  
CHAPTER 9.82 - PARTIES INVOLVING JUVENILES 
 
9.82.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Party, Gathering or Event. A group of persons who have assembled, or are assembling, for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
B.  Police Services. Police services include the salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at the party, gathering, or event at a rate established by Resolution of the City Council; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property. 
C.  Person Responsible for the Event. The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering or event takes place, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1168 C.S. § I, 1991.)  
9.82.020 - Unlawful Juvenile Gatherings on Private Property. 
No person shall suffer, permit, allow or host a party, gathering or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises under his or her control where 5 or more persons under the age 21 are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by any person under the age of 21 years. A violation of this Section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1168 C.S. § I, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 9.84 - PURCHASES FROM MINORS 
 
9.84.010 - Permission From a Parent or Guardian Required. 
It is unlawful for any junk dealer or secondhand dealer to buy, purchase or receive any article from any minor under the age of 18 years without a written authorization from the parent of such minor authorizing the minor to sell or dispose of such article. 
(Prior code § 3503.)  
VIII. - WEAPONS  
CHAPTER 9.92 - FIREARMS 
 
9.92.010 - Minors Prohibited From Possession. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall have in his possession on any public street, or public place in the City, any B.B. gun or air-operated pistol or rifle or firearm. 
(Prior code § 3513a.)  
9.92.020 - Discharges in City Limits—Prohibited. 
No person shall discharge any B.B. gun, air-operated pistol or rifle or firearm within the City limits. 
(Prior code § 3513b.)  
9.92.030 - Discharges in city Limits—Exemptions. 
The provisions of Section 9.92.020 herein shall not apply to police officers operating such a device in the line of duty or at a target range established or licensed by the City. 
(Prior code § 3513c.)  
9.92.040 - Shooting Clubs and Target Ranges Exempt Generally. 
The provisions of Sections 9.92.010 and 9.92.020 herein shall not apply to any person lawfully enrolled in or who is a member of a lawfully established target, pistol, revolver or rifle range, nor shall Sections 9.92.010 and 9.92.020 apply to or include any person shooting at any revolver, pistol or rifle range approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 824 C.S. § I, 1975: Prior Code 5.3513d.)  
9.92.050 - Minor to Carry Written Authorization When. 
Whenever a person under the age of 18 years possesses, has custody and control of any B.B. gun, air-operated pistol or rifle or firearms, while going to or from such target range and while discharging or shooting at such target range, shall have in his immediate possession a signed, dated, written authorization from a parent or guardian to do so. 
(Prior code § 3513e.)  
CHAPTER 9.96 - SLINGSHOTS 
 
9.96.010 - Use Prohibited. 
No person shall discharge upon any public street, or in or upon any place or premises within the City, any gun by means of which any missile is projected by a spring, bow or compressed air, or use any implement whereby stones, beans, shot, pebbles or other substances are projected, and no person in the street or place shall hurl or throw any stone or other missile by means of any sling, or any mechanical or other device. 
(Prior code § 3512.) 
TITLE 9 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding the giving of false reports to officials, see Penal Code § 148.1, 148.3—148.5. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding gaming, see Penal Code § 330 et seq; for provisions on cardrooms, see Chapter 5.48 of this Code. 
3.  For statutory provision authorizing cities to close streets for parades, see Vehicle Code § 21101. 
4.  For provisions on minors in public billiard rooms, see Chapter 9.32 of this Code, for provisions regarding minors and firearms, see Chapter 9.92 of this Code. 
5.  For statutory provisions regarding dangerous weapons, see Penal Code § 12000 et seq. 
Issued: 3/94  
TITLE 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
10.04.010 - Generally. 
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(Prior code § 3200 (part).)  
10.04.020 - Coach. 
"Coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(Prior code § 3200(a).)  
10.04.030 - Curb. 
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
(Prior code § 3200(c).)  
10.04.040 - Divisional Island. 
"Divisional Island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
(Prior code § 3200(d).)  
10.04.050 - Holidays. 
"Holidays" within the meaning of this title, are the 1st day of January, the 12th day of February, the 22nd day of February, the 30th day of May, the 4th day of July, the 1st Monday in September, the 9th day of September, the 12th day of October, the 11th day of November, Thanksgiving Day and the 25th day of December, and holidays proclaimed by the President or Governor. 
If a holiday falls on a weekend, i.e., Saturday or Sunday, the holiday will be observed on the nearest working day, i.e., Friday or Monday respectively. 
(Prior code § 3200 (e).)  
10.04.060 - Loading Zone. 
"Loading Zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Prior code § 3200 (f).)  
10.04.070 - Official Time Standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in this City. 
(Prior code § 3200(g).)  
10.04.080 - Parking Meter. 
"Parking Meter" means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
(Prior code § 3200 (i).)  
10.04.090 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a public right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 3200(h).)  
10.04.100 - Passenger Loading Zone. 
"Passenger Loading Zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Prior code § 3200 (j).)  
10.04.110 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Prior code § 3200 (k).)  
10.04.120 - Police Officer. 
"Police Officer" means every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Prior code § 3200(1).)  
10.04.130 - Stop. 
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
(Prior code § 3200(m).)  
10.04.140 - Vehicle Code. 
"Vehicle Code" means the latest edition of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 3200(n).)  
CHAPTER 10.08 - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE 
 
10.08.010 - Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials. 
Officers of the Police Department and such other officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of a fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3202.)  
10.08.20 - Persons Other Than Officials Shall Not Direct Traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or the City Traffic Engineer, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal. 
(Prior code § 3202.1.)  
10.08.030 - Obedience to Police or Authorized Officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or by law. 
(Prior code § 3202.2.)  
10.08.040 - Regulations Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles or Animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Prior code § 3202.3.)  
10.08.050 - Obstruction or Interference with Authorized Officers Prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Prior code § 3202.4.)  
10.08.060 - Authority of Police in Crowds. 
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer' order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this title. 
(Prior code § 3202.5.)  
10.08.070 - Public Employee to Obey Regulations. 
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3202.8.)  
10.08.090 - Report of Damage to Certain Property. 
A.  The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within 24 hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of this city. 
B.  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the persons operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
C.  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in Subsection A within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report. 
(Prior code § 3202.10.)  
10.08.100 - Police Towing Authority. 
Officers of the Police Department and such other persons assigned by the Chief of Police are authorized to tow any vehicle parked in violation of any parking section within Title 10 of the Martinez Municipal Code provided the space or parking area is posted for restricted parking and as a tow away zone. 
(Ord. 1171 C.S. § 1, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 10.12 - POLICE TOWING SERVICE 
 
10.12.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Operator" means any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles. 
B.  "Tow car" or "tow truck" is a motor vehicle which has been altered or designed and equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line or dolly, or is otherwise exclusively used to render assistance to other vehicles. 
(Prior code § 3216.)  
10.12.020 - Selection and Designation of Towing Service by Council. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution the designation of towing service operators to provide service at the request of the Police Department throughout the City. 
(Prior code § 3216.)  
10.12.030 - Minimum Equipment Standards for Tow Trucks. 
Minimum equipment standards for tow trucks shall be as follows: 
A.  Truck Chassis. A truck chassis shall have at least one-ton capacity with rear dual wheels or equivalent. 
B.  Company Name. Company name, address and telephone number shall be on both sides of the tow car. 
C.  Lights. Trucks must, at all times, be equipped with such headlights, tail lights, red reflectors, stop lights, warning lights, etc., as required by California law, plus one white utility light (adjustable or portable) and may be equipped with such other lights as the operator may desire which are not forbidden by law. 
D.  Winch. Each vehicle shall have one power-driven winch operated from a transmission equipped with safety dogs or equivalent braking devices. 
E.  Additional Equipment. Trucks must be equipped with red flares, lanterns or reflectors, portable warning signs, hand tools, crowbar, rope, broom, shovel, dustpan, fire extinguisher (dry chemical type), portable red tail light and stop light for towed vehicles, equipment for opening locked vehicles and a safety snubber chain. The operator shall have at least one set of dollies readily available at all times. 
F.  Attendants. Attendants of the operator must display a reasonable knowledge of their work. 
(Prior code § 3316.2.)  
10.12.040 - Storage Lots and Space. 
The storage lot must be within the Martinez city limits or not more than 7 miles from the city limits border. In addition, the storage lot must be located in Contra Costa County. The storage lot must have adequate space to accommodate not less than 15 vehicles in a secure, covered storage area. Such storage area and any fences surrounding the same must be approved, in writing, by the Chief of Police. It is the intent of this chapter that such buildings and fences must reasonably screen the stored vehicles from public view. Stored vehicles and the contents must be safe from pilfering and/or tampering. 
(Ord. 1293 C.S. § II, 2002.)  
10.12.050 - Hours for Attendant on Call. 
A.  There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding to police request for towing 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
B.  There shall be an attendant on call capable of responding for the release of vehicles 7 days a week from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
(Prior code § 3216.3(b).)  
10.12.060 - Insurance—Filing. 
Adequate public liability, property damage, fire and theft insurance must be maintained by the operator. A copy of the certificate of insurance shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code § 3216.3(c).)  
10.12.070 - Records. 
The operator shall keep a record of the vehicles and license numbers; date and time each was towed and location from which it was towed; name of the officers ordering the towing and whether the vehicle was impounded or towed at the owner's request. 
(Prior code § 3216.3(d).)  
10.12.080 - Communications. 
The operator shall maintain two-way radio communications capability between the tow truck and operator's dispatcher. 
(Prior code § 3216.3(e).)  
10.12.090 - Removal of Hazards. 
After being dispatched by the Police Department to the scene, the operator shall cooperate with the police officers in removing hazards and illegally parked vehicles, as requested. 
(Prior code § 3216.4.)  
10.12.100 - Only Tow Vehicles With Markings to be Dispatched—Exception. 
Only tow cars bearing the name of operator's firm, corporation or association name shall be dispatched to the scene of need, unless the police officer at the scene approves the use of a tow car or truck which is unmarked or showing a different name than the contracting operator's marking. 
(Prior code § 32165.)  
10.12.110 - Collecting Fees—Lien Sale. 
Pursuant to State law, the operator shall be responsible for collecting all fees and charges and he shall handle and process all lien sales involving vehicles towed and stored by the operator under this chapter; provided, however, that the Police Department shall handle and process the disposition of low valued vehicles as set forth in Section 22705 of the Vehicle code. 
(Prior code § 3216.6.)  
10.12.120 - Vehicle Release—Removal of vehicle Contents on Hold. 
Vehicles impounded by the police for special investigations, i.e, fingerprints, etc. shall be held in a place of maximum security by the operator until released in writing by the Police Department. Written release by the Police Department shall be made within 24 hours after first having been impounded, unless there are specific reasons the Police Department cannot provide for a release within 24 hours. Contents of vehicles with a police "hold" shall not be removed without the prior written approval of the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 3216.7.)  
10.12.130 - Responsibility. 
The operator shall be responsible for the acts of its employees or agents while on duty. The operator shall assume and be responsible for damage or loss to vehicles while in its possession. 
(Prior code § 3216.8.)  
10.12.140 - Supervision Checks. 
The records, equipment and storage facilities of the operator shall be subject to periodic checks by the Police Department and Fire Department. 
(Prior code § 3216.9.)  
10.12.150 - Damage Appraisals—Generally. 
All vehicles, except vehicles with a Police "hold," stored or impounded as a result of a tow ordered by the Police Department, shall be made available for the purpose of estimating or appraising damages, by the owner of the vehicle or his representative, any insurance agent, insurance adjuster, or any body shop or car dealer. 
(Prior code § 3216.10.)  
10.12.160 - Damage Appraisals—Access to Vehicles. 
Vehicles to be appraised shall be accessible to Police Department personnel. An employee of the operator may be required to assist upon request of the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 3216.11.)  
10.12.170 - Unauthorized Towing Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, not one of the designated tow operators, as herein provided, to remove from the public streets and tow away any vehicle as described herein; provided, however, that the owner or driver of the vehicle so described is excepted and may designate any towing service to be used for the removal and towing away of his vehicle. 
(Prior code § 3216.12.)  
10.12.180 - Performance Failure by Operator—Service Cancellation—Appeal. 
The failure of the operator to conform to the standards and quality of service to be performed hereunder shall be deemed sufficient cause for cancellation and termination of services by the City Manager; provided however, that the operator may exercise his right to appeal such cancellation and termination to the City Council as hereafter set forth: 
The appeal shall be by written notice of appeal delivered to the City Clerk within five days of the operator being notified of the action from which the appeal is taken. The City Clerk shall deliver a copy of the notice of appeal to the City Manager and set a hearing on the appeal within fifteen days, and at least five days prior to the hearing, mail notice of hearing as convenience and justice dictate, and may affirm, modify or rescind the action of the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 3216.13.)  
10.12.190 - Removal of City-Owned Vehicles. 
Any operator providing for the service herein shall remove with reasonable cost or expense to the City any disabled emergency vehicle or vehicle involved in an accident, which is owned or leased by the City and which is located within or in close proximity to the City, to the City corporation yard, or other designated storage area. 
(Prior code § 3216.14.)  
10.12.200 - Unlawful Solicitation. 
It is unlawful for any tow operator, his agent or employee, to solicit any tow job under this chapter at the scene of an accident without having first been called by the owner or operator of the disabled vehicle, or by the Martinez Police Department. Any violation of this section will be considered to be a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 3216.15.)  
10.12.210 - Nonliability of Police Department. 
In the event that a towing service is contracted by the Police Department to perform services in a manner not in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter, the Police Department is held harmless from any and all liability or damage arising therefrom and shall not be accountable for nor investigate complaints or negligence and deviations, unless the deviations are shown to be of a repeated and frequently recurring nature, and any complaints received from the tow car or tow truck services selected and designated to carry out such police towing operations and any complaints received concerning the quality and standards of service performed by the operators shall be deemed sufficient cause for cancellation and termination of any contract or operating agreement entered into for the performance of such service. 
(Prior code § 3216.16.)  
10.12.220 - Abandoned Vehicles. 
In the event a towing service does not desire to process abandoned vehicles, the Chief of Police is authorized to enter into an agreement with any tow operator to tow and/or sell vehicles abandoned upon the streets or private property within the City. Abandoned vehicles need not be required to be stored within the City. 
(Prior code § 3216.17.)  
CHAPTER 10.20 - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
 
10.20.010 - Special Speed Limits. 
It is determined upon the basis of an Engineering and Traffic Survey that the speed permitted by State law upon the following streets is not reasonable and safe to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth on the streets or parts of streets herein designated: 
Declared Prima Facie 
Name of Street and Portion Affected 	Speed 
Limit 
(MPH) 
A. ALHAMBRA AVENUE 	
 Franklin Canyon Rd. to "D" St 	35 
 "D" Street to Berrellesa Street 	30 
 Berrellesa Street to Escobar Street 	30 
 South City limits to Roanoke Drive 	35 
 Roanoke Drive to Franklin Canyon Road 	45 
B. ALHAMBRA VALLEY ROAD 	
 South City Limits to Alhambra Avenue 	25 
C. ALHAMBRA WAY 	
 Muir Station Rd. to Alhambra Ave. (North of SR 4) 	25 
 Muir Station Rd. to Alhambra Ave. (South of SR 4) 	20 
D. ARNOLD DRIVE 	
 Howe Road to Morello Avenue 	35 
 Morello Avenue to Milano Drive 	35 
 Milano Drive to Pacheco Boulevard 	40 
E. BERRELLESA STREET 	
 Marina Vista to Alhambra Avenue 	30 
F. CENTER AVENUE 	
 Howe Road to Veterans Drive 	30 
 Veterans Drive to City Limits 	25 
G. CHILPANCINGO PARKWAY 	
 Morello Avenue to Lake Ridge Dr./Quiet Lakes Pl. 	35 
 Lake Ridge Dr./Quiet Lakes Pl. to easterly City Limits 	30 
H. COURT STREET 	
 Thompson Street to Marina Vista 	25 
I. ESCOBAR STREET 	
 Court Street to Marina Vista 	25 
J. FRANKLIN CANYON ROAD 	
 West City Limits to Alhambra Avenue 	35 
K. GLACIER DRIVE 	
 Center Avenue to Olympic Drive 	25 
 Olympic Drive to Arnold Drive 	30 
L. HOWE ROAD 	
 Pine Street to easterly City limits 	35 
M. MARINA VISTA 	
 East City Limits to Pine Street 	35 
N. MIDHILL ROAD within City Limits 	25 
O. MILANO WAY within City Limits 	25 
P. MORELLO AVENUE 	
 North City Limits to Vine Hill Way east) 	25 
 Vine Hill Way (east) to Chilpancingo Parkway 	35 
Q. MUIR ROAD 	
 Easterly City Limits to Glacier Drive 	35 
 Glacier Drive to Roman Way 	40 
 Roman Way to Center Avenue 	25 
R. MUIR STATION ROAD 	
 Center Avenue to Alhambra Way 	25 
S. NORTH COURT STREET 	
 The Marina to Marina Vista 	25 
T. PACHECO BOULEVARD 	
 Jones Street to City Limits at Potter Street 	25 
 Sunrise Drive to Arnold Drive 	40 
U. PINE STREET 	
 Thompson Street to Jones Street 	25 
 Jones Street to Howe Road 	25 
V. PLEASANT HILL ROAD EAST 	
 Muir Station Road to John Muir Road 	25 
W. RELIEZ VALLEY ROAD 	
 North City Limits to Sage Drive 	40 
 Sage Drive to south City limits 	35 
 
The declared prima facie or maximum speed limit shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street, and shall not thereafter be revised except upon the basis of an Engineering and Traffic Survey. The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect to any 25 miles per hour prima facie limit which is applicable when passing a school building or the grounds thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1391 C.S. § I, 12-2-2015; Ord. 1337 C.S. § I, 2007; Ord. 1298 C.S. § II, 2002; Ord. 1184 C.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 1176 C.S. § 1, 1991: Ord. 1123 C.S. § 1, 1989: Ord. 1072 C.S. § I, 1986: Ord. 1054 C.S. § I, 1985: Ord. 1044 C.S. § I, 1985: Ord. 1028 C.S.: Ord. 1021 C.S. § 1, 1984; Ord. 969 C.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. 940 C.S. § 1, 1981; Ord. 911 C.S. § 1, 1979; Ord. 778 C.S. § 1, 1973; Ord. 758 C.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 3215.)  
CHAPTER 10.24 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
10.24.020 - Required for Enforcement Purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Prior code § 3203.1.)  
10.24.030 - Obedience Required. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator or an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Prior code § 3203.2.)  
10.24.040 - Installation. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
C.  Whenever the city Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection, street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. 
(Prior code § 3203.3.)  
10.24.050 - Lane Markings. 
The city Traffic Engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles, and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. 
(Prior code § 3203.4.)  
10.24.060 - Distinctive Roadway Markings. 
The city Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle code. 
(Prior code § 32035.)  
10.24.070 - Authority to Remove, Relocate and Discontinue. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title, whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or pertain. 
(Prior code § 3203.6.)  
10.24.080 - Hours of Operation. 
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. 
(Prior code § 3203.7.)  
10.24.090 - Unauthorized Painting of Curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by the Director of Public Services, shall paint any street or curb surface, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto 
(Ord 1069 C.S. § 1, 1986: Prior code § 3203.8.)  
CHAPTER 10.28 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
10.28.010 - Markings at Intersections and Multiple-Laned Roadways. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or chapter. 
(Prior code § 3204.)  
10.28.020 - Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Prior code § 3204.1.)  
10.28.030 - Signal-Controlled Intersections—Right Turns. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 
B.  The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against the traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Prior code § 3204.2.)  
CHAPTER 10.32 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
10.32.010 - Sign Placement and Maintenance. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 3205.)  
CHAPTER 10.36 - PARKING METERS 
 
10.36.010 - Parking Meter Zones—Defined. 
The streets, portions of streets or parking lots hereinafter described in Section 10.36.020 of this Chapter are defined and established as parking meter zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of parking meters, coin boxes or permit parking. 
(Ord. 1264 C.S. § 2, 1999: Ord. No. 1124 C.S. § 1, 1989: prior code § 3213.)  
10.36.020 - Parking Meter Zones—Established. 
A.  Parking meter zones are established as follows: 
1.  On both sides of Alhambra Avenue from Marina Vista to Ward Street; 
2.  On both sides of Castro Street from Marina Vista to Green Street; 
3.  On both sides of Estudillo Street from U.P.R.R. to Main Street; 
4.  On both sides of Estudillo Street from Ward Street to Green Street; 
5.  On both sides of Ferry Street between U.P.R.R. and Green Street; 
6.  On both sides of Las Juntas Street from Escobar Street to Mellus Street; 
7.  On the easterly side of Court Street from Marina Vista to a point 100 feet south of Green Street; 
8.  On the westerly side of Court Street from Escobar Street to Ward Street; 
9.  On both sides of Court Street from Thompson Street to Henrietta Street; 
10.  On the west side of Pine Street from Marina Vista to Escobar Street; 
11.  On both sides of Pine Street from Escobar Street to Ward Street; 
12.  On the east side of Pine Street from a point 250 feet north of Mellus Street to Henrietta Street; 
13.  One the west side of Pine street from Mellus Street to Henerietta Street; 
14.  On the west side of Willow Street from Ward Street to Mellus Street; 
15.  On the north side of Marina Vista from Alhambra Avenue to a point located 600 feet east of Pine Street; 
16.  On the south side of Marina Vista from Alhambra Avenue to Court Street; 
17.  On both sides of Escobar Street from Alhambra Avenue to Pine Street; 
18.  On both sides of Escobar Street from Pine Street to a point located 500 feet east of Pine Street; 
19.  On both sides of Main Street from Alhambra Avenue to Grandview Avenue; 
20.  On both sides of Ward Street from Alhambra Avenue to Willow Street; 
21.  On both sides of Green Street from Alhambra Avenue to Court Street; 
22.  On both sides of Thompson Street from Las Juntas Street to Court Street; 
23.  On both sides of Mellus Street from Las Juntas Street to Willow Street; 
24.  On the north side of Henrietta Street form the creek to Court Street. 
B.  Parking meter zones are established on the following parking lots: 
1.  Parking Lot No. 1, adjacent to Alhambra Creek between Main Street and Ward Street; 
2.  Parking Lot No. 2, at the southeast corner of Escobar Street and Castro Street; 
3.  Parking Lot No. 3, at the southwest corner of Ward Street and Las Juntas Street; 
4.  Parking Lot No. 4, at the southeast corner of Marina Vista and Ferry Street; 
5.  Parking Lot No. 5, at the southwest corner of Green Street and Las Juntas Street; 
6.  Parking Lot No. 6, along the U.P.R.R. between Estudillo Street and Ferry street; 
7.  Parking Lt No. 7, at the northwest corner of Marina Vista and Court Street; 
8.  Parking Lot No. 8 (Museum Lot), at the southwest corner of Marina Vista and Pine Street; 
9.  Amtrak Parking Lot, on the east side of Ferry Street at the Amtrak Station. 
(Ord. 1264 C.S. § 3, 1999: Ord. 1124 C.S. § 1 (part), 1989: Ord. 936 C.S. § 1, 1981: Ord. 866 C.S. § 2, 1977.)  
10.36.030 - Manner of Installation. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones as required to make effective the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parkings for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as indicated on the meter. Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the part of the street upon which the meter is placed. Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of the legal parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period is expired. 
(Ord. No. 1124 C.S. § 1, part 1989: Prior code § 3213.2.)  
10.36.040 - Hours of Operation. 
The provisions of this Chapter relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(Prior code § 3213.3.)  
10.36.050 - Operational Procedure to be Followed. 
Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in the parking meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the parking meter. 
(Prior code § 3213.4.)  
10.36.060 - Fees. 
Parking meter fees within the established parking meter zones (Section 10.36.020) shall be no greater than $1.00 per hour for all meters. All meters, with the exception of loading/unloading zones, shall have a maximum time limit of 10 hours. Meters for loading/unloading zones shall have a maximum time limit of 30 minutes. The exact meter rates and durations shall be set by ordinance. 
(Ord. 1372, § 1, 9-18-2013; Ord. 1264 C.S. § 4, 1999.)  
10.36.070 - Unlawful to Park After Meter Time Has Expired. 
No operator of any vehicle shall permit the vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking. 
(Prior code § 3213.6.)  
10.36.080 - Unlawful to Extend Time Limit. 
No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed. 
(Prior code § 3213.7.)  
10.36.090 - Unlawful Acts. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Prior code § 3213.8.)  
10.36.100 - Deposit of Coins by Unauthorized Person. 
No person, other than the owner or operator of a vehicle, shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately adjacent to the meter. 
(Prior code § 3213.9.)  
10.36.110 - Meters and Meter Standards Not to be Used for Certain Purposes. 
No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or parking meter standard. 
(Prior code § 3213.10.)  
10.36.120 - Prima Facia Evidence. 
The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3213.11.)  
10.36.130 - Application of Other Provisions. 
No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this title. 
(Prior code § 3213.12.)  
CHAPTER 10.38 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING STALLS AND SPACES 
 
10.38.010 - Findings. 
The City Council makes all of the following findings in establishing this chapter: 
A.  The City Council finds that there is a need for parking stalls and spaces to be located within the City which are made available to the public for charging of electric vehicles over short-term or long-term periods in order to promote greater fuel conservation and enhance fuel and energy efficiency. 
B.  The City Council finds that the City has previously invested in electric vehicle charging infrastructure through grants obtained by 511 Contra Costa, the transportation demand management program for all jurisdictions within Contra Costa County, with funding supplied through Measure C and Measure J half-cent sales tax for Transportation Improvement Projects along with Transportation for Clean Air funding from the Bay Area Air Quality Management District. Through such funding sources, the City has constructed and installed various electric vehicle charging stations for the use of owners of electric vehicles to connect their electric vehicles to charging stations and charge their vehicle power sources. 
C.  The City Council finds that the public use of the City-owned electric vehicle charging stations has resulted in significant costs being incurred by the City including energy usage, software program costs, equipment depreciation, personnel costs, maintenance, and repair and replacement costs; none of which may the City recover while it continues to provide such service without charging the vehicle owners' fees for the benefits being received by them. Unreimbursed expenditures of money from the General Fund and other resources shall continue to be incurred by the City each time a vehicle owner uses a City-owned vehicle charging station without payment of a fee to the City. 
D.  The City Council finds that it is beneficial to the public and the environment that the City's electric vehicle charging stations continue to be used and available to owners of electric vehicles and that the establishment of certain regulations, including fees for the reimbursement of the City for its costs incurred in providing such service and hourly limits for parking in short-term parking spaces, will enable the City to continue to make available the electric vehicle charging service to the public on both short-term and long-term charging basis. 
E.  The City Council finds that the fees being established in the amounts set forth by this Ordinance are reasonably proportionate to each user's portion of costs incurred by the City in providing the service, and further finds that based upon the anticipated level of usage such fees as a whole are reasonable and necessary for the City to recover even a portion of its costs of providing electric vehicle charging parking spaces or stalls for public use. 
(Ord. No. 1378 C.S., § I, 2-5-2014.)  
10.38.020 - Fees. 
The following fees shall be charged for utilizing City-owned electric vehicle charging station spaces or stalls: 
A.  Short-term rates shall consist of $1.00 per hour. No vehicle shall be parked, left standing, or connected to a charging station for more than 4 consecutive hours in any electric vehicle charging station space or stall having short-term rates. Short-term rates shall be charged for all electric vehicle charging stations spaces or stalls located within the City Hall parking lot and for electric vehicle charging stations parking stalls or spaces located on or along Court and Main Streets. 
B.  Long-term rates shall consist of $1.00 per hour, with a maximum of $12.00 being charged per each electric vehicle charging session, no matter how long such session may continue. Notwithstanding the fees established by this subsection, no vehicle shall be parked, left standing, or connected to a charging station for more than 24 consecutive hours in any electric vehicle charging station space or stall having long-term rates. Long-term rates shall be charged for all electric vehicle charging stations stalls or spaces within the parking lots for the Amtrak and Pacheco Transit Hub stations. 
(Ord. No. 1378 C.S., § I, 2-5-2014.)  
10.38.030 - Designation and Posting. 
The City hereby designates each of the parking stalls and spaces described by this chapter to be exclusively for the purpose of charging and parking a vehicle that is connected for electric charging purposes. Each of the parking stalls and spaces so designated shall be posted in accordance with subdivision (d) of Section 22511 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 1378 C.S., § I, 2-5-2014.)  
CHAPTER 10.40 - SPECIAL STOPS 
 
10.40.010 - City Traffic Engineer to Erect Stop Signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signals shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle code. 
(Prior code § 3206.)  
10.40.020 - Stop at Through Street or Stop Sign. 
A.  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council. 
(Prior code § 3206.1.)  
10.40.030 - Emerging From Alley, Driveway or Building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across an alleyway or driveway. 
(Prior code § 3206.2.)  
CHAPTER 10.44 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
10.44.010 - Application of Regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking, shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Prior code § 3209.)  
10.44.020 - In Parkways Prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Prior code § 3209.1.)  
10.44.030 - Traffic Engineer to Maintain Stopping Zones and No Parking Areas. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter and title. 
B.  When the curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 3209.2.)  
10.44.040 - No Parking Areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area where the City Traffic Engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
D.  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
E.  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track; 
F.  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;. 
G.  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
H.  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
I.  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
J.  Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(Prior code § 3209.3.)  
10.44.050 - Use of Streets for Vehicle Storage Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(Prior code § 3209.4.)  
10.44.060 - Parking for Advertisement or Display. 
No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the Council. 
(Prior code § 3209.5.)  
10.44.070 - Repairing or Greasing Vehicles on Public Streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Prior code § 3209.6.)  
10.44.080 - Washing or Polishing Vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Prior code § 3209.7.)  
10.44.090 - Parking Adjacent to Schools. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Prior code § 3209.8.)  
10.44.095 - Parking—Commercial Vehicles. 
Refer to chapter 10.60 Commercial Vehicles. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 1, 1987: Ord. 950 C.S. § 1, 1981.)  
10.44.100 - Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
B.  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Prior code § 3209.9.)  
10.44.110 - Parking on Grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Prior code § 3209.10.)  
10.44.120 - Peddler and Vendor Parking—Permit. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this City except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand. 
C.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
D.  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City Traffic Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 3209.11.)  
10.44.130 - Emergency Parking Signs. 
A.  Whenever the City Traffic Engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. 
(Prior code § 3209.12.)  
10.44.155 - Vision Safety Parking Zones. 
A.  The city Traffic Engineer may create vision safety parking zones on any street, driveway or other area that requires unobstructed visibility to facilitate safe pedestrian or vehicle entry into or across a street. 
B.  Vision safety parking zones may be implemented which limit the size of vehicles in parking spaces or by use of other accepted engineering methods to provide visibility for safe entry onto or across any street. 
C.  When the signs are in place, it shall be unlawful and shall constitute an infraction for any operator of a vehicle to park a vehicle in violation of the sign or in violation of any provision of the Martinez Municipal code. 
(Ord. 888 C.S. § 1, 1978.)  
10.44.160 - Parking on City Property. 
A.  Whenever the city Traffic Engineer determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city Traffic Engineer shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
(Prior code § 3209.15.)  
10.44.170 - Parking on Prints Property—Notice. 
A.  No person shall drive, park or operate a motor vehicle upon land or premises where the owner or person occupying or having possession of, or agents thereof, have posted on such property or premises a notice in substantially the following form, and where the permission therein referred to shall not have been granted: 
NOTICE 
"NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that this property is privately owned. Parking or operating a motor vehicle hereon without written permission of the owner or his agent shall constitute a violation of Ordinance No. 705 C.S. of the City of Martinez." 
B.  The notice shall appear on a sign which shall have dimensions of at least 30 inches by 24 inches. The words of the notice shall fully occupy the signboard herein described. 
C.  The owner of the property so posted shall report to the Police Department of the City violations of the Ordinance codified herein. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof to park any motor vehicle in or upon any private property so as to interfere with the use thereof. 
(Prior code § 3209.16.)  
10.44.180 - Fifteen-Minute Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than fifteen minutes. 
(Ord. 1125 C.S. § 1 part, 1989: Prior code § 3210.1.)  
10.44.190 - Twenty-Minute Parking. 
A.  Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, or as determined by the City Engineer. 
B.  When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 1179 C.S., 1992; Prior code § 3210.)  
10.44.200 - Thirty-Minute Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time no longer than thirty minutes 
(Ord 759 C.S. § 1, 1973 prior code § 3210.4.1.)  
10.44.210 - One-Hour Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Prior code § 3210.2.)  
10.44.220 - Two-Hour Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Prior code § 3210.3.)  
10.44.230 - Ten-Hour Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than ten hours. 
(Prior code § 3210.4.)  
10.44.240 - Parallel Parking on One-Way Streets. 
A.  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  The city Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway or a highway having two or more separate roadways, and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
D.  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Prior code § 3210.5.)  
10.44.250 - Diagonal Parking. 
A.  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except: 
1.  At the angle to curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space; 
2.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within 6 inches of the curb. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.44.240 of this chapter shall be complied with. 
(Prior code § 3210.6.)  
10.44.260 - Parking Space Markings. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbing where authorized parking is permitted. 
B.  When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a designated single space as marked, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 951 C.S. § 1, 1981: prior code § 3210.7.)  
10.44.270 - No-Stopping Zones. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that the stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited. 
B.  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no-stopping zones. 
(Prior code § 3210.8.)  
10.44.280 - All-Night Parking prohibited. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. of any day when appropriate signs are in place, provided that this section shall not apply to any vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls. 
B.  For commercial vehicles refer to Section 15.60.030. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 2, 1987: Ord. 925 C.S. 1980: prior code § 3210.9.)  
10.44.290 - Taxicab Stands. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer shall establish taxicab stands and determine the location thereof. 
B.  The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked "Taxicab Stand" in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
C.  No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile for hire, shall park the vehicle in such taxicab stand. 
D.  The owner or operator of a taxicab shall pay a fee to be established by resolution, from time to time, for each taxicab stand assigned to his taxicab. 
(Ord. 855 C.S. § 1, 1977: prior code § 3210.10.)  
10.44.300 - Authority to Establish Reserved Parking Within Parking District. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to establish in any City parking district, with the approval of the Parking Place Commission, reserved parking spaces within City parking lots. 
B.  No persons who do not possess and display a valid City parking card, decal or tag shall be allowed to park in the reserved parking spaces. 
C.  The City Traffic Engineer shall clearly define, by appropriate signs and markings, the reserved parking spaces in each parking lot. 
(Prior code § 3210.11.)  
10.44.310 - Parking for Physically Handicapped. 
A.  Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to vehicles of physically handicapped persons. 
B.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code, or disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the Vehicle Code, and in addition, may designate stalls of spaces in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the City or private person for the exclusive use of vehicles which display distinguishing license plates or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the Vehicle Code. 
In the case of on-street parking spaces, the parking space shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition to the blue paint, the space may also be indicated by signs or other suitable means. 
In the case of off-street parking facilities, these stalls or spaces shall be designated by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background, and by painting a white "Handicap Symbol" in each stall. Design of parking space widths, signs, and paint markings shall be in accordance with standards approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
Any vehicle parked in violation of an off-street parking facility physically handicapped stall or space may be towed from said stall or space pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22511.8. 
C.  It is unlawful and punishable as an infraction for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any legible curb marking described in Section 10.44.310B, or for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate issued to disabled persons pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 to stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any parking space property designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to Section 10.44.310B. 
(Ord. 921 C.S., 1980.)  
CHAPTER 10.46 - PERMIT PARKING AREAS 
 
10.46.010 - Purpose. 
The City Council may establish permit parking areas within the City of Martinez in order to alleviate, in certain areas and neighborhoods, motor vehicle congestion caused by long-term parking by nonresidents of those areas and neighborhoods; to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents of these certain areas; and to promote the integrity of these areas. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.020 - Designation of Permit Parking Areas. 
Areas meeting and satisfying the objective criteria established in these procedures will be considered by the City Council for designation as a permit parking area. Permit parking areas may be designated by a City Council resolution in which motor vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may stand or be parked without limitation as to the parking time restrictions established by the resolution. Said resolution shall also state the applicable time limitation and the period of the day and days of the week for its application. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.030 - Designation Criteria. 
A.  An area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as a permit parking area if data from surveys and studies prepared at the direction of the City Traffic Engineer satisfy the objective criteria that the area is impacted by vehicles belonging to nonresidents for any extended period during the day or night, on weekends, or during holidays. 
B.  The eligibility criteria shall include the following: 
1.  The extent of the desire and need of the residents for permit parking; 
2.  The extent to which legal on-street parking spaces are occupied by motor vehicles during the period proposed for parking restriction; 
3.  The extent to which vehicles parking in the area during the period proposed for parking restriction are vehicles belonging to nonresidents rather than vehicles of residents; 
4.  The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons residing in the area cannot be accommodated by the number of available off-street parking spaces; 
5.  Determination and identification of possible alternative parking locations for vehicles of nonresidents which are to be displaced in the proposed permit parking area; and 
6.  Determination that sufficient on-street parking may be made available for area residents with the proposed permit parking program. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.040 - Designation Process and Recommendations. 
A.  Upon receipt of a verified petition signed by at least fifty (50) per cent of the residents in the area proposed for designation, and which represents at least fifty (50) per cent of the residential units in the area proposed for designation, the City Traffic Engineer shall undertake such surveys or studies as are deemed necessary to determine whether an area is eligible for permit parking. 
B.  At the completion of surveys and studies a determination shall be made by the City Traffic Engineer as to the eligibility of the area under consideration for permit parking, the boundaries for the proposed permit parking area, the appropriate time limitation on parking, the period of the day, and days of the week for its application. 
C.  A written report shall be submitted by the City Traffic Engineer to the City Council, including recommendations. 
D.  The Parking Place Commission shall hold a public hearing on the recommendation of the City Traffic Engineer. 
E.  Public hearing notices shall be posted in the proposed area ten days prior to the hearing on the proposed designation of an area as residential permit parking area. 
F.  A written notice shall be mailed to the owners and/or tenants of the use or facility, if any, creating the need for permit parking identified in City Traffic Engineer's report ten days prior to the hearing Notice shall also be mailed to all owners of property fronting on the street(s) proposed for permit parking. 
G.  After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt with conditions or reject the resolution approving the designation of a certain area as a residential permit parking area based on the Parking Place Commission's recommendations. 
H.  The designation process and designation criteria shall also be utilized by the City Traffic Engineer and the City Council in determining whether to remove the designation of an area as a permit parking area. 
(Ord. 1206 C.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.050 - Resident Parking Permits. 
A.  The Finance Director shall be responsible for the issuance of parking permits to persons residing or maintaining a business in a permit parking area. A permit shall be issued by the Director only upon receipt of a valid application. 
B.  The Director may not issue more than four (4) permits to any one address for residents at that address, unless the Director finds more than four (4) licensed drivers residing at or operating a business from that one address with more than four (4) vehicles registered to that address. 
C.  The Director shall either grant or deny a resident parking permit within ten (10) working days from the receipt of a valid application. If the Director denies a permit, the written reasons for the denial shall be provided to the applicant, in person or by mail, within the time period specified herein. 
D.  The permit shall be clearly displayed on the vehicle for which it has been issued as instructed. 
E.  The Director shall maintain a record of the number of parking permits issued to each address, the names of permit holders, the license numbers of vehicles for which a permit has been issued, documents checked to establish residency and vehicle ownership, and any other information as required. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.060 - Revocation of Parking Permit. 
The Finance Director may revoke the parking permit(s) of any person known to the Director to no longer be eligible for a permit(s). The Director shall give written notice to the permit holder of said revocation and the reasons therefor. The owner shall not display the revoked or expired permit from the individual vehicle. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1,1983.).  
10.46.070 - Guest Parking Permits. 
A.  The Finance Director may issue guest parking permits upon receipt of completed applications for guest permits. 
B.  The guest permit shall be of a different color than resident parking permits(s) and shall be valid for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
C.  The guest parking permit shall be displayed in the valid guest vehicle as required by the Finance Director. 
D.  The Director shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, a record of the number of guest parking permits issued to each address within a designated permit parking area. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.080 - Appeal. 
Any person who has been denied a permit(s) or had a permit(s) revoked by the Director may appeal that decision to the city council within ten (10) days after the decision of the Director has been given or sent to the appellant. An appeal shall be set forth on a form provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.090 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any emergency vehicle, including but not limited to an ambulance, fire engine, or police vehicle, which is under the control of an individual providing service to a property located in the permit parking area shall be permitted to stand or be parked on a street in the area without being limited by the time restrictions. 
B.  Any vehicle, including but not limited to a delivery, utility, or service vehicle, which is under the control of an individual providing service to property located on a street in the permit parking area shall be permitted to stand or be parked on a street in the area without being limited by the time restrictions. Identification of such vehicle as commercial, utility, or service vehicles shall be the responsibility of the driver of such vehicle. 
C.  Any vehicle which is identified as used by disabled or handicapped individuals meeting the requirements of Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code, and displaying the handicap plates, shall be permitted to stand or be parked on a street in the area without being limited by the time restrictions. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.100 - Posting of Permit Parking Area. 
Upon the designation of an area as a permit parking area, the City Traffic Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the area. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
10.46.110 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this chapter for any person to do, or cause to be done, any of the following: 
A.  To stand or park a motor vehicle, without a current permit properly displayed, on a street within the permit parking area for a period of time exceeding the specified limit during effective times and days of the permit parking as indicated on the traffic signs; 
B.  To falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish false information in an application for a permit; 
C.  To permit the use or display of, or to use or display, a valid parking permit issued under this chapter on a motor vehicle or in a manner other than that for which the permit was issued; 
D.  To copy, reproduce, or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit resident or guest parking permit; 
E.  To knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit resident or guest parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking applicable in the permit parking area; 
F.  To knowingly commit any act which is prohibited by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 988 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
CHAPTER 10.48 - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
10.48.010 - Authority to Establish Loading Zones. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in the zones. 
(Prior code § 3211.)  
10.48.020 - Curb Markings to Indicate No-Stopping and Parking Regulations. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter and Chapters 10.52 and 10.56, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
1.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes. 
3.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.  when such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times; 
b.  when such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
B.  When the City Traffic Engineer, as authorized under this title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 3211.1.)  
10.48.030 - Effect of Permission to Load or Unload. 
A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Prior code § 3211.2.)  
10.48.040 - Standing for Loading or Unloading Only. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.48.020. 
(Prior code § 3211.3.)  
10.45.050 - Standing in Passenger Loading Zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.48.020. 
(Prior code § 3211.4.)  
10.45.060 - Standing in Alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. 
(Prior code § 3211.5.)  
CHAPTER 10.52 - BUS ZONES 
 
10.52.010 - Establishing—Authority. 
A.  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
B.  Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Prior code § 3211.6.)  
CHAPTER 10.56 - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
10.56.010 - Designation Authority. 
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons 
(Ord 1105 C.S. § 4, 1987 Prior code § 3211.7(a).)  
10.56.020 - Three-Ton Trucks to be Driven on Truck Routes—Only. 
When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the operator of any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 4, 1987: Prior code § 3211.7(b).)  
10.56.030 - Exceptions Prom Provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities commission; or. 
B.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 4, 1987: Prior code § 3211.7(c).)  
10.56.040 - Designated. 
Those streets and parts of streets established by ordinance of the council and listed herein are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons: 
A.  Alhambra Avenue—Marina Vista to Hwy. 4; 
B.  Berrellesa Street—Marina Vista to Alhambra Avenue (at Bertola); 
C.  Center/Pine Street—Howe Road to Hwy. 4; 
D.  Escobar Street—Berrellesa Street to Marina Vista (at Miller); 
E.  Howe Road—Pacheco Boulevard to Center/Pine Street; 
F.  Marina Vista—Berrellesa Street to east city limits; 
G.  Pacheco Boulevard—Shell Avenue to east city limits; 
H.  Shell Avenue—Marina Vista to Pacheco Boulevard. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 4, 1987: Prior code § 3211.7(d).)  
CHAPTER 10.60 - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
 
10.60.010 - Using Private Driveways—Commercial Vehicle Defined. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle having a rated capacity of ½ ton or more in or across any private driveway approach or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 5, 1987: Prior code § 3207.2.)  
10.60.020 - Parking—Commercial Vehicles in Residential District Prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of five tons or more on any street in a residential district, except when the commercial vehicle is making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 5, 1987.)  
10.60.030 - Parking—Commercial Vehicles, All Night Parking Prohibited Except in Service Commercial Zones. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park, or permit to be stopped, left standing, or parked, any commercially registered bus, semi-truck, trailer, tractor, or motor truck with a rated carrying capacity in excess of three tons on any street between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.; except in service commercial zones, parking may be allowed overnight in the street by permit only on weekends (Friday and Saturday overnights). Permit Fee shall be established by a City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1238 C.S., 1997; Ord. 1177 C.S., 1992; Ord. 1105 C.S. § 5, 1987.)  
10.60.035 - Overnight Parking Permits on Weekends in Service commercial Zones. 
A.  The community Development Director shall be responsible for the issuance of overnight parking permits to addresses in the service commercial zones. A permit shall be issued by the Director only upon receipt of a valid application. 
B.  The Director may not issue more that two annual permits to any one address. 
C.  The Director shall either grant or deny an overnight parking permit within ten working days from the receipt of a valid application. If the application involves parking in front of or near residentially zoned property, or property owned by someone other than the applicant, the Director shall contact such person(s) and may impose conditions on the permit to mitigate any adverse impacts. If the Director denies a permit, the written reasons for the denial shall be provided to the applicant, in person or by mail, within the time period specified herein. 
D.  The permit shall be clearly displayed on the vehicle for which it has been issued as instructed. 
E.  The Director shall maintain a record of the number of parking permits issued to each address, the names of permit holders, the license numbers of vehicles for which a permit has been issued, documents checked to establish address and vehicle ownership, and any other information as required. 
F.  The Director may revoke the parking permit(s) for any address known to the Director to no longer be eligible for a permit(s) for failure to meet permit conditions, or for causing adverse impact to adjacent property owners or residents. The Director shall give written notice to the permit holder of said revocation and the reasons therefor. The owner shall not display the revoked or expired permit from the individual vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1177 C.S., 1992.)  
10.60.040 - Parking—Commercial Vehicles on Private Property. 
A.  No person shall park a "heavy-duty" commercial vehicle for more than three hours on private property visible from public right-of-way, in any land use district zoned other than commercial and industrial, except: 
1.  while loading or unloading materials and goods and the time required to complete the work exceeds the three-hour period; or 
2.  when the vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of providing a service to or on a property in the block in which the vehicle is parked and time in addition to the three-hour period is necessary to complete such service; or 
3.  when the vehicle is parked in connection with and is owned or leased by an approved business in a non-residential zoning district, or when the vehicle is loading or unloading goods in connection with such a business and is parked adjacent to a loading dock or loading area for a period of time not to exceed forty-eight hours. 
B.  For the purpose of this section "heavy-duty" commercial vehicle means a single vehicle or combination of vehicles having more than two axles, a single vehicle or combination of vehicles twenty feet or more in length on a single vehicle or combination of vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more. It includes, but is not limited to a dump truck, moving van, tractor, pole or pipe dolly. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 5, 1987.)  
10.60.050 - Display of Warning Devices When Commercial Vehicle Disabled. 
Every motor truck having unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above-mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this City and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated herein shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A-type 1 turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned herein can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 5, 1987: Prior code § 3209.13.)  
CHAPTER 10.64 - HEAVY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
10.64.010 - Permit Required—Conditions if Load or Size in Excess Allowed by Vehicle Code. 
A.  No person shall move or operate upon any of the City streets any vehicle with a load or size in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the City Traffic Engineer. 
B.  The City Traffic Engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or size in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely accommodate the additional size or weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the City that all costs of any alterations or repair to the streets or to the public property of the City caused by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the City Traffic Engineer in his discretion may require. 
C.  The applicant for such permit shall pay a nonrefundable application fee in the amount sufficient to pay the costs of the review of the route and application as determined by the City Traffic Engineer. 
D.  Any person requesting terminal access for interstate trucks as defined in Section 35401.5 of the California Vehicle Code from the Federally-designated highway system, shall submit an application with information as may be required by the City Traffic Engineer and in accordance with this section and the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1105 C.S. § 6, 1987: Prior code § 3212.)  
10.64.020 - Flange Wheel Machinery. 
No person shall operate over the City streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. 
(Prior code § 3212.1.)  
CHAPTER 10.68 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
10.68.010 - Driving Through Funeral Procession or Parade. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 3207.)  
10.68.020 - Clinging to Moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on, or hold onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Prior code § 3207.1.)  
10.68.030 - Riding or Driving on Sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk, or any bicycle across or upon any sidewalk within any business district as defined by the California Vehicle Code, except over permanently constructed driveways and except when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk, provided further, that the sidewalk area is substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission is previously obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (Ord 734 C.S. § 1, 1971 prior code § 3207.3.)  
10.68.040 - Riding or Driving Over New Pavement or Markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Prior code § 3207.4.)  
10.68.050 - Obedience to Barriers and Signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. 
(Prior code § 3207.5.)  
10.68.060 - Vehicular Traffic on Municipal Wharf. 
No vehicle, other than those necessary for repair purposes, as authorized by the City Traffic Engineer shall be driven, moved or be on the municipal wharf. 
(Prior code § 3207.6.)  
10.68.070 - Obstructing Intersections or crosswalks Prohibited. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior code § 3207.7.)  
10.65.080 - Limited-Access Roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Prior code § 3207.8.)  
10.68.090 - Restrictions on Freeway Use. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by State law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in a space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. 
(Prior code § 3207.9.)  
CHAPTER 10.72 - CROSSWALKS 
 
10.72.010 - Designation and Establishment Where—Authority. 
A.  The city Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections and places where the city Traffic Engineer determines that there is a particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established on any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
C.  The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Prior code § 3208.)  
10.72.020 - Pedestrians Required to Use in Business Districts. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district. 
(Prior code § 3208.1.)  
CHAPTER 10.76 - TRAINS 
 
10.76.010 - Driving Vehicles Through Railway Gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed. 
(Prior code § 3214.)  
10.76.020 - Blocking Streets Prohibited. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train, railway cars or similar vehicles on rails, to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Prior code § 3214.1.)  
10.76.030 - Speed Limit in City. 
No person owning, operating or controlling any railroad train, or part thereof, in or through the City shall cause, permit, or allow the railroad train or part thereof to pass over, along or upon any of the public streets or highways of the City at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour. 
(Prior code § 3214.2.)  
10.76.040 - Railroad Train Tunnel Signals in City. 
Any railroad train tunnel opening within the City of Martinez shall have appropriate safety signage at both entry and exit points. Said signage shall indicate both the hazards associated with unauthorized entry into the tunnel, and the illegal nature of unauthorized use of a railroad right-of-way. Signs shall be such sizes as to be easily visible to the public, and should be permanently affixed to the tunnel. 
(Ord. 1139 C.S. § I, 1989.)  
CHAPTER 10.80 - PARKING ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
10.80.010 - Private Off-Street Parking Facilities. 
The City Council hereby finds and declares that there are privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities throughout the City which are generally held open for use of the public for vehicle parking, which creates a need for parking regulations, including City's ability to remove illegally parked vehicles by tow. 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.020 - Public Facilities. 
The City Council hereby finds and declares that there are publicly owned and maintained off-street parking facilities throughout the City which are held open for use for the public and for the purposes of vehicle parking, necessitating a need for parking regulations including City's ability to remove illegally parked vehicles by tow. 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.030 - Public and Private Parking Signing. 
No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle upon any public or private off-street parking facility or upon land or premises where the owner or the person occupying or having possession, or the agents thereof have posted on such public or private off-street parking facility or other land or premises a notice in substantially the following form, to the effect that such off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control, and where the permission therein referred to shall not have been granted: 
A.  A statement that parking is restricted, and to whom it applies: 
EXAMPLES:  "Parking for XXX customers only"; 
"This space reserved for XXX"; 
"Parking for tenants only"; 
"No parking in this area"; 
"Parking by permit holders only". 
B.  A statement that violators may or will be cited: 
EXAMPLES:  "Violators will be cited by Martinez Police"; 
"Unauthorized vehicles will be cited or towed at owner's expense". 
C.  A reference  to this Municipal Code Section: 
"MMC 10.80.030" 
Lettering shall be on a contrasting twenty-four inch (24?) by twenty-four inch (24 ?) background. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as placing a requirement upon the Police Department to patrol such private property for violations, and no enforcement action shall be taken except upon specific request by an authorized agent, owner or person in lawful possession or control thereof. 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.040 - Interference With Use of Property. 
No person, without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof, shall park any motor vehicle in or upon any private property so as to interfere with the use thereof. 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.050 - Unlawful Parking. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate, drive, or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without the express or implied permission of the owner thereof, the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either. 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.060 - Removal of Vehicles. 
Any regularly employed or salaried officer of the Police Department, the owner of any private property, the person entitled to the possession thereof for the time being, or the authorized agent of either may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle parked or left standing on any private property in violation of the provisions of Section 10.80.030 and 10.80.050 of this chapter, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections 21107.8, 22507.8 and 22651(h). 
(Ord. 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
10.80.070 - Liability for Wrongful Removal of Vehicles. 
If a vehicle removed from such private property was rightfully there, the person who complained of the presence of such vehicle and/or the person (other than the employees of the Police Department) who caused such vehicle to be removed shall be liable for any and all charges for towing and for caring for and keeping safe such vehicle (Ord 944 C.S. § 1 (part), 1981.)  
CHAPTER 10.84 - USE OF NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES 
 
10.84.010 - Use of Non-Motorized Vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates, roller blades, in-line skates, skateboards, or riding in or by any means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon: 
1.  Any public sidewalk or street within the downtown central business district Monday through Saturday, during the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. The boundaries of which are defined as the south sidewalk of Ward Street, the west sidewalk of Alhambra Avenue, the north sidewalk of Marina Vista, and the east sidewalk of Pine Street; also, the sidewalk and street areas in the 600 block of Ferry Street. 
2.  Any public sidewalk or street in the 500 block of Henrietta Street; the portions of the sidewalk and street directly in front of the following designated locations: 1000 and 1100 block of Ferry Street, 90 F Street, the 2200 block of Alhambra Avenue, the 2200 block of Berrellesa Street, the 400 block of Soto Street upon completion of the Senior Citizen Center), the 800 block of Green Street (upon completion of the Senior Citizen Center). 
3.  Any public sidewalk adjacent to property on which a school is located, during the hours the school is open for educational instruction. 
4.  And/or any private sidewalk or private driving surface in front of or around any stores or buildings used for business purposes during business hours. 
(Ord. 1098 C.S. § 1, 1987.) 
5.  Any property located within the City of Martinez that is owned and/or operated by a school district including high school, junior high school, elementary school, adult education center and the district office, where signs are posted on School District grounds prohibiting the activity. Such signs shall:(1)be placed in a conspicuous area(s); (2) have a dimension of not less than 17 by 22 inches, with lettering of not less than one inch high; (3) state that such activities are prohibited on the property; and (4) cite this subsection number or Municipal Code section. The School District property affected will include the respective parking lots, corridors, hallways, fields, ramps, benches, tables, patios, portable buildings, equipment and the area between structures. 
(Ord. 1251 C.S. § 1, 1998.)  
CHAPTER 10.88 - TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT 
 
10.88.010 - Purposes, Goals and Objectives. 
In light of elimination of mandatory employer-based trip reduction requirements, the following purposes, goals and objectives are adopted in order to assist City staff in continuing the implementation of the Transportation Systems Management (TSM) Ordinance and programs: 
A.  The purposes of this chapter are as set forth below: 
1.  To promote maximum efficiency in the existing transportation system and to further the transportation goals of the Measure C Growth Management Program, Contra Costa's Congestion Management Program and the Bay Area Clean Air Plan by: 
(a)  Promoting and encouraging the use of transit, ride-sharing, bicycling, walking, flexible work hours and telecommuting as alternatives to solo driving; 
(b)  Incorporating these goals and objectives into the land use review and planning process; 
(c)  Developing proactive programs and/or projects either alone or in conjunction with other jurisdictions, or with "TRANSPAC" (Central Contra Costa County Transportation Partnership and Cooperation) aimed at achieving these goals; 
(d)  Considering the incorporation of appropriate technology designed to facilitate traffic flow, provide transit and highway information, provide trip generation alternatives, and related technology into the transportation system; 
(e)  Educating Central Contra Costa County employees, employers, residents and students regarding the benefits and availability of commute alternatives; 
(f)  Working with the transit authorities to better serve Central Contra Costa County; 
(g)  Encouraging the most cost effective, broad-based and wide range of transportation improvement projects aimed at achieving congestion relief; 
(h)  Cooperating with other jurisdictions, the private sector, and transit operators in planning and implementing transportation programs. 
2.  To reflect an ongoing commitment to expand "TSM" efforts beyond employer-based trip reduction programs, in order to achieve traffic congestion management and air quality goals. 
3.  To comply with applicable state and federal laws as well as with Measure C Growth Management Program requirements pertaining to "TSM". 
B.  The goal of this chapter is to ensure the continuation of a proactive "TSM" program effort aimed at reducing vehicle trips, vehicle emissions and traffic congestion in the most efficient and cost effective manner. 
C.  The objective of this chapter is to establish the following policies: 
1.  To participate, in conjunction with other jurisdictions and "TRANSPAC", in a proactive effort to support and develop projects which will achieve the Measure C "TSN"/"TDM" (Travel Demand Management) goals as described in the "TRANSPAC" Action Plan, the Countywide Comprehensive Transportation Plan, the Measure C Strategic Plan, the Congestion Management Plan and/or the Bay Area Clean Air Plan. Such participation may include, but need not be limited to: 
(a)  Promotion and encouragement of the use of transit, ride sharing, bicycling, walking, flexible work hours, telecommuting or other alternatives to solo driving; 
(b)  Projects incorporating appropriate technology designed to facilitate traffic flow, provide transit and highway information and related technology. 
2.  To incorporate these goals, as appropriate, into its land use review and planning process. 
D.  The City Council of the City of Martinez hereby delegates to "TRANSPAC" its participation in the "TSM" Program in order to achieve the goals and objectives as described in the County wide Comprehensive Transportation Plan, the Measure C Strategic Plan, the Congestion Management Plan and/or the Bay Area Clean Air Plan. 
(Ord. 1212 C.S. § II, 1994; Ord 1253 C.S. § III, 1998 repealed & replaced it its entirety.) 
TITLE 10 FOOTNOTES 
a.  For statutory provisions regarding traffic regulations and local authorities, see Veh. Code § 21100 et seq.; for provisions on the Traffic Committee see Ch. 2.44. 
2.  For statutory definitions of terms, see Veh. Code § 100 et seq. 
3.  For statutory provisions authorizing removal of certain vehicles as nuisances, see Veh. Code § 22660. 
4.  For statutory provisions regarding parking meter zones, see Veh. Code § 22508. 
5.  For statutory provisions regarding stopping, standing and parking, see Veh. Code § 22500 et seq. 
6.  For statutory provisions regarding local authorities and size, weight and load of vehicle, see Veh. Code § 35700 et seq. 
7.  For provisions regarding commercial vehicles using certain streets and private driveways, see Ch. 10.60. 
8.  For statutory provisions regarding stopping at railroad crossings, see Veh. Code § 22450, 22451. 
Issued: Rev: 4/98  
TITLE 12 - CITY REAL PROPERTY 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
I. - ENCROACHMENTS  
CHAPTER 12.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
12.04.010 - Construction. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in Chapter 12.08 and general provisions set forth in Sections 12.04.020 through 12.04.070 shall govern the construction of this chapter and Chapters 12.08 through l2.20. 
(Prior code § 4200)  
12.04.020 - Right of Lawful Use. 
Any permit granted under this chapter and Chapters 12.08 through 12.20 shall not annul the right of the City, or any person, firm, corporation, district or association entitled to use that part of the public right-of-way for any purpose, for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of the public street shall be unduly obstructed at any time. 
(Prior code § 4207.)  
12.04.030 - City Officers Exempt From Provisions. 
This chapter and Chapters 12.08 through 12.20 shall not apply to any officer or employee of the City in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Prior code § 4208.)  
12.04.040 - Exceptions to Fee and Bond Requirements. 
Work which requires a permit and is being performed by any person, firm or corporation, under contract with the City, will be exempt from the fee and bond requirements of this chapter and Chapters 12.08 through 12.20. Public utilities entitled to occupy and maintain facilities in public rights-of-way shall be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 12.16 of this title. 
(Prior code § 4209.)  
12.04.050 - Acts Requiring Permit. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, without first obtaining a written permit, to encroach or to make or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatever within, upon, over or under the limits of any right-of-way in the City, or to make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature, within, upon, over or under such right-of-way; or to construct, put upon, maintain or leave thereon, or to cause to be constructed, put upon, maintained or left thereon, any obstruction or impediment of any nature, whatever; or to remove, cut or trim trees thereon; or to set a fire thereon; or to place on, over or under such right-of-way any pipeline, conduit or other fixture; or to move or cause to be moved over the surface of any right-of-way or over any bridge, viaduct or other structure maintained by the City any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the right-of-way; or to place any structure, wall, culvert or similar encroachment; or to make any excavation or embankment in such a way as to endanger the normal usage or the right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 4210.)  
12.04.060 - Nonacceptable Permit Applications. 
No application will be accepted nor a permit issued for constructing or maintaining a loading platform upon a right-of-way, or for erecting, using or maintaining therein or thereon a post, pole, column or structure for support for advertising signs, and any such installation is an illegal encroachment. 
(Prior code § 4211.)  
12.04.070 - Emergency Work. 
This chapter and Chapters 12.08 through 12.20 shall not prevent any person, association, firm or corporation from performing emergency maintenance of any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public street, or from making an emergency use, or encroachment as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises, except that the person, firm, association or corporation making an emergency use or encroachment of a public street shall apply for a written permit therefor within ten calendar days, commencing with the first business day the City offices open. Any person, firm, association or corporation, requiring an emergency use, or encroachment, shall first notify the engineer's office. During the hours the City offices are closed, notification shall be given the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 4212.)  
12.04.080 - Appeal From Permit Denial. 
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a permit required by this chapter and Chapters 12.08 through 12.20 may appeal to the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4252.)  
12.04.090 - Findings on Appeal. 
If the City Council finds all of the following to be true, the permit shall be granted: 
A.  That the applicant will be substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit as requested; 
B.  That no other reasonable method of obtaining the desired results is available except as proposed by applicant; 
C.  That the granting of the permit will not be materially detrimental to the public interest, safety, health and welfare or injurious to other property. 
(Prior code § 4253.)  
CHAPTER 12.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
12.08.010 - Encroach. 
"Encroach" includes, going upon, over, under or using any right-of-way in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere with the normal use of that way, including the performance thereon of any of the following acts: 
A.  Excavating or disturbing the right-of-way; 
B.  Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, loading platform or other structure on or over or under the right-of-way; 
C.  Planting any tree, shrub, grass or other growing thing within the right-of-way; 
D.  Placing or leaving on the right-of-way any rubbish, brush, earth or other material of any nature whatever; 
E.  Constructing, placing or maintaining on, over, under or within the right-of-way any pathway, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, any culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface drainage facilities, any pipe, conduit or cable; 
F.  Traveling on the right-of-way by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension, weight or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit; 
G.  Lighting or building a fire; 
H.  Construction, placing, planting or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree or other object adjacent to the right-of-way which causes or will cause an encroachment. 
(Prior code § 4203.)  
12.08.020 - Engineer. 
"Engineer," as used in Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 means the City Engineer of the City of Martinez, or his authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 4205.)  
12.08.030 - Permittee. 
"Permittee" means any person, firm, company, corporation, association, public agency or organization that proposes to do work or encroach upon a public street as herein defined and has been issued a permit for the encroachment by the director. All obligations, responsibilities and other requirements of the permittee as herein described, shall be binding on subsequent owners of the encroachment. 
(Prior code § 4206.)  
12.08.040 - Public Street. 
"Public Street" means the full width of the surface or traveled portion, including shoulders, or any road, street, path, lane or alley dedicated to, reserved for, used by or for the general public, with those roads, streets, paths, lanes and alleys which have been accepted as and declared to be part of the City system of public streets, except streets forming a part of the State Highway System or highways forming a part of the County System of Public Highways. 
(Prior code § 4201.)  
12.08.050 - Right-of-Way. 
"Right-of-Way" means all land or interest therein which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedications, usage or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the use of the general public. 
(Prior code § 4202.)  
CHAPTER 12.12 - PERMITS AND FEES 
 
12.12.010 - Permits—Issuance. 
The written permits required by Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 shall be issued by the engineer for any lawful use, subject to conditions set forth in Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 and required by law. The engineer shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application for a permit required by Chapters 12.04 through 12.20. The application form shall contain space for the applicant's name, address, and contractor's name, license number, and primary place of business, if applicant proposes to employ a contractor, together with such detail as in the judgment of the engineer is necessary to establish the purpose and use, the location, dimensions, estimated date of commencement and completion of encroachment. The application form shall be completed and signed by the applicant and filed with the engineer. 
(Prior code § 4213.)  
12.12.020 - Permits—Application—Exhibits. 
The applicant shall enclose with, attach or add to the application for a permit, a map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit, when required by the engineer, of a size and in such quantity as he may prescribe, on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate or identify the proposed use or encroachment, and the right and necessity of applicant to cause an encroachment. If necessary, changes, corrections and notes will be made on such map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit and these items will become an integral part of the permits. 
(Prior code § 4214.)  
12.12.030 - Permits—Application—Consent of Public Bodies. 
The applicant shall also enclose with, attach to, or add to the application, copies of the written order or consent to any work thereunder, required by law, of the Public Utilities Commission, sanitary district, water district or any other public body having jurisdiction. A permit shall not be issued until and unless such order, or consent, if required, is first obtained and evidence thereof filed with the engineer. The permittee shall keep himself adequately informed of all State and Federal laws and local ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the permit. The applicant shall at all times comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, court and similar authoritative orders; and shall protect and indemnify the City and all of its officers, agents and employees against any claims or liability proximately caused by the violations of any such law, ordinance, regulation or order issued under police power and in accordance with law, whether by himself or his agents or employees. 
(Prior code § 4215.)  
12.12.040 - Permits—Required for Moving certain Vehicles or Objects. 
Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or objects of weight or dimension or characteristic prohibited by law without a permit is moved on any public right-of-way, a permit to do so must first be granted by the engineer as set forth in specifications adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4216.)  
12.12.050 - Permits—Term—Commencement and Validity. 
The permittee shall begin the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 within ninety (90) days from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not commenced within ninety (90) days or within the time stated in the permit, then the permit shall become void, unless prior to its expiration, the time for commencement has been extended in writing by the engineer. A permit for temporary encroachment, as determined by the engineer, for continuing a use or maintaining a temporary encroachment previously authorized, shall be valid for a term of one year from date of issuance, unless the permit specifies otherwise, or unless sooner termination by discontinuance of the use, removal of the encroachment, or termination of the permit by written order of the engineer is mailed thirty days prior to the date of termination. A permit valid for one year from date of issuance, unless specified otherwise, may be issued to public utilities for the replacement and repair of existing utility poles and anchors, installation of additional facilities on existing utility poles, placement of not more than four consecutive additional poles at any one location, and the installation of minor underground facilities. 
(Prior code § 4217.)  
12.12.051 - Permits—Insurance Requirements. 
Prior to the issuance of any encroachment permit, the applicant therefor shall file a certificate and/or endorsement(s) of insurance evidencing coverage for bodily injury and/or property damage liability in an amount and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 1085 C.S. § II, 1987.)  
12.12.060 - Permits—Term—Completion Within Specified Time—Failure—Cancellation. 
The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit within the time specified in the permit. If, at any time, the engineer finds that delay in the commencing, prosecuting or completing the work or use authorized is due to lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, he may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former condition. The permittee shall reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by the engineer in restoring the right-of-way, plus fifteen percent as administrative costs. 
(Prior code § 4218.)  
12.12.070 - Permits—Nontransferable. 
No permit issued pursuant to Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 is transferable. The person or persons, public agency, firm or corporation actually making and/or maintaining the encroachment shall obtain the permit and furnish the bond. 
(Prior code § 4219.)  
12.12.080 - Permits—Display. 
A.  The permittee shall keep any permit or copy thereof issued pursuant to Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 at the site of work, or in the cab of a vehicle when movements thereof in a public street are involved, and the permit must be shown to any authorized representative of the engineer or law enforcement officer on demand. 
B.  A permit issued for continuing use or maintenance of an encroachment may be kept at the place of business of the permittee or otherwise safeguarded during the term of validity, but shall be made available to an authorized representative of the engineer or law enforcement officer within a reasonable time after demand therefor is made. 
(Prior code § 4220.)  
12.12.090 - Permits—Changes—Approval Required. 
No changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except on written authorization by the engineer, except that no permit shall be required for the continuing use or maintenance of encroachments installed by public utilities, or for changes therein or thereto where such changes or additions require no excavation of the right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 4221.)  
12.12.100 - Fees. 
A.  The schedule of fees will be those recommended by the engineer and established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the engineer for payment to the treasurer of the City, cash or check, in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, charges for field investigation and the fee for necessary inspection, all in accordance with schedules established and adopted by the City Council. 
B.  Public utilities and political subdivisions may, at the engineer's option, make payment of the charges herein as billed by the City instead of advance deposit as required. 
(Prior code § 4222.)  
CHAPTER 12.16 - BONDS AND CASH DEPOSITS 
 
12.16.010 - Cash Deposit. 
Unless this chapter is waived in the permit and before a permit is effective, an applicant shall deposit with the engineer, or agent authorized by resolution of the City Council, cash or a certificate or cashier's check, in a sum to be fixed by the engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City for costs of restoring the right-of-way to its former condition, based on the schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the City Council, provided, however, that an applicant may file a cash deposit on an annual basis in the sum estimated by the engineer as sufficient to cover his activities during any twelve-month period. 
(Prior code § 4223.)  
12.16.020 - Bond in Lieu of Cash Deposit. 
In lieu of the cash deposit prescribed by Section 12.16.010, the applicant may, upon approval by the engineer, file a cash deposit in the minimum sum established by the schedules, if any, adopted for that purpose by the City Council and in effect at the time of application for a permit, and the balance of the sum fixed by the engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City expenses incurred in restoring the right-of-way to its former condition, may be filed in the form of an approved surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in the State. 
(Prior code § 4224.)  
12.16.030 - Annual Bond. 
In lieu of a cash deposit, the applicant may, upon approval by the engineer, annually file with the engineer an approved surety bond issued by a company authorized to do a general surety business in the State in a sum fixed by the engineer as sufficient to reimburse the City for expenses to be incurred in restoring the right-of-way to its former condition, subject to the schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4225.)  
12.16.040 - Additional Bond or cash Deposit. 
The engineer may require an additional bond or cash deposit at any time that evidence indicates that the amount of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its former condition, subject to the schedules, if any, adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4226.)  
12.16.050 - Conditions. 
The condition of any bond or cash deposit made pursuant to this chapter shall be that the permittee will diligently and in good faith comply with all the terms of Chapters 12.04 through 12.20 and the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Prior code § 4227.)  
12.16.060 - Payable to City—Release. 
Any bond or cash deposit required by the engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the City and shall be filed with the engineer. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the permit, and fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the City Council will release the bond or cash deposit, upon the expiration of ninety (90) days. 
(Prior code § 4228.)  
CHAPTER 12.20 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
12.20.010 - Erection and Maintenance of Safety Devices. 
A.  The permittee in the conduct of the work, use or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16, shall provide, erect and/or maintain such light barriers, waning signs, patrols, watchmen and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling public. Any omission on the part of the engineer to specify in the permit what lights, barriers or other protective measures or devices shall be provided, erected or maintained by the permittee, or the fact that the engineer may not specify sufficient lights, barriers or other protective measures or devices shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all requirements of law and appropriate regulations and ordinances for adequately protecting the safety of those using public streets. If, at any time, the engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, the City may, after first notifying the permittee, provide, erect, maintain, relocate or remove such safeguards as are deemed necessary or may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, all at the expense of the permittee. 
B.  A permittee making any excavation or erecting or leaving any obstruction within, under or upon the right-of-way, or causing the same to be made, erected or left, shall place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation or obstruction, at not more than 50-foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half hour before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise of the next day, until the excavation is entirely refilled or the obstruction removed and the right-of-way made safe for use. In addition, reflectorized or illuminated warning signs conforming to the requirements of the California Director of Highways shall be placed approximately 200 and 400 feet from each excavation or obstruction, in such a position as to adequately warn public traffic. 
C.  The warning signs, lights and other safety devices shall conform to the requirements of Section 21406 of the Vehicle Code and of "The Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use in Performance of Work Upon Highways" issued by the Department of Public Works of the State. 
(Prior code § 4229.)  
12.20.020 - Start of Work. 
Before beginning any work which includes excavation, construction of concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveway approaches, planting, trimming or removing trees, making, placing or causing an obstruction in the right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the engineer of the time of beginning work, unless otherwise exempt in the permit. 
(Prior code § 4230.)  
12.20.030 - Completion of Work. 
Unless this section is waived in the permit, the permittee, upon completion of all work, shall notify the engineer. No work shall be deemed to be completed until notice of completion is given pursuant to this section. 
(Prior code § 4231.)  
12.20.040 - Care of Drainage. 
If the work, use or encroachment authorized in a permit issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16 interferes with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage as approved by the engineer. 
(Prior code § 4232.)  
12.20.050 - Interference With Use. 
All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will cause least interference with the safe and convenient travel of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized; and at no time shall a public street be closed, or the use thereof denied the general public without written permission of the engineer, nor shall use of private property be interfered with unreasonably without the consent of the owner. 
(Prior code § 4233.)  
12.20.060 - Restoring of Street and Maintenance of Encroachment. 
A.  Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which a maintenance or encroachment permit was issued, or when required by the engineer, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the right-of-way as provided by this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16 and adopted specifications, or as directed by the engineer, within the limits of the specifications. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, impediments, materials or rubbish caused or placed upon the right-of-way, and shall do any work or perform any act necessary to restore the right-of-way to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the engineer. 
B.  After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting and maintaining the area affected by the encroachment. The permittee shall, upon notice from the engineer, immediately repair any injury, damage or nuisance, in any portion of the right-of-way, resulting from the work done under the permit. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly, or should the exigencies of the injury or damage require repairs or replacement to be made before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the City may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacements or perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with actual costs of labor and materials, plus fifteen percent, as administrative costs. By acceptance of the permit, the permittee agrees to comply with the above. 
(Prior code § 4234.)  
12.20.070 - Relocation or Removal of Encroachments. 
A.  If any future construction, reconstruction or maintenance work on a public right-of-way requires the relocation or removal of installations or encroachments in, on or under the public right-of-way, the permittee, owning, controlling or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate or remove the same at his sole expense provided, however, that this provision shall apply to and remain in force and effect only so long as the right-of-way upon which the installations or structures are located shall be used for usual street purposes and not as a highway, and this provision shall cease to apply when such street shall become a highway. When removal or relocation is required, the engineer shall give the permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation, or that the installation or encroachment must be removed from the right-of-way, and specifying in the demand a reasonable time within which the encroachment must be removed or relocated. If the permittee fails to comply with the instructions, the City may cause the removal or relocation of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to public utility corporations subject to other laws and contractual benefits relating to the costs of relocation and which are in conflict with the provisions contained herein. 
(Prior code § 4235.)  
12.20.080 - Standards on Supervision and Inspection. 
A.  All encroachment repair work done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16 shall conform to specifications established by the engineer in the absence of established specifications, to recognized standards of construction and approved practices in connection with such work. All encroachment repair work shall be done subject to approval of the engineer. 
B.  Unless otherwise noted on the permit, all encroachment repair work performed on any public street or right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the City shall conform to City construction specifications. 
(Prior code § 4236.)  
12.20.090 - Storage of Material. 
No materials shall normally be stored within 5 feet of a public street, except that sections of pipe or other materials may be strung out or laid in a public street as may be required provided that reasonable safety precautions are exercised as otherwise provided for in this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16. Excess earth materials from trenching or other operations shall be removed from the pavement, traveled way or shoulder as the trench is backfilled or other work carried forward unless otherwise approved by the engineer. 
(Prior code § 4237.)  
12.20.100 - Small Pipes or Rigid Conduits. 
Utility, service and other small diameter pipes or rigid conduits shall be jacked, bored, driven or otherwise forced underneath a paved surface. The paved surface of a road shall not be cut, trenched or otherwise disturbed unless installation of the pipe or conduit in the manner described herein is not practical in which case the damaged surface shall be reasonably restored to its preexisting condition. 
(Prior code § 4238.)  
12.20.110 - Minimum Cover. 
The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits larger than 2 1/2 inches installed within the right-of-way shall be 3 feet of each of imported materials, unless otherwise specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of 3 feet shall be measured from the surface, existing or planned. The engineer is authorized to permit installation of pipes or conduits where 3 feet of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structure or other engineering necessity. 
(Prior code § 4239.)  
12.20.120 - Backfilling. 
Backfilling and compaction of an excavation shall be in accordance with specifications established by the engineer and adopted by resolution of the City Council, both as to materials and method. 
(Prior code § 4240.)  
12.20.130 - Poles and Transmission Line Carriers. 
A.  Clearances and types in the construction of poles and transmission line carriers shall be in accordance with rules, regulations and orders of the Public Utilities Commission and other public agencies having jurisdiction. 
B.  No guy wires are to be attached to trees without specific authorization to do so in the permit, and in no event shall guy wires be so attached as to girdle the tree or interfere with its growth. Guy wires shall not be below the minimum elevation above the ground, prescribed in the rules, orders and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission. 
C.  The permittee shall remove and keep clear all vegetation on the right-of-way within a radius of at least 5 feet of poles when ordered by the engineer. 
D.  When a pole, guy, stub or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. 
(Prior code § 4241.)  
12.20.140 - Aids to Visibility. 
When the location or position of a pole or other obstruction makes accentuation of its visibility to vehicular traffic necessary, the engineer may require that the pole or other obstruction be painted or equipped with the reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the Public Utilities Commission or the Department of Public Works of the State at the expense of the permittee. 
(Prior code § 4242.)  
12.20.150 - Poles Prohibited in Specific Locations. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any pole for the purpose of carrying or supporting wires for the transmission of electricity or lighting, power, telephone or other purposes, upon Main Street between Pine Street and Alhambra Avenue, or upon Ferry Street between the Southern Pacific right-of-way and Green Street, all being within the City. 
(Prior code § 4243.)  
12.20.160 - Overhead Wires Prohibited in Specific Locations. 
It is unlawful for any person owning real property, or a tenant thereof, on or along Main Street between Pine Street and Alhambra Avenue, or upon Ferry Street between the Southern Pacific right-of-way and Green Street, to permit or to compel any person, firm or corporation supplying electricity, to suspend or to continue to suspend from his premises any overhead distribution line along the above-described portions of Main and Ferry Streets for the purpose of supplying such premises with electricity. 
(Prior code § 4244.)  
12.20.170 - Movement of Vehicles. 
When authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Section 12.20.040 of this chapter to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight or other characteristic as generally prohibited by law, the permittee shall comply with the general law regulating travel over a public street, including posted signs or notices which limit speed or direction of travels, or weight which may be placed upon a structure, or the width or height that may be moved thereon or thereover, or which otherwise restrict or control travel on a public street, unless otherwise exempt by special permit. The permittee at all times shall conform to and abide by the practice and procedure, necessary to make safe and convenient the travel of the general public, and to keep safe and preserve the public street over and on which movement is being made. Any violation of this section shall automatically cancel the permit issued to the permittee. 
(Prior code § 4245.)  
12.20.180 - Mailboxes. 
All mailboxes must be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Post Office Department, but no box shall be so placed within the road right-of-way as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public. A permit is not required for the placing of mailboxes. 
(Prior code § 4246.)  
12.20.190 - Hedges, Plantings and Fences—Generally. 
A.  No hedge, shrub or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure, except as provided in Section 12.20.210, shall be planted, erected or maintained in the right-of-way without a permit. 
B.  No hedge, shrub or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure, shall be maintained across any existing walkway in a sidewalk area or shoulder. The intent of this restriction is to keep free a walkway for pedestrian or other lawful public travel without interference by or with vehicular travel. No encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs or denies such pedestrian or other lawful travel within the limits of the right-of-way of a public street, or which impairs adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Prior code § 4247.)  
12.20.200 - Hedges, Planting and Fences—Maintenance. 
The permittee or property owner, shall maintain the hedges, shrubs or other plantings, fence or similar structure, used for landscaping purposes in a neat and orderly condition at all times. If the encroachment is not maintained as specified in this section, or is located in violation of Section 12.20.190, the engineer may direct the permittee or property owner to remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, at the expense of the permittee or property owner. 
(Prior code § 4248.)  
12.20.210 - Lawns. 
A.  Other provisions of this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16 notwithstanding, it is lawful for a person, firm, corporation or other body of persons to plant and maintain a lawn or similar ground cover of any grass or type not otherwise prohibited by law within the right-of-way of a public street without a written permit. However, the lawn or similar ground cover shall not extend into the traveled way of the public street nor into the drainage ditches, gutter or other drainage facilities. 
B.  The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian travel or other lawful use. The City may use the planted area for any purpose whatever and may issue a permit to any applicant to go thereon to perform work or otherwise encroach pursuant to this chapter and Chapters 12.04 through 12.16. If the lawn or similar ground cover is damaged or disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, the permittee will be held responsible for the replacement unless the permit specifically states otherwise. 
(Prior code § 4249.)  
12.20.220 - Marking of Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks—Permit Required When. 
It is unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit, to solicit, on a commercial or donation basis, to place or maintain any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design or other marking upon any street, sidewalk or curb; except that temporary markings for the purpose of identifying survey or construction locations shall not be subject to this section. 
(Prior code § 4250.)  
12.20.240 - Monuments. 
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public street or right-of-way, property subdivision, or a precise survey point or reference point, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the engineer to do so, the permission to be granted in conformance with requirements as set forth in specifications adopted by resolution of the City Council. Replacement of removed or disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee. 
(Prior code § 4251.)  
II. - GENERALLY  
CHAPTER 12.28 - OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS 
 
12.28.010 - Restrictions. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed anywhere upon any public street, way or sidewalk, and no person owning, occupying or having the control of any premises shall suffer to remain in front thereof upon the sidewalk, or portion of the street or way next to such premises, any boxes, bales, barrels, wood, lumber, goods, wares and merchandise, sign bulletin board, signboard or any other thing obstructing the free use or passage of such street, way or sidewalk; provided, however, that goods, wares and merchandise in transit may be allowed on the outer 3 feet of the sidewalk for a period not exceeding one-half hour. 
(Prior code § 3514.)  
CHAPTER 12.30 - STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS 
 
12.30.010 - Declaration of Policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the City that curbs, gutters, driveways, sidewalks, and street pavement be installed along the street line or lines as a condition to building permit approval. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1 part, 1988.)  
12.30.020 - Higher Standards Prevail. 
The provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements and wherever any ordinance or resolution or determination of the City requires additional improvements of a higher degree or grade, that ordinance or determination shall control. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1 part, 1988.)  
12.30.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings: 
A.  "Person" means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
B.  "Sidewalks and curbs" shall include concrete sidewalks, parkways, concrete curb and gutter, concrete driveways, and structural pavement section to the centerline of the street all in accordance with adopted City standards and constructed in accordance with applicable standard specifications of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1 part, 1988.)  
12.30.040 - Administration. 
This chapter shall be administered by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.050 - Sidewalks and Curbs Required. 
A.  Any person who applies for a building permit to construct or cause to be constructed any building or dwelling in the City, and any person who applies for a building permit for the purpose of making improvements to an existing building or dwelling where such improvements have a value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall construct sidewalks and curbs in accordance with the City specifications, along all street frontage adjoining the property upon which such building or dwelling is proposed to be constructed or improved, unless adequate sidewalks and curbs already exist. 
B.  Whether or not adequate sidewalks and curbs already exist shall be determined in each instance by the City Engineer, and an endorsement to that effect shall be made upon each building permit at the time it is issued. 
C.  In determining whether or not an improvement to an existing building or dwelling has a value in excess of $25,000.00, the value of all improvements made to the subject property within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application for the relevant building permit shall be aggregated, and is said aggregation, plus the value of the work for which the relevant permit is sought, exceeds $25,000.00, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
D.  Only to the extent that at the time application is made for the relevant permit there already exist adequate sidewalks or curbs shall the person applying for the permit be relieved of the requirements specified in Section 12.30.050(A). That is, if only adequate sidewalks exist, the applicant shall nevertheless be required to install, at his/her cost, curbs, gutters, parkways, driveways, and street pavement (unless said requirements are otherwise waived under the provisions of this chapter). 
E.  In such cases where curbs and gutters, sidewalks, etc., exist along the street frontage of such property and such curbs and gutters, sidewalks, etc., are in a deteriorated or hazardous condition, the City Engineer may require the repair, replacement or reconstruction of such facilities as a condition of issuance of a building permit without utilizing procedures as specified in Section 5610, et seq., Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.060 - Plans and Specifications. 
All work or improvements shall conform to the construction standards adopted by the City and on file in the office of the City Engineer. Any and all specifications for the improvements referred to above shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or other such person licensed by the state to design such works, and the plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval prior to any commencement of said work within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.070 - Encroachment Permit Required. 
An encroachment permit shall be required for all improvements performed on the public rights-of-way in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 12. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1 part, 1988.)  
12.30.080 - Exceptions for certain Single-family Residences. 
A.  The City Engineer shall have the power to waive the requirement for the installation of either sidewalks, curbs, driveways, parkways, pavement or any combination of the above required improvements along the frontage of a single-family residence if the City Engineer determines and finds upon application for exception by an applicant in such form as the City Engineer may reasonably require, that: 
1.  Such improvement is not presently in existence at the subject property; and 
2.  No adjoining lot or parcel contains such improvement; and 
3.  Substantially all of the built-up lots and parcels within five hundred feet (500 ft.) of the subject property, and abutting upon the same street, do not have such improvements; and 
4.  The character of the neighborhood is such that, based on present neighborhood conditions, and conditions which can be expected to exist within five years from the date of the application for the building permit, that it would be unreasonable to require the applicant to construct such improvement. 
B.  In order for the City Engineer to waive any of the required improvements, the City Engineer must determine that the conditions specified above are satisfied as to each required improvement waived. Any required improvement not waived by the City Engineer must be constructed by the applicant. Therefore, pursuant to the conditions specified above, the applicant may for example, obtain a waiver from the sidewalk, curb, and gutter requirements. This shall not, however, relieve the applicant of his/her responsibility to construct parkways, driveways, and pavement to the centerline of the street as required by this chapter. 
C.  The waiver granted by the City Engineer pursuant to this section may be granted conditionally to include any reasonable conditions imposed by the City Engineer. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the condition that any required improvement which may be waived be installed upon the occurrence of some future event, condition, or happening. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.090 - Appeal to Council. 
Any decision by the City Engineer made under this chapter shall be subject to review by the Council of the City. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the City Engineer may appeal therefrom by filing a written notice to the City Council within ten days after notice of determination by the City Engineer. Thereafter, the Council shall set such appeal for hearing before it and hear the appeal at the next regular Council meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final and shall be binding upon all parties. In deciding whether an exception to this Chapter's requirement should be allowed, the Council shall be governed by the criteria specified in Section 12.20.080. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.100 - Guarantee of Installation. 
Unless an exception has been granted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 12.17.080, or 12.17.090, the City shall deny final building permit approval and acceptance, and shall refuse to allow final public utility connections, to any building or dwelling unless such sidewalks and curbs are completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, or unless money or a bond to guarantee the required construction is deposited with the City in a sum equal to the estimated cost of construction of such improvements as determined by the City Engineer of the City. 
(Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
12.30.110 - Installation by City. 
If the improvements required by this chapter are not performed by the applicant within ninety days after the completion of construction of the building, dwelling and/or improvement thereto, the City Engineer is authorized to install such sidewalks and curbs, or cause the same to be constructed by a call for bids to do the work. Following the call for bids, the applicant shall not undertake or cause to be undertaken any work specified in the call for bids. All permits previously issued for the work shall become null and void. The cost of labor, materials, equipment rental, and overhead as necessary to perform the work shall be charged against the owner of the property and such charges shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected in the same manner as sidewalk repair costs are collected under California Streets and Highways Code §§ 5616—5630. 
(Ord. No. 1121 C.S. § 1, 1988: Ord. 1117 C.S. § 1, part 1988.)  
CHAPTER 12.31 - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR 
 
12.31.010 - Purpose and Findings. 
The purpose of this Section is to impose upon property owners the affirmative duty to repair and maintain the sidewalk area adjoining their property in a safe and non-dangerous condition. This duty runs to and in favor of members of the public using the sidewalk area. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
12.31.020 - Duty to Maintain Sidewalk. 
A.  Owner's Responsibility. Except as provided in subsection B of this Section, the owner of property which fronts on sidewalk area shall maintain and repair the sidewalk area in a reasonably safe condition, at the owner's expense. If the owner makes an alteration to the sidewalk, the owner must obtain an encroachment permit from the City prior to the work and use ordinary care in making the alteration and in keeping the altered portion of the sidewalk in a reasonably safe condition. 
The provisions of Chapter 22 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the California Streets and Highways Code (Sections 5600 through 5630 inclusive), as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are adopted as the procedure governing the maintenance and repair of sidewalks, driveways, and driveway approaches in the City. For the purposes of this Chapter, "sidewalk" shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 5600 of the California Streets and Highways Code, and shall also include a "driveway" and a "driveway approach." 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning any building, lot or premises in the City, fronting on any portion of an improved street or way where a sidewalk is laid to allow any portion of such sidewalk in front of such building, lot, or premises to be out of repair, or to become, be or remain defective, or to become, be or remain dangerous to the users thereof for any reason. Such person, firm or corporation must at all times keep each such sidewalk in such condition that it will not endanger persons or property passing thereon, will not interfere with public convenience in the use thereof, or be or remain an obstruction or impediment to normal, customary and usual pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Such property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance and repairs, including that required to repair damage caused by tree roots, needed to keep the sidewalk improvements in a safe condition. 
The owner has the primary and exclusive duty to perform such maintenance and repair, whether or not notified by the City and whether or not the City has performed similar maintenance in the past. The City may notify the owner when the sidewalk is out of repair, in conformance with California Streets and Highways Code sections 5610 and following. 
The owner shall comply with City of Martinez Resolution 062-14 requiring the preservation of sidewalk stamps commemorating the government work plan date or other significant information related to the time of the original construction to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  Exceptions. An adjacent property owner is not responsible for sidewalk damage and repair if: 
1.  The damage is caused by a utility structure, such as a PG&E structure, telephone pole or structure, storm drain, cable television structure, fire hydrant, or similar utility structure, and the property owner has notified both the City and the appropriate utility company of any obvious damage or defects in the sidewalk. 
2.  Another entity or individual, such as a homeowner's association, commercial property association, or other individual or entity, has entered into a written agreement or covenant with the property owner and the City pursuant to which such other individual or entity assumes responsibility for sidewalk damage and repair. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
12.31.030 - Liability of Owner. 
The owner required by Section 12.31.020 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area free from sidewalk defects and in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition as required by Section 12.31.020, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
12.31.040 - Persons in Possession. 
If the owner is not the person in possession of the property, then the responsibilities, duties and liabilities imposed by this Chapter are also imposed on the person in possession of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
12.31.050 - Joint Owners. 
If more than one party is an owner, then the responsibilities, duties and liabilities established by this Chapter are joint and several as to each party. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
12.31.060 - Assessments on Property. 
If the owner fails to maintain or make repairs to the sidewalk area after notice is provided pursuant to Chapter 22 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the California Streets and Highways Code (Sections 5600 through 5630 inclusive), then the City may undertake such maintenance and repairs and confirm and collect assessments for the costs and expenses of such maintenance and repair as set forth in California Streets and Highways Code Sections 5616 through 5630 including but not limited to placing a lien on owner's property, having the assessment placed on the property tax rolls or any other method of collection legally available to the City. 
(Ord. No. 1384 C.S., § 1, 3-4-2015)  
CHAPTER 12.32 - STREET DEDICATION 
 
12.32.010 - Dedication—Defined. 
A.  All streets, lanes, places, avenues and portions thereof, including extensions in length and width, within the City limits which on or before February 10, 1932 have been dedicated by the owners thereof to public use, or which on or before February 10, 1932 have been opened or offered by the owners for the use of the public, are accepted and declared to be open public streets of the City. 
B.  All streets represented on all maps of the City which, on or before February 10, 1932 were filed and of record in the office of the County Recorder are declared to be such streets. 
(Ord. 1250 C.S. § 1, 1998; Prior code § 4100.)  
CHAPTER 12.36 - MARINA REGULATIONS 
 
12.36.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "City" shall mean the City of Martinez. 
B.  "Harbor" means a portion of the ocean or inland waters within the jurisdiction of the City either naturally or artificially protected so as to be a place of safety for vessels, including the artificially protective works, the public lands ashore, and the structures and facilities provided within the enclosed body of water and shore for the mooring and servicing of vessels and the servicing of their crews and passengers. 
C.  "Marina" means the same as "Harbor", but more specifically, that portion of the land under the jurisdiction of the City which is bounded on the south, east and west by the East Bay Regional Martinez Shoreline Park located north of the Southern Pacific railroad tracks adjacent to North Court Street, Martinez, California. 
D.  "Harbor Master"/"Operator" means the person in day-to-day charge of the actual operations of the Martinez Marina or the city Manager or his designated representative. 
E.  "Channel" means any waterway now navigable by vessels including the structure and facilities created to facilitate navigation. 
F.  "Berth" means securing to any dock, pier or other object by rope, anchor or other device. 
G.  "Moor" means the same as "Berth". 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11100.)  
12.36.015 - Authority. 
To the extent permitted by law and as may otherwise be provided in any agreement with the City, the Operator shall interpret and enforce the rules, regulations, and ordinances pertaining to the Harbor and Marina. All orders given in the performance of his duties shall be obeyed. Every boat entering the Harbor and Marina shall immediately become subject to the authority and direction of the Operator. Each boat shall be berthed in the space assigned by the Operator. The Operator may assess service fees for any services rendered therefor. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 2, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.020 - Mooring. 
A.  There are two classes of berth rentals in the Harbor, permanent and transient. 
1.  Permanent rentals are made to owners desiring to moor their boats for a period of one month or longer. 
2.  Transient rentals, as available, are assigned to owners desiring to moor their boats for less than one month. 
B.  Applications for berths in the Harbor shall be made to the Operator on the form furnished by the Operator. Berth assignments will be made in the chronological order of receipt of applications based on the availability of berths for size of the boat to be accommodated, unless the application is rejected by the Operator. The Operator may reject applications only on the basis of the applicant's credit, tenant or employment history, references, or condition of vessel. The Operator may charge a credit check fee. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 3, 1998.) 
C.  Each boat shall be berthed in the space assigned by the Operator. No exchange of berths between boat owners will be permitted without the prior approval of the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
D.  The holder of a permanent berth assignment, hereinafter called "Lessee", may upon a bona fide sale of the boat berthed therein, with the approval of the Operator, relinquish the berth to the buyer of the boat; conversely, he may, upon approval of the Harbor Master, retain the aforesaid berth assignment for another boat owned by him, provided the latter boat is within the classification of the berthing space assigned and is occupied within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
E.  Any sale, purchase, or exchange of boats occupying permanent mooring space in the Harbor must be immediately reported to the Operator. 
F.  The berth assignment of any Lessee who occupies his assigned berth with his own boat for a total of less than six (6) months in any twelve (12) month period may be cancelled. 
G.  The holder of a permanent berth assignment of a specific size has no preemptive right to a larger berth in the event he purchases a larger boat. 
H.  Mooring of a boat the size of which is greater than that of the berth assigned to the Lessee is not permitted unless authorized by the Harbor Master. 
I.  The Harbor Master shall have the authority to move, or relocate in the Harbor, any boat berthed therein, if such change is required for the safety and protection of persons or property, for repair and maintenance of Marina facilities or for obtaining optimum utilization of facilities available. 
J.  Unauthorized berth occupancy is prohibited and the Harbor Master is authorized to move or secure the boat until berthage plus any penalty has been paid. 
K.  Vessels illegally moored or stored in the Marina may be towed to another location or hauled out to dry storage by the Harbor Master. Towing, mooring and/or storage fees will be charged to the vessel's owner. A fifteen (15) day grace period may be allowed before hauling out, except in emergency or in the interest of safety. 
L.  No berth shall be sub-leased by Lessee. Any such activity will result in cancellation of the lease and berthing assignment and subsequent removal of vessel in berth at time of cancellation unless other arrangements are authorized by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 4, 1998.) 
M.  A security deposit shall be required for all new permanent rentals in an amount set by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 4, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.025 - Mooring Charges. 
A.  Charges for all berths shall be made in accordance with the schedule adopted by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 5, 1998.) 
B.  If a berth is assigned effective the first day of the month, then the full month's rental is charged. If an initial period is less than a full month, the charge will be on a pro rata basis utilizing a thirty (30) day schedule for all months. 
C.  All berthage fees are due and payable monthly in advance on the first day of each month, and become delinquent if not paid by the last day of the same month. 
D.  All berth fees not paid by the tenth (10th) day of the month in which they fall due shall be subject to and assessed a late charge set by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 5, 1998.) 
E.  Transient mooring for longer than seven (7) days will be subject to two (2) times the normal rate unless other arrangements are authorized by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 5, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.030 - Non-Payment of Charges. 
A.  Any berth assignment, the fees for which are fifty (50) days delinquent, may be cancelled, and the berth shall be vacated. 
B.  No person shall remove or cause to be removed from the Harbor any vessel upon which charges for mooring or any other proper charges are delinquent without paying all such delinquent charges. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give false information to the Operator or other City employees in order to secure the removal of a vessel. 
D.  The city and the Operator are authorized to do all things necessary to prevent the unauthorized removal of a vessel to avoid payment of mooring fees or other charges, including the moving, securing, or otherwise fastening the vessel. 
E.  In accordance with the provisions of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State of California, the charges for berthing fees or charges for service are liens upon a vessel, and when these are delinquent fifty (50) days or more, an action shall be brought against the registered owner or berth holder to enforce payment of the lien by the city, and the vessel with all its appurtenances and furnishings may be attached as security for the satisfaction of any judgment that may be recovered in the action. If the attachment is not discharged, and judgment is recovered and an execution is issued thereon, the vessel and all of its appurtenances and furnishings shall be sold at public auction and the proceeds applied in accordance with the above provisions of the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State of California. ( 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998;) Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.035 - Release of Assigned Facilities. 
The Operator shall be notified in writing of the exact date of relinquishment of an assigned berth. This notice must be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the effective date of release. Charges will continue until such written release is effective. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 6, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.040 - Disposing of Refuse. 
A.  No person shall throw, discharge, or deposit from any vessel, the shore or float any refuse matter of any kind whatsoever into or upon the waters of the Harbor, or in, on or upon the banks, walls, sidewalks, or branches of any water within the boundaries of the Harbor and Marina area. 
B.  No person shall dump or discharge oil, spirits, inflammable liquids or contaminated bilge water in the Harbor. 
C.  All garbage must be deposited in receptacles furnished by the city for that purpose, or removed from the Harbor area. Receptacles/trash bins provided by the City shall be used only for refuse generated at the Harbor. No garbage, trash, tree trimmings, grass clippings, discarded furniture, appliances, junk, etc. generated from outside the Harbor area shall be placed in trash receptacles. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 7, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.045 - Hazardous Obstructions Prohibited, Boarding Platforms. 
A.  Floats, gangways, tops of lockers and docks shall be kept clear at all times of skiffs, tenders, miscellaneous gear, debris, or other hazardous obstructions. 
B.  Any condition aboard or around any boat, float, or gang plank caused by the berth holder which, in the opinion of the Operator, constitutes a fire hazard, health menace, or danger to public safety, shall be corrected or removed immediately to the satisfaction of the Operator. In the event of the refusal or neglect of the owner or licensee to remedy forthwith the aforesaid condition when reported to the Operator or the city shall remove the cause of the complaint and cancel the berth assignment of such owner or licensee. 
C.  Boarding platforms or ladders on floats shall be permitted, subject to the approval of the Operator, provided that any platform used for boarding shall not be over eighteen (18) inches in width and three (3) feet high, and shall be of lightweight construction. The platform shall not be used as a storage locker. 
D.  No person shall build or place in or about the Harbor, any structures, such as walkways, gangplanks, finger floats, rubbing piles, dock boxes, etc, without prior approval of the Operator. 
E.  Dock boxes (gear lockers) will be provided by the Marina. Only one box per berth is permitted. Any dock boxes that do not conform to the foregoing specifications shall be removed from the Harbor. Location of dock boxes shall be subject to the approval of the Operator. 
F.  All boats must be secured so that no part, including bowsprit, boom, boomkin, or equipment will block any portion of the walkway. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.050 - Use of Water and Electricity. 
A.  Charges for water and electricity under normal usage are included in mooring fees. 
B.  Continuous use of water for siphoning is prohibited except in the case of emergency. The existence and nature of the emergency shall be reported immediately to the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
C.  Excessive use of electricity for heating, cooling and other purposes is prohibited. If the Operator is of the opinion that there is excessive use of electricity by a berth holder, he may attach a meter to the outlet for measuring actual consumption and the tenant shall be liable for the cost of the electricity in excess of that which is normally provided to the berth or boat in question. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 8, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.055 - Maintenance of Facilities. 
A.  Repairs to and maintenance of a vessel may be made or accomplished while such vessel is at its berth provided all such work is done within the confines of the vessel itself and is not carried on in any manner whatsoever upon floats, gangways, or docks. All materials used in such repair or maintenance work must also be kept within the confines of the vessel and may not be kept upon floats, gangways, or docks. Spray painting is not permitted in the Harbor. 
B.  No boat shall be materially or structurally altered, repaired, rebuilt, or engine(s) removed/installed except in such authorized spaces as set forth by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
C.  No paint shall be removed by any means from any boat in a slip other than for minimum maintenance. All sand residual, paint and dust must be controlled and kept out of the Marina waters and off other boats. 
D.  Fueling and defueling of vessels at other than the fuel pier is prohibited. 
E.  Boats are required to be maintained in an operable condition. The operator may request, on fifteen (15) days written notice, a demonstration of the boat's operability unless other arrangements are authorized in writing by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.065 - Unnecessary Disturbance. 
A.  Outboard motors attached to any boats must be equipped with approved mufflers. 
B.  The owner of the vessel is responsible for the conduct and action of his crew and guests and any unnecessary noise, including loud talking. Playing of musical equipment, is prohibited from 11:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. Violation of this rule shall be cause for removal of the vessel from the Harbor and cancellation of the berth assigned by the Operator. 
C.  It is unlawful to sound, operate or cause to be sounded, any siren on a vessel in the Harbor except on vessels owned or operated by a government agency. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982; Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11105.)  
12.36.070 - Vessel Traffic within the Harbor. 
A.  All vessels approaching or within the Harbor must be operated in a safe and prudent manner and in no event shall the entrance to the Harbor be blocked by general boating activities or fishing. 
B.  The speed of any vessel within the Harbor shall not cause a wake, except under emergency conditions. 
C.  The Harbor shall not be used for the movement of any vessels except for the purpose of entering or leaving a berth or launch ramp area and necessary maneuvering in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11106.)  
12.36.075 - Swimming or Diving in Harbor. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, wade, water-ski, use a surfboard or paddle board in any portion of the Harbor. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in skin diving or underwater breathing or to engage in any other underwater activity requiring such breathing apparatus within the Harbor except that diving for salvage, repair, bottom cleaning or recovery purposes may occur if authorized by the Operator upon written application to the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. 10, 1998.) 
C.  When persons are engaged in an underwater diving activity as authorized by the Operator, there shall be present an attendant not less than sixteen (16) years of age who shall be on the surface of the water close over the person or persons engaged in the underwater activity, and such attendant shall conspicuously display the diver's flag during the activities. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code §§ 11101 and 11109.)  
12.36.080 - Lodgings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to reside on any vessel berthed in the Harbor. This prohibition against residing on vessels shall not prevent the use of vessels in the Harbor for eating and sleeping purposes for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours in any seven (7) day period provided that the owner or operator of the vessel so notifies the Operator. Such use shall be subject to the requirements and limitations of Section 12.36.085 herein. Holders of on-board tenant permits are exempt from the time-limit period. The Operator shall assign the space in which the holder of the on-board tenant permit shall berth. On-board tenant permits will be issued on availability, unless the application is rejected by the Operator. The Operator may reject applications only on the basis of the applicant's credit, tenant or employment history, references, condition of the applicant's vessel and/or any lawful limitation imposed on the number of on-board tenant permits. The Operator may charge a credit check fee. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 11, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.085 - Solid and Liquid Waste Disposal. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge solid or liquid waste in the waters of the Harbor, Alhambra Creek or any navigable body of water within the city Limits of Martinez. 
B.  No person shall operate or berth in the Harbor any vessel equipped with a marine sanitation device unless such device is sealed or otherwise rendered inoperable or designed and installed in accordance with current regulations so that no raw human excreta can be discharged into the waters of the Harbor, Alhambra Creek or any navigable body of water within the city limits of Martinez. 
C.  The Operator shall have the authority to board any vessel berthed in the Harbor to inspect such installations for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
D.  The owner of the vessel shall be liable for the costs of cleanup of any contamination caused by the owner Marina waters or waters within City limits, and the security deposit of the owner may be applied against the same. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 12, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code §§ 11113 and 11114.)  
12.36.090 - Minors in Harbor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to go, remain, or be upon any of the gangways, floats or vessels in the Harbor, unless such person is accompanied by an adult, or unless such person has the written permission of the owner of any vessel located at the Harbor to go upon such vessel. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.095 - Fishing in Harbor Prohibited. 
A.  Fishing, crabbing and cleaning of fish on gangplanks, boats and floats is strictly prohibited in the Harbor. 
B.  All fish caught outside the Harbor must be disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of catching. No person shall throw fish or cleaning residuals overboard at the dock or from a vessel. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11103.)  
12.36.100 - Damage to Property. 
The owner of a vessel must assume all liability for loss and damage to his property of any kind while it is within the limits of the boundary of the Harbor. The city of Martinez assumes no risk or liability on account of fire, theft, act of God, or damages of any nature to vessels or their contents. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.105 - Solicitation, Advertising and Signs. 
A.  Solicitation of patronage in the Harbor, without a permit, is prohibited 
B.  No person shall row, propel, navigate or maintain any vessel or float in the Harbor for the purpose of advertising, without first having received a permit for such purposes. 
C.  No signs of any kind or description shall be posted on pilings, gangplanks, or floats without receiving prior approval from the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998.) 
D.  No vessel shall display a "FOR SALE" sign with or without telephone numbers listed and/or price which are visible to the public. All such transactions must be handled by the Lessee without any request for showing vessel or allowing access to piers by Marina personnel. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.110 - Maintenance and Care in Berthing, Anchoring and Mooring Vessels. 
A.  All vessels shall be berthed and secured with proper care and equipment, and such berthing or equipment shall be maintained at all times in such condition as to meet with the approval of the Operator. 
B.  In the event that vessels are not so maintained, the Operator may supply lines and fittings, or replace inadequate lines and fittings, or may care for the vessel in such a manner as to prevent damage to the vessel or floats. A charge for this service and for any lines, fittings and materials supplied shall be made, and payment shall be made at the end of each month. Any lines, fittings and materials used and supplied by the Operator to protect vessels are not returnable. 
C.  No person shall bring into, moor or berth within the Harbor any vessel of any kind whatsoever which is so unseaworthy or in such badly deteriorated condition that it may cause damage to docks, floats or other vessels, or which may become a menace to navigation, except in cases of extreme emergency in which case the owner will be liable for any damage caused by such vessel. 
D.  The Operator shall be the sole judge as to the condition of the vessel, for the purposes of this section. 
E.  In the event a vessel or other craft is wrecked or sunk within the Harbor, it shall be the owner's responsibility to mark its position and provide for the raising and disposition of such vessel or craft and assume all liability for damage to city property or other vessels in the Harbor. 
F.  Small tenders and row boats are permitted to be moored, if kept by for the use of the berthholder and berthed within the limits of the berth assigned. They shall not be placed on the piers or fingers. 
G.  Abandoned Vessels. 
1.  It is unlawful for any owner or other person in control of any vessel, watercraft or other object to abandon any such vessel, watercraft or other object in the Harbor or on the tidelands or submerged lands. 
2.  Any such vessel, watercraft or other object may be removed and disposed of by the Operator as provided by the Harbors and Navigation Code, the Civil Code and/or other applicable law of the State. The cost of such removal and disposition incurred shall be paid by the owner or person in control of such vessel, watercraft or other object, and the security deposit of the owner or person in control of such vessel may be applied to such removal or disposition, and if said deposit is so used, it shall be replenished by the owner or controlling person pro tanto. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 13, 1998.) 
H.  Mooring in Entrances—Vessel Removal. 
1.  If any unattended vessel, watercraft or other object shall be found to be anchored or moored within the entrance to the Harbor or channel, secured to any jetty, breakwater, buoy or other thing without authorization, the Operator or his assistants may assume custody of such vessel, watercraft or other object and cause it to be removed or held or placed in storage. Such costs incidental to this action shall be the liability of the owner or owners. 
2.  The Operator and his assistants shall not be held liable for any damage to such vessel, watercraft or other thing whether such damage occurs before or after he assumes custody. 
3.  If such vessel, watercraft or object is not claimed by the owner thereof, the Operator may dispose of such vessel, watercraft or object in the manner provided in the Harbors and Navigation Code, the Civil Code and/or any other applicable law of the State. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 13, 1998.) 
I.  Sunken Vessels. 
1.  Any owner or operator of a vessel, watercraft, or object which sinks accidentally or otherwise within the Harbor or entrance thereto, shall immediately mark it with a buoy or beacon by day, and by a lantern or light by night, and maintain such markings until the sunken vessel, watercraft or obstruction is removed. 
2.  The owner or operator of such sunken vessel, watercraft, or object shall immediately advise the Operator of the sinking, and immediately commence removal of such vessel, watercraft or object, and prosecute the removal diligently to completion and dispose of it as provided by the Harbors and Navigation Code, the Civil Code and/or any other applicable law of the State. 
3.  If the owner or operator of such sunken vessel, watercraft or other object fails, neglects or refuses to remove such sunken vessel, watercraft or other object in a reasonable time, the Operator may cause the removal diligently to completion. 
4.  The owner or owners of such vessel, watercraft or object shall be liable to the City for costs incidental to the removal and disposition of such vessel, and the security deposit of the owner or owners may be applied to such removal or disposition and if said deposit is so used, it shall be replenished by the owner pro tanto. 
5.  Neither the Operator, his assistants, nor the City shall be liable to any person, firm or corporation for damage as a proximate cause of the sunken vessel, watercraft or object, or damage caused by removal of such vessel, watercraft or object. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 13, 1998; Ord. 1226 C.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974, prior code § 11102, 11108, 11110, 11111, 11112.)  
12.36.115 - Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Rules and Regulations. 
All persons using the Harbor shall comply with all of the Rules and Regulations adopted by the United States of America, State of California, and local agencies with regard to water safety requirements, and operation and maintenance of boats. The Operator is authorized to enforce all said Rules and Regulations, and to deny use of the facilities at the Harbor for violation of said Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998, Ord 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.120 - Violation of Rules and Regulations. 
A.  An applicant for a berth assignment agrees by his signature on the application form, to comply with these Rules and Regulations. 
B.  The Operator shall have the right to deny the use of the Harbor and to cancel the berth assignment and require removal of any boat of any owner, who in the opinion of the Operator, fails to comply with the Rules and Regulations for the operation of the Harbor. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.125 - Registration and Numbering: Furnishing Information to the Harbor Master. 
A.  Every undocumented vessel entering the Harbor must be registered and numbered as provided by the laws of the State of California. 
B.  The owners of vessels entering the Harbor shall furnish all information relating to the vessel and the ownership thereof as may reasonably be required by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.130 - Accident Reports. 
A duplicate copy of any report of any accident occurring in the Harbor involving any one or more vessels shall immediately be filed with the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998 Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.135 - Security Gates. 
No person shall be permitted to be present beyond the security gates on any pier to which access is restricted by such gate, unless such person is a permittee whose vessel is berthed at such pier or is an authorized guest of such permittee, or unless such is on official business of the City of Martinez, the State of California, or the United States of America, or unless such person has been specifically authorized to enter such pier by the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.140 - Vehicle Parking. 
Vehicles shall park only in those areas designated and marked for such parking. Boat trailers with or without boats shall not be parked or left at the Harbor for over twenty-four hours. Recreation vehicles, trailers, or campers, shall not be parked on Marina grounds without the permission of the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.145 - Pets. 
Animals running at large are prohibited. No owner or keeper of an animal shall allow or permit such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed to run at large within the Harbor area. Such animal should be securely restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and is in charge and control of a person competent to keep such animal under effective charge and control. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.150 - Boat Launching Facilities. 
A.  Fees for the use of the ramp shall be collected as set forth by the City Council resolution and shall be collected at all times when the Marina Office is open or a ramp attendant is on duty, either when the boat is launched or when the boat is removed from the water. 
B.  The Marina Office personnel and/or the ramp attendant shall control the parking of cars and trailers in the vicinity of the ramp, maintain general order in the area, and assist as may be necessary in the launching and recovery of the boats. Assistance will not be rendered as a convenience but will be offered under adverse circumstances such as adverse weather conditions or a boater's inexperience. 
C.  The docks at the ramp area are not to be used as a tie-up for convenience of boaters using marina facilities other than the launching or recovery of boats. 
D.  It is unlawful to launch, recover or berth any vessel or other object in the Harbor without the authorization of the Operator. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.155 - Boat Races, Regattas or Exhibitions. 
It is unlawful to conduct, participate in, or cause to be conducted any regatta, motorboat or other boat race, tournament or exhibition within the harbor without written permission of the Operator and subject to such regulations as may be imposed. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11107.)  
12.36.160 - Penalty. 
Every person violating any provision of these rules and regulations shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as set forth in the Martinez Municipal Code, Section 1.12.030. 
(Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982.)  
12.36.165 - Enforcement. 
The Police Department and the Operator, if lawful and delegated the authority by the City, shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of the Harbors and Navigation Code and all other laws pertaining to the harbor. 
(Ord. 1257 C.S. § 16, 1998; Ord. 982 C.S. § 1 (part), 1982: Ord. 781 C.S. § 1 (part), 1974; prior code § 11115.)  
CHAPTER 12.40 - DISPOSITION OF CITY REAL PROPERTY 
 
12.40.010 - General. 
A.  The real property of the City of Martinez is held in trust for the common benefit of all its citizens. It is the intent of this Chapter to assure that no disposal of City real property governed by this Chapter takes place unless the disposition is for the common benefit of all the citizens of Martinez and is required by the public interest and convenience. 
B.  Subject to the exceptions set forth in Section 12.40.020, this Chapter shall only apply to proposed dispositions and dispositions of City real property for the exclusive use or benefit of specified parties (and shall apply to such exclusive use or benefit dispositions even where the City retains an easement or other interest in the real property in question). 
Disposition of City real property governed by this Chapter shall require, among other things, a Council resolution finding that the disposition is for the common benefit of all the citizens of Martinez and is required by the public interest and convenience, coupled with a statement of the facts supporting such finding; provided, however, that should any state law apply to any such disposition, and should such state law require that certain findings be made in order to dispose of such real property, in the event that the City Council makes the findings required by such state law and, based thereon, finds that the proposed disposition is for the common benefit of all the citizens of Martinez, no further factual or other findings need be made and it shall be deemed that the disposition is for the common benefit of all the citizens of Martinez and is required by the public interest and convenience. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.020 - Exceptions. 
This Chapter shall not apply to the following dispositions of City real property: 
A.  The encroachments by public entities (or by private entities providing a public utility type service) into City rights-of-way that are governed by other chapters of Martinez Municipal Code Title 12; 
B.  Dispositions concerning City real property of 250 square feet or less; 
C.  Vacations of City real property to which California Streets and Highways Code Section 8300 et seq. applies; provided that prior to the City Council approving any such vacation, Sections 12.40.040(B) and (C) of this Chapter shall be complied with. The City Manager shall adopt procedures and policies to regulate vacations described in this subsection; 
D.  The leasing and licensing of City real property; 
E.  Any disposition of City real property which is not for the exclusive use or benefit of specified parties. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.030 - Inventory of City Real Property. 
To comply with California Government Code Section 50569, on or before October 31 of each year, the City Manager shall cause to be prepared an annual inventory of real property owned by the City. That inventory shall also identify which City-owned real property, if any, is deemed to be in excess of the City's foreseeable needs. Such inventory and identification shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. The City Council's hearing on the proposed inventory and identification (collectively "inventory") shall be noticed in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65092, except that: 
A.  The notice described in California Government Code Section 65091(a)(3) shall be mailed to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of each of the properties identified in the inventory; 
B.  The notice shall be published pursuant to California Government Code Section 65091(a)(4)(A); and 
C.  As to those properties identified as being in excess of the City's foreseeable needs, the notice shall specify an address (if one exists) and assessor's parcel number (if one exists) and include a locator map showing the subject property; and 
D.  The notice shall specify the date, time and location of the public hearing. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the proposed inventory or proposed amended inventory identifies at least 5 separate parcels, the City may forego mailing the notice pursuant to subsection A above; provided that, in all cases, the notice specified in subsection A above shall be mailed to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of each of the properties identified in the inventory as being in excess of the City's foreseeable needs. The materials described above shall be made available for inspection and copying by the public at least 10 days prior to the Council's noticed hearing on the inventory. The inventory described above may be amended at any time by the City Council provided that the notice and hearing requirements specified above are first complied with. If the inventory proposed to be submitted by the City Manager to the City Council for approval pursuant to this Section does not identify any pieces of real property or does not add any real property to the previously approved inventory, or does not change the designation as to whether or not any property on the previously approved inventory is surplus, then no notice need be given prior to the submission of the inventory to the Council for approval other than is otherwise required by the Ralph M. Brown Act. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.040 - Council Action to Consider Proceeding to Dispose of Real Property. 
A.  The Council shall not dispose of any real property unless it is identified as surplus in the inventory of City property described in Section 12.40.030 above, and has therefore been determined by the Council to be in excess of foreseeable City needs. 
B.  Prior to any action to dispose of City real property, the City Manager shall prepare a report ("Council Report") to the City Council requesting authorization to initiate the process for disposition of the property; provided, however, that the City Manager shall not require authorization from the City Council prior and as a condition to preparing the Council Report. 
C.  The Council Report shall include up-to-date, general information on the real property, the reasons for requesting its disposition, an identification of the person(s) or entity(ies), if any, to whom the real property is proposed to be disposed, a recommendation on whether it should be disposed of, and, if by sale, whether the City should dispose of the property by (1) negotiation or (2) public bid. 
D.  In reviewing and taking action on the Council Report, the City Council shall: (1) determine whether or not the real property proposed for disposition is listed as surplus in the inventory required under Section 12.40.030 above; (2) determine whether the real property is required to be so listed; (3) if the real property is not so listed, determine whether as part of any other direction given to the City Manager, the City Manager should be instructed to initiate those steps necessary to determine whether the property should be designated as surplus; (4) irrespective of whether the real property is so listed, subject to and consistent with the last sentence of Section 12.40.010(B) of this Chapter, preliminarily determine whether its disposition is for the common benefit of the citizens of Martinez, is required by public interest and convenience and is in compliance with applicable law (the preliminary findings described in this subsection shall not be binding upon the City); (5) preliminarily determine whether (a) any limitations should be imposed on the specified parties' use of the real property and/or (b) the real property should be merged or subjected to a lot line adjustment with adjacent properties; and (6) determine whether the Council is interested in pursuing or is opposed to the disposition of the real property. If after making these determinations, the Council is willing to permit the disposition of the real property to be examined and/or pursued further, the Council shall give instructions to the City Manager to coordinate the proceedings for disposition under the process outlined in this Chapter, as specified by the City Council and as otherwise required by state law. In giving such instructions to the City Manager, the Council may designate the method of disposition, including, but not limited to, public bid, negotiated sale or exchange. 
E.  The City Manager may designate a City staff member to serve as the City's property manager to perform the functions and duties specified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.050 - Review by Other Agencies. 
Dispositions of real property governed by this Chapter (1) must be referred to the Planning Commission for a General Plan consistency determination pursuant to California Government Code Section 65402, (2) may be referred to other City commissions or committees for a report containing information specified by the City Council, and (3) must be referred to other agencies if required under California Government Code Section 54220 et seq. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.060 - Review by the Public. 
A.  Except with respect to the Council's approval of the annual inventory as provided in Section 12.40.030 above, prior to Council action on any disposal or proposal to dispose of real property, the Council shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation and post the notice at City Hall, with a prominent display "NOTICE OF POTENTIAL DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC PROPERTY." 
B.  The notice shall remain posted at the City Hall beginning no later than one month prior to the date on which the Council will consider the property disposal. The notice shall also be published and mailed pursuant to Section 12.40.030 of this Chapter. In the event that Council consideration of the inventory described in Section 12.40.030 of this Chapter, the Council report and/or disposition of real property are scheduled for the same Council meeting, 1 notice may be utilized to describe 2 or more of such events, but the notice shall contain all of the information and comply with all the requirements required hereunder pertinent to each event so scheduled. At the same meeting, the Council may not consider and/or take action on (1) a Council report (pursuant to Section 12.40.040(D) of this Chapter) and (2) the final disposition documents which pertain to the same real property. 
C.  The notice shall contain a description of the real property proposed to be disposed of, the proposed use for the property and its general plan designation. The posted notice shall, in addition, contain a map showing the location of the property and all parcels within 300 feet of that property. 
D.  The Council shall allow public testimony on the proposed disposal on the date of Council action. 
E.  Copies of all documents prepared under Sections 12.40.070 and/or 12.40.080 of this Chapter shall be made available for public inspection at least 10 days prior to the date the Council takes final action on the proposed disposition. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.070 - Disposition of Property by Negotiation, Public Bid, Exchange or Other Method. 
After the Council makes its preliminary and nonbinding determination specified in Section 12.40.040(D) of this Chapter and direction is given to proceed with a real property's disposition, the City Manager shall determine whether the real property shall be disposed of by public bid, negotiation, exchange or some other method as long as in making its determinations pursuant to Section 12.40.040(D) of this Chapter, the Council did not specify the manner in which the real property's disposition was to be effected. The City Manager's manner of disposition determination shall be consistent with the rules and regulations promulgated under Section 12.40.100 of this Chapter and shall be subject to the Council's approval. All fees and costs incurred by the City in disposing of real property under this Chapter shall be paid for by the person or entity desiring to acquire the real property; provided, however, that where necessary and appropriate, such fees and costs may be waived by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.080 - Final Disposition of Property. 
Only the City Council may approve or disapprove the disposition of the City's real property and shall do so under the terms and conditions of disposition approved by a majority vote of the entire Council. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.090 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
A.  "Disposal," "dispose" or "disposition" means any sale, encroachment, franchise, grant of easement, conveyance and lot line adjustments. 
B.  "Real property" shall be defined as specified in California Civil Code Section 658. 
C.  "Exclusive use" or "benefit" or words of similar import means that the person or entity entitled to or granted such exclusive use or benefit with respect to real property shall have the right to exclude any or all persons and entities from that real property (except the City, if the City retains an interest in the real property) and/or prevent any or all persons from benefitting from that real property (except the City, if the City retains an interest in the real property). 
D.  "Specified parties" means the person or persons (including entities) to whom real property is disposed under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.)  
12.40.100 - City Manager to Adopt Implementing Regulations. 
The City Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations specifying the procedures and steps to be followed in implementing this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1321 C.S. § 2 (part), 2005.) 
TITLE 12 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions authorizing a City to regulate and prohibit encroachments and obstructions of public places, see Gov. Code § 38775. 
2.  Chapter 12.36 of the Martinez Municipal Code is amended to change the term "Harbor Master" wherever that term may appear to the word "Operator."  
TITLE 13 - UTILITIES 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this Title.  
CHAPTER 13.04 - WATER RATES AND REGULATIONS 
 
13.04.010 - Established. 
A.  The rates of the Martinez Water System shall be such as adopted by resolution approved by a majority vote of the City Council. 
B.  The regulations of the Martinez Water System shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  Any increase in rates for water service provided by the Martinez Water System shall comply with all existing applicable laws of the State. 
(Ord. 1336 C.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1126 C.S. § I, 1989: prior code § 7100.)  
13.04.020 - Fluoridation of Water Supply. 
Fluoride compounds shall be added to the public water supply of the City in such a manner and to such an extent as may be approved by the State Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. 1336 C.S. § 1 (part), 2007: prior code § 7101.)  
13.04.030 - Approved Water Supply Systems. 
Chapter 414-4 (Approved Water Supply Systems) as set forth in the Ordinance Code of Contra Costa County is hereby adopted by reference with those changes, additions and deletions made from time to time by the Contra Costa Board of Supervisors. 
(Ord. 1336 C.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 972 C.S. § 2, 1982.)  
13.04.040 - Unauthorized Use of Water. 
Water shall not be used or taken from the City of Martinez Water System without a water meter and authorization from the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1336 C.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1186 C.S. § I, 1992.)  
CHAPTER 13.07 - WATER SUPPLY AND INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE 
 
13.07.010 - General. 
The City will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water under proper pressure. However, the City will not be liable for any loss or damage occasioned by interruption, shortage, or insufficiency of supply. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.020 - Suspending Service. 
For purposes of making repairs or installing improvements to the system, the City has the right to temporarily suspend the delivery of water. Insofar as practicable, repairs or improvements will be performed rapidly, and at times will cause minimal inconvenience to the customers concerned. The City will not be liable for any loss or damage occasioned by suspensions of service. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.030 - Maintenance of Pressures. 
The City does not guarantee to maintain any specific water pressure or range of pressures for any service, and no damages relating to pressure will give any right of claim against the City. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.040 - Service Outside Corporate Limits. 
The City Council reserves the right to discontinue water service to any or all premises outside the corporate limits, at any time the City may cease to have an adequate supply of water. 
a.  Localized Improvements. 
It has been determined improvements to the system are required in certain localized areas to provide the desired level of service for existing and future developments. Applicants for water service in these localized areas shall pay the water connection fees and install the additional improvements required to serve these localized areas, or deposit a proportionate cost share of the improvements or enter into a deferred improvement agreement as required by the City. 
These localized areas and the requirement for service are listed in Appendix A at the end of Section 14. 4 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.050 - Water Shortages. 
The City reserves the right to fix the time and rate of flow of all deliveries of water to each customer and, in the event of shortage, to allocate between its customers the water supply from time to time available to the City and to establish such priorities to the available supply the City shall consider necessary and in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.060 - Prevention of Waste. 
If the City finds a customer is wasting water by failing to repair a leak in the customer's water system, by permitting water to run off the customer's premises, or by failing to put water received from the City to reasonable and beneficial use, the City shall notify the customer to cease the waste. If the customer fails to take prompt, reasonable action to stop the waste, the City may, in its sole discretion, suspend delivery of water to the customer or install a device to restrict the flow of water to the customer until the City determines there will be no further waste of water by the customer. 
In addition, and at the sole discretion of the City, the City may levy Administrative Citations, as provided for in Chapter 1.15 of the Martinez Municipal Code, of up to $250.00 for a first offense, and up to $500.00 for a second offence for the wasting of water. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
13.07.070 - Water Conservation Encouraged. 
The City encourages the installation of water conserving landscaping and water-saving devices in plumbing and water conserving appliances. 
(Ord. No. 1387 C.S. § 2, 8-19-2015)  
CHAPTER 13.08 - SEWAGE DISPOSAL—GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
13.08.010 - Person Defined. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth: "Person" includes, in addition to the definition contained in Section 5.08.090 of this code, a public or governmental agency. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.08.020 - Permit—Required When. 
No person shall collect, discharge or deposit, or cause or suffer to be collected, discharged or deposited, any sewage, sewage effluent or garbage from more than one building in or upon incorporated territory of this County, or into streams or bodies of water where the same is or may be carried through or upon unincorporated territory of this County, or make use of County roads or highways therefor, without first securing in the manner provided for in this chapter a permit from the City Council to do so, and at all times having an unrevoked permit therefor. No person shall collect, discharge or deposit any such sewage which creates a public nuisance in the unincorporated portions of this County. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.08.030 - Permit—Application Procedure. 
Every person seeking a permit to do any of the acts described in Section 13.08.020 shall file with the City Council a petition for permission to do so, together with a complete and detailed plan, description and history of the existing or proposed lines, works, system or purification plant through which such waste matter is proposed to be collected and discharged. Whenever directed by the City Council, it shall be the duty of the Health Officer and the Public Works Director to investigate the existing or proposed system or plant and to make a report of their investigation to the City Council. If the City Council determines as a fact that the waste matter being or to be so collected, discharged or deposited does not or will not constitute a public nuisance, and does not or will not emit disagreeable odors or fumes offensive to the public in the vicinity of such place of collection or deposit, or passing over and along public highways adjacent thereto, and that under all circumstances and conditions it is necessary so to dispose of such waste matter, it shall grant a permit authorizing the petitioner to collect or discharge or to continue to collect, deposit or discharge such substance; provided, however, that all permits issued under this chapter shall be revocable by the City Council at any time, or shall be subject to suspension if it is found as a fact by the Council that the substance collected, discharged or deposited by virtue thereof, constitutes a public nuisance or emits disagreeable odors or smells offensive to the public in the vicinity thereof or passing over and along public highways adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.08.040 - Official Inspections. 
Every person engaged in, or applying for a permit to engage in, any activity regulated by this chapter shall allow the Health Officer and/or Public Works Director and/or any of their therefor-designated subordinates, to enter and inspect the place, facilities, and activities, for compliance with this chapter during reasonable hours, upon demand identifying the official and his purpose under this chapter. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
CHAPTER 13.12 - LINES AND PLANTS 
 
13.12.010 - Persons Subject—Actions Required. 
All persons, firms, corporations and political subdivisions organized under the laws of the State and empowered to install sewer lines or to construct or erect sewage processing plants, prior to doing any work of sewer line installation or erection of sewage processing plants in the City, shall file with the City Engineer plans and specifications of the proposed work. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.12.020 - Approval by City Engineer. 
Within 15 days after plans and specifications are filed with him, the City Engineer may approve the plans and specify the amount of cash deposit required by him to cover the estimated cost of inspecting the work during its progress to insure compliance with the submitted plans and specifications. If additional time is required by the City Engineer to review the plans and specifications in order to determine that the proposed work meets accepted sanitary engineering standards, he shall notify the applicant of the amount of additional time required. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.12.040 - Work Commencement—Fee Deposit. 
On approval of plans and specifications and deposit of the required fee, work may begin. The applicant shall carry forward the work without unreasonable delays and shall keep the Director of Public Works advised of times when work is to be performed so that inspection may be scheduled. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.12.060 - Work Suspension—Additional Fees. 
If inspection fees deposited are expended before the work is completed, the Director of Public Works may order the work suspended until sufficient additional fees are deposited with him to cover the cost of inspection. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.12.080 - Appeals. 
Any applicant whose plans and specifications are disapproved, who complains of delay in the review of submitted plans and specifications, who asserts that inspection fees are excessive, or who contends that inspection by the City Engineer is unreasonable, may appeal in writing to the City Council. The appeal shall set forth in reasonable detail the ruling or action complained of. At its first regular meeting which follows by more than five days the filing of the appeal, the City Council shall hear and decide the appeal. The Council may continue the hearing from time to time, but no one extension shall be longer than two weeks. The decision of the Council shall be final. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
CHAPTER 13.16 - INDIVIDUAL SYSTEMS 
 
13.16.010 - County Ordinance Adopted. 
Chapter 420-6 (Subdivision and Individual Systems) as set forth in the Ordinance Code of Contra Costa County is hereby adopted by reference with those changes, additions and deletions made from time to time by the Contra Costa County Board of Supervisors. 
(Ord. 972 C.S. § 3, 1982: Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.020 - Unauthorized Discharge of Sewage. 
A.  No person shall discharge or deposit sewage or sewage effluent in or on the area of the City without an unrevoked permit from the City Council. 
B.  No person shall maintain an improperly functioning individual sewage disposal system. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.040 - Tentative Map Filing Required. 
Subdividers of realty subdivisions shall submit tentative maps to the Health Officer for investigation to prevent creation of a health nuisance. The tentative map shall show the proposed provisions for adequate drainage as may be required by the Public Works Department to prevent inundation of any lots, and shall state the source of domestic water supply, the method of sewage disposal, the number of lots and the size of each lot. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.060 - Lot Area—Variances. 
A.  The total lot area exclusive of underground and surface easements, shall be 10,000 square feet or more for a single-family dwelling or other structure requiring a sewage disposal system. When both an individual sewage system and private water supply are required, the total lot area exclusive of underground and surface easements, shall be one acre or more. The Health Officer may grant variances to the provisions of this section when he finds all of the following conditions to be met: 
1.  The lot in all other respects will comply with the requirements of this chapter and regulations issued by the Health Officer; 
2.  The variance would not create nor contribute to the creation of a public health nuisance; 
3.  A community sewage collection system is not available to the property; 
4.  The sewerage system will not contaminate the domestic water supply reservoir. 
B.  If the parcel or lot is located within a drainage area of a domestic water supply reservoir, any structure requiring disposal of sewage shall be connected to a community sewage disposal system. If a community system is not available and the conditions specified in Subsection A are satisfied, the Health Officer may grant a variance subject to other reasonable conditions and the following: 
1.  Between 50 and 1,000 feet from the reservoir or tributary stream a watertight sewage holding tank system, or equal will be required. Such system must be owned or operated by a presently existing public agency having statutory authority to provide such service. 
2.  Beyond 1,000 feet from a reservoir or tributary stream a septic tank or other similar acceptable system may be permitted subject to all the conditions specified in Subsection A. 
C.  It is the intent of this chapter to provide maximum protection to the water quality of the waters stored in these reservoirs and any variance granted must be considered as an interim method of sewage disposal which shall not create situations that may become a menace to the public health. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.080 - Approval by Health Officer. 
The Health Officer may approve, may conditionally approve subject to special conditions essential to prevention of a health nuisance and for full compliance to regulations, or may disapprove the tentative map of the subdivision. No permit to utilize any premises requiring the disposal of sewage shall be issued by any County agency in any subdivision, the final map of which has not been approved by the Health Officer. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.100 - Filing of Final Map. 
The final recorded maps or tentative maps required to be filed under Title 21 shall be filed with the Health Officer. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.102 - When Required. 
Individual sewage disposal systems approved by the Health Officer shall be provided for premises requiring the disposal of sewage where no sanitary sewer system is available. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.104 - Permit—Requirement. 
A.  Permits for installation of new individual disposal systems or for reconstruction or relocation of all or part of any existing system are required. 
B.  Applications for permits shall be made to the Health Officer. Such application shall expire one year after date of issuance. 
C.  The Health Officer shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the issuance of the permit on the basis of compliance with this chapter and the regulations of the Health Officer. Permits shall expire one year after date of issuance if installation of the approved systems is not commenced. 
D.  No change shall be made in approved plans without the approval of the Health Officer. 
E.  The Health Officer or his sanitarians may enter and inspect any premises for the purpose of this chapter at reasonable times with notice to owner or occupant. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.106 - Permit—Building Permit Prerequisite. 
No permit to build on premises requiring disposal of sewage shall be granted if: 
A.  A community sewage disposal system approved by the Health Officer is not available; or 
B.  A permit for the installation of an individual sewage system as required by this chapter has not been obtained. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.108 - Approval Required For Certificate Of Occupancy Issuance. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a structure utilizing an individual sewage disposal system until the system has been installed and approved in accordance with this chapter and the regulations of the Health Officer. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.110 - Publication of Regulations. 
The Health Officer, with the approval of the City Council, is authorized to make and publish regulations necessary to effect the purposes of this chapter. These regulations shall become effective when published in a newspaper of general circulation and posted in the County Health Department. The Health Officer shall be responsible for the execution of this chapter. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.114 - Nuisance—Abatement. 
Each violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. The City Attorney, when directed by the City Council, shall initiate and maintain actions for the abatement of these nuisances. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
13.16.120 - Repair Notice and City Action. 
In the event of an improperly functioning individual sewage disposal system, and in addition to other penalties provided in this title, the Health Officer may send a written notice to the owner of the property on which the violation is occurring at the address of the owner as it appears on the assessment roll of this County. The notice shall state the nature of the violation, that the owner is required to abate the condition constituting the violation within thirty (30) days after the notice is received, and that if the owner fails to abate the condition within that period, the condition may be abated by the Health Officer and the owner shall be liable for the cost thereof. If the condition is not abated by the owner in accordance with the notice, the Health Officer may abate the condition and shall charge the owner for the cost thereof. If this charge is not paid within sixty (60) days, the amount of the charge plus accrued interest at the rate of six (6) percent per year from the date of the charge, shall be added to the next regular tax bill sent to the owner by the County and shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, or in the alternative, recovery therefor may be had through civil action. 
(Ord. 837 C.S. § 5 (part), 1976.)  
CHAPTER 13.20 - SEWER USE 
 
13.20.070 - Preliminary Treatment Facilities—Required When. 
The admission into the public sanitary sewers of any waters or wastes having characteristics exceeding the following limits shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer and where necessary, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the owner shall provide, at his own expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics to within the allowable limits: 
A.  Five-day B.O.D. of 300 parts per million by weight; 
B.  Suspended solids content of 350 parts per million by weight; 
C.  Any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in this chapter; 
D.  An average daily flow of two (2) percent of the average daily flow of the City. 
(Prior code § 5303 (part).)  
13.20.080 - Preliminary Treatment Facilities—Approval Required. 
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the City Engineer, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing. 
(Prior code § 5303 (part).)  
13.20.090 - Preliminary Treatment Facilities—Necessity Determination. 
Upon determination by the City Engineer that waste of unusual strength or character can safely, efficiently and without damage to the system, be handled by the sewage system, an agreement or arrangement between the City and the person causing such waste may be entered into. 
(Prior code § 5303 (part).)  
13.20.100 - Preliminary Treatment Facilities—Maintenance. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Prior code § 5303 (part).)  
CHAPTER 13.24 - SEWER FEES 
 
13.24.010 - Establishment and Collection. 
Rates and compensation to be charged and collected by the City for services rendered, connections made to system, fees for additional construction and plant enlargement, shall from time to time hereafter be established by resolution of the City Council. The fees and charges so established by such resolution may be abolished or modified by a resolution to that effect of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 5306.)  
CHAPTER 13.28 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATION 
 
13.28.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California; 
B.  "Development" consists of any residential or commercial subdivision, any new multiple residential development containing three or more dwelling units or two or more main dwelling structures, or any commercial development requiring 200 amp service or larger. 
C.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporation, partnerships and their agents and employees; 
D.  "Overhead Utility Distribution Facilities" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances, located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communications cable TV, telephone or similar or associated service including but not limited to any above ground utilities; i.e., pad mounted transformers and electric equipment. 
E.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.28.070 of this chapter; 
F.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10, 304.)  
13.28.020 - New or Existing Development—Conditions for Underground Placement. 
All new overhead utility distribution facilities installed in and if for the purpose of supplying or maintaining service to any new or existing development shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10, 300.)  
13.28.030 - New Development—Developer Responsible for Compliance. 
A.  The developer is responsible for complying with the requirements of Section 13.28.030. In all new development, the developer will perform or cause to be performed all trenching necessary for the underground installation of service, including furnishing of any imported backfill material required and the furnishing and installation of any necessary substructures, including conduit and pedestals required in accordance with the plans and specifications provided by the company. The developer shall bear all costs associated with these undergrounding requirements. The developer shall pay for all extensions of service to new developments from existing trunk lines. 
B.  Cable Television Service-The cable television company franchised to provide service to the area of the new development shall provide, install and pay for all other of its plant in such trench. The cable television company shall provide plans and specifications to the developer and shall inspect the facilities and certify to the City prior to final approval of the development that the cable television facilities are properly installed. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 879 C.S. § 1, 1978.)  
13.28.040 - Conditions for Underground Placement—Exceptions. 
A.  New Development-The Planning Commission may waive the requirements of Section 13.28.020, if topographical soil, or any other conditions make underground installation of the facilities unreasonable or impractical and they make the finding that the equipment can be effectively screened from public view. 
B.  Replacement of Existing Overhead Utility Distribution Facilities-The undergrounding requirements may be waived by the Community Development Director if the existing service connections or other existing conditions make the requirement unreasonable and utmost efforts are made to screen the facility from public view. The Community Development Director shall adopt guidelines defining what is reasonable and unreasonable. 
C.  Metal poles supporting street lights and traffic controller boxes shall be exempted from undergrounding requirements. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,302.)  
13.28.050 - (RESERVED). 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993.)  
13.28.060 - Underground District—Determination of Necessity—Hearing—Notice. 
The Council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City, and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,305.)  
13.28.070 - Underground District—Districts Designated by Council Resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an "underground utility district" and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district, and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished, and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,306.)  
13.28.080 - Underground District—Maintenance of Overhead Facilities—Unlawful Acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.28.070 hereof, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution; except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Sections 13.28.130 through 13.28.190 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,307.)  
13.28.090 - Maintenance of Overhead Facilities—Exceptions—Emergency or Unusual Circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 10 days, with authorization of the City Engineer in order to provide emergency service. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,308.)  
13.28.100 - Maintenance of Overhead Facilities—Exceptions—Additional Designated. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 thereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility or person for furnishing or receiving communication services; 
G.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10, 309.)  
13.28.110 - Notice to Affected Property Owners and Utility Companies. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
B.  Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,310.)  
13.28.120 - Utility Company's Responsibilities. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section l3.28.070 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,311.)  
13.28.130 - Property Owner's Responsibility—Notice to Install. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.28.120, and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
B.  If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 hereof, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(a).)  
13.28.140 - Notice to Install—Mailing Procedure. 
The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Martinez. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail, either the owner or occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than 8 inches by 10 inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(b).)  
13.28.150 - Notice to Install—Contents. 
The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(c).)  
13.28.160 - Work Done by City—Unoccupied Premises—City Engineer's Authority—Assessment Costs—Hearing. 
If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(d).)  
13.28.170 - Assessment—Hearing—Notices—Contents. 
The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in Sections 13.28.110 through 13.28.150 for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(e).)  
13.28.180 - Assessment—Hearing—Determination. 
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(f).)  
13.28.190 - Assessment—Nonpayment—Lien. 
If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the County Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the County Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,312(g).)  
13.28.200 - City's Responsibility. 
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 hereof. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,313.)  
13.28.210 - Time Extension. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.28.070 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,314.)  
CHAPTER 13.29 - LANDSCAPING AND LIGHTING ASSESSMENT DISTRICT 
 
13.29.010 - Landscaping and Lighting Assessment District. 
The City Council may set up Landscaping and Lighting Assessment District(s) in accordance with the applicable provisions of the "Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972" of the State of California Streets and Highways Code, Division 15, Section 22500 et seq. and any amendment thereto. Each such Assessment District shall be formed after conducting a public hearing and as provided for in the said Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972. All future developments shall participate if such Assessment District is formed by the City. 
(Ord. 941 C.S. § 2, 1981.)  
CHAPTER 13.30 - BENEFIT DISTRICTS 
 
13.30.010 - Authority. 
Whenever the City Council desires to establish a benefit district to pay for the costs of construction or acquisition of public improvements, the City Council may form a district by proceeding in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.040 - Alternative Procedure. 
The provisions of this chapter are alternative to any other provisions of this municipal code or of the laws of the State of California for accomplishing the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.070 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a special development assessment on land that benefits from public improvements which have been constructed by, for or at the behest of the City but which lands have not been assessed for such improvements. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.100 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  "Benefit District" means one or more parcels of land for which Development Approvals will be granted only after payment of Special Development Assessments. 
B.  "Development" means the subdivision of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction thereon of improvements and any of the acts, events or conditions described in Government Code Section 65927, and as it may be amended from time to time. "Development" shall not include improvements that by rules and regulations promulgated hereunder the City Council finds to be of a minor or insubstantial nature. 
C.  "Development Approval" means an approval by the City precedent to Development, or to the sale or occupancy of a parcel on which Development has occurred. A Development Approval may include, without limitation, rezoning of land, approval of a tentative or final subdivision map or parcel map, approval of a development agreement, approval of connection to the City's water distribution facilities, or issuance of a building or occupancy permit. The Development Approval that applies to a Benefit District will be determined by the City Council when the Benefit District is formed. 
D.  "Special Development Assessment" or "Assessment" means an assessment payable to the City as a precondition to a Development Approval within a Benefit District. The amount of the assessment will be determined by the City Council when the Benefit District is formed. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.110 - Initiation of Proceedings. 
Whenever the City Council desires to form a Benefit District hereunder it must initiate said formation by adopting its resolution of intention to form a Benefit District. The resolution of intention shall: 
A.  Identify the general boundaries of the proposed Benefit District and provide a general description of the improvements which have or will be constructed. 
B.  State, with reasons therefor, that certain parcels of land generally described and shown on a preliminary Benefit District diagram benefit from the district improvements but are not assessed at the time of formation of the benefit district. 
C.  State the intention of the City Council to form a Benefit District and to establish a Special Development Assessment for the land therein. 
D.  Designate a Benefit District Engineer and direct the Engineer to prepare a Benefit District report. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.140 - Contents of Report. 
The Benefit District report shall contain: 
A.  A description of each parcel of land proposed to be included in the Benefit District. Any parcel may be described by its county assessor's parcel number as listed on the last equalized tax assessment roll or on current records of the County Assessor. 
B.  The amount of the proposed Special Development Assessment for each parcel. The amount of the Assessment shall include all costs incurred in forming the District and in complying with this chapter. The Special Development Assessment shall be proportional to the estimated benefit to each parcel from the district improvements. 
C.  The Development Approval for which payment of the Special Development Assessment is preconditioned. 
D.  The time period within which the Special Development Assessment will be collected shall not exceed fifteen (15) years from the establishment of the fee as set by the Benefit District report, unless a longer period is specified in the report. 
E.  The formula or method by which benefits within the Benefit District are estimated. The method shall be based in proportion to estimated benefit to be received by each of the parcels in the Benefit District from the district improvements. 
F.  The terms which the Special Development Assessment will be escalated over time, if escalation of the Assessment is proposed. The Assessment may be escalated in one of the following ways: 
1.  An annual increment of interest may be added to the Assessment, at an uncompounded rate not exceeding the net effective rate earned by the City on the cash it invests for the same year. 
2.  The Assessment may be increased annually in proportion to a published index of construction costs applicable to improvements such as those in the district. 
G.  The manner in which the Special Development Assessment will be disbursed when collected. The Assessment may be disbursed in one or more of the following ways, and may change over time: 
1.  Disbursement to the general fund or a designated special fund of the City. 
2.  Disbursement to the district improvement fund, for use or distribution as provided by law. 
3.  Disbursement to owners within the assessment district in accordance with reimbursement or development agreements. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.170 - Filing of Report; Setting of Hearing. 
The Benefit District report shall be presented to the City Council. The City Council may accept the report, return the report for modification, or modify the report itself and accept it as modified. The Council shall call a public hearing on the report, to be held no sooner than twenty (20) days after its acceptance, at a regular, adjourned or special meeting of the Council. Any Council decision to accept the report under this Section shall be preliminary and subject to final decision of the Council taken in accordance with Section 13.30.270. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.200 - Mailing Notice of Hearing. 
Not later than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing, the City Clerk shall give notice of the hearing by first-class U.S. Mail, postage prepaid (or if directed by the City Council, by certified or registered mail) to each owner of land within the proposed Benefit District as the owner's name and address appear on the last equalized county tax assessment roll or on current records of the County Assessor. Failure of any owner to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.210 - Contents of Notice of Hearing. 
The notice of hearing shall state: 
A.  That the City Council has received a report proposing a Special Development Assessment for the land of the owner. 
B.  A general description of the assessment district improvements from which the owner's land benefits. 
C.  The total amount and the amount applicable to each owner's land of the proposed Special Development Assessment, and the conditions under which the Assessment will be payable. 
D.  The time and place of the hearing. 
E.  That any owner or owner's representative may appear at the hearing to protest or comment on the report orally or in writing or both. 
F.  That the report is on file with the City Clerk and is open for public inspection. 
G.  The name and telephone number of the Benefit District Engineer to whom the owner may address questions. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.240 - Hearing. 
At the hearing, the City Council shall consider all protests and comments, oral and written, by any interested person. The hearing may be continued from time to time. After the hearing, the City Council may continue its consideration of the report from time to time. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.270 - Decision; Establishment of Assessment. 
A.  After the hearing, the City Council may reject the report and abandon proceedings to form the Benefit District, may approve the report as filed, or may modify and approve the report. If the City Council approves the report, it shall adopt a resolution forming the Benefit District and establishing the Special Development Assessment in the amounts and under the terms set forth in the report. 
B.  After adoption of said resolution, and except for escalations approved in the report, the City Council shall not increase the initial Special Development Assessment in the report on file without the written consent of the affected owner unless it first holds a hearing on the increase after 10-day notice by mail to the affected owner. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.300 - Notice of Benefit District Formation. 
After establishment of the Special Development Assessment, the City Clerk shall record a notice in the office of the County Recorder of the County of Contra Costa in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Council of the City of Martinez, Contra Costa County, California, has established a Special Development Assessment to be paid to the City, in addition to all other fees, charges, taxes and assessments, as a condition to 
 [here state Director of Development Approval]  . 
The Special Development Assessment affects the following described land lying within Benefit District No. ____________ of the City. 
[Here describe the land within the Benefit District by metes and bounds, by deed reference or by reference to a recorded map] 
The Special Development Assessment represents benefit to the described land from public improvements as set forth in the report for Benefit District No. ____________ , which report is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Martinez and is hereby referred to for the amounts of the Special Development Assessment and for all other details of the Benefit District. The Special Development Assessment shall not be imposed after 
 [here insert termination date] . 
DATED: _____   	_____
City Clerk 
 
The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the notice to each owner of land within the Benefit District. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991)  
13.30.310 - Modification of Fees. 
On its own motion or on the application of any owner of land within the Benefit District, the City Council may eliminate or reduce the special development assessment for any parcel, on the ground that the assessment was incorrectly calculated, that changed conditions have reduced or eliminated the benefit on which the assessment was based, or that the parcel has come under the ownership of a public agency. The City Council may increase the amount of the assessment for a parcel only by proceeding as for the formation of a Benefit District, except that the amount of the assessment may be escalated over time as described in the approved Benefit District report. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.340 - Collection; Accounting. 
No development approval shall be granted by the appropriate City officer or department until the City Finance Officer has certified that the special development assessment has been paid for the affected parcel. The Finance Officer shall maintain a separate account for each Benefit District and shall collect and disburse the special development assessments in accordance with the approved Benefit District report. The Finance Officer may include in the collection an administrative charge, not to exceed 1% of the Assessment, to reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses in the administration of the Benefit District. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.370 - Prepayment. 
The special development assessment may be paid at any time before it is due, in the amount that would apply if the assessment were due on the date of payment. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.400 - Development Before District Formed. 
In the event a land owner within the district's boundaries seeks and obtains development approval before the Benefit District is formed, and at the time of said approval paid to the City an estimated amount to be applied toward the applicable special development assessment, the amount paid shall operate to reduce the affected land's assessment pro tanto. If the amount so paid exceeds the special development assessment applicable to the affected parcel, the difference shall be refunded to the person who paid the estimate within 120 days after the formation of the district, or as otherwise provided by agreement. If the amount paid is less than the special development assessment, then the person who paid the estimate and/or the owner of the land at the time of the formation of the district shall pay the difference to the City within 120 days after the district's formation, or under such terms as may be agreed upon by the persons liable therefor and the City. If no such agreement has been or can be reached, the unpaid amount shall operate as a lien against the affected parcel, which may be foreclosed in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
13.30.410 - Division of Assessment. 
If less than an entire parcel of land in the Benefit District is proposed for Development, the owner of the parcel may apply to the office of the Public Services Director for a division of the special development assessment. The Public Services Director shall thereupon divide the assessment into parts corresponding to the assessments which would have been levied if the parcel had been divided at the time the Benefit District was formed. The owner may appeal the decision of the Public Services Director to the City Council and shall be afforded a hearing before the City Council for this purpose. 
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 13.34 - CABLE TELEVISION-GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
13.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Title is to promote competition in the cable industry, facilitate the development of cable infrastructure, minimize aesthetic impacts and damage to public property, provide for the payment of reasonable compensation for the commercial use of public property, and establish customer service standards. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.34.020 - Definitions. 
All of the following definitions shall be construed liberally for the purpose of maximizing the scope of this Title. 
A.  "Affiliate" means any subsidiary of the operator, any parent of the operator, any person in which the operator has a financial interest, and any person who is directly or indirectly under common control with the operator. 
B.  "Basic cable service" means the basic tier of service offered by the operator in accordance with 47 U.S.C. 543(b)(7). 
C.  "Cable operator" or "operator" means any person or group of persons (A) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through 1 or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. Cable operator includes, but is not limited to, affiliates of a cable operator who perform cable services through the operation of the cable system within the franchise area. 
D.  "Cable service" means (A) the 1-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (B) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
E.  "Cable system" or "system" means the facility proposed to be built, rebuilt, upgraded and/or operated by an operator, which shall consist of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City, but such term does not include: (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of 1 or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way within the City; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Sections 201, et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interaction or on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
F.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
G.  "Franchise" means a nonexclusive authorization granted pursuant to this Title and applicable law to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the public rights-of-way to provide cable service within all or a specified area of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by State or City laws, ordinances or regulations, or for attaching devices to poles or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way, public property or private property. 
H.  "Franchise agreement" means a contract entered into pursuant to this Title between the City and a cable operator that sets forth, subject to this Chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be granted and exercised. 
I.  "Franchisee" means a person that has been granted a franchise by the City in accordance with the provisions of applicable law. 
J.  "Gross revenues" means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by the franchisee or any affiliate of the franchisee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the City. Gross revenues shall include, without limitation, the following: (i) fees charged to subscribers for basic service, cable programming service, premium service, pay-per-view programming, video-on-demand programming, a la carte programming, or other cable service; (ii) installation, disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; (iii) franchise or license fees; (iv) late fees; (v) administrative fees, including FCC regulatory fees; (vi) charges for the rental or sales of converters and other equipment to subscribers; (vii) advertising revenues (excluding commissions paid to or retained by advertising agencies), provided, however, that revenues generated from advertising sales extending beyond the franchise area shall be prorated on a per subscriber basis, so that no revenues are double-counted, or attributed to more than 1 local governmental entity for purposes of calculating franchise fees; (viii) leased access channel fees; (ix) revenues for program guides; (x) studio and production equipment rental fees; and (xi) revenues from home shopping channels. Gross revenues shall be calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
Gross revenues do not include (i) actual bad debt, provided, however, that all or a part of any actual bad debt that is written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected; (ii) the value of free cable services provided to employees of the franchisee; (iii) the value of advertising time on the cable system provided as consideration in barter transactions; (iv) PEG access capital support collected by the franchisee on behalf of the City; (v) any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee which are imposed directly by the State of California, the City, or other governmental unit, and which are collected by the franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit; or (vi) amounts received from programmers as reimbursement of marketing expenses and launch fees. 
K.  "Normal operating conditions" means those conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions that are within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
L.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, limited liability company, trust, corporation, or government entity. 
M.  "PEG" means public, educational and governmental. 
N.  "Public rights-of-way" means the surface of and the space above and below each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, paths, lanes alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public property and areas that the City shall permit to be included within this definition from time to time. No reference herein to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit use of the property for the purpose of installing, operating, and maintaining a cable system. A cable operator shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use the property as are properly in the City, in its sole determination, and as the City may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
O.  "Subscriber" means any person who or which lawfully elects to become a recipient of cable service in a manner consistent with the operator's applicable terms of service. 
P.  "Transfer" means any transaction in which (i) the franchise or the rights and obligations held by the operator under the franchise are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons; or (ii) there is a change in the direct or indirect control of the system, the franchise or the operator. The term "control," as used herein, means working control, in whatever manner exercised. By way of illustration, and not limitation, the addition, deletion or other change of any general partner of the operator, or a cable operator of the cable system is such a change of control. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.38 - CABLE TELEVISION-FRANCHISING PROCEDURES 
 
13.38.010 - Franchise Required. 
No person shall establish, construct, operate, or maintain within this City a cable system unless a franchise has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.020 - Granting. 
The City Council may grant 1 or more nonexclusive revocable franchises to establish, construct, operate and maintain cable systems within the City. A franchise shall be effective only upon execution of a franchise agreement between the City and a cable operator and compliance with all requirements of this Code. In the event of any conflict between the express terms of this Title and a franchise agreement, including any amendments to this Title, the terms of such an agreement shall prevail, except with respect to matters falling within the scope of the City's police powers. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.030 - Term of Franchise. 
A franchise shall be granted a term as specified in the franchise agreement, but in any event not greater than 15 years. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.040 - Franchise Characteristics. 
A.  A franchise authorizes use of public rights-of-way for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the operation of a cable system to provide cable service within a franchise area, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize a cable operator to provide service to, or install a cable system on, private property without the owner's consent or to use publicly or privately owned conduits or any public property other than the public rights-of-way without a separate agreement with the owners thereof. 
B.  A franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the cable services regulated by the provisions of this Title and a franchise agreement. 
C.  A franchise is nonexclusive and shall not: explicitly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the City; affect the City's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way or City-owned property by other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as the City deems appropriate; or affect the City's right to itself construct, operate, or maintain a cable system. 
D.  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to (without limitation) the City's use and prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-of-way or public property. 
E.  The City reserves the right to reasonably designate, in accordance with its generally applicable procedures, where a cable operator's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way or on any City-owned property the cable operator is otherwise authorized to use, and to resolve any disputes among users of the public rights-of-way or such City-owned property. 
F.  A franchise authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for the installation and operation of a cable system to provide cable service within a franchise area. The City reserves its rights with respect to the regulation of telecommunications services and facilities, and to the extent allowed by applicable law, reserves the right to adopt a telecommunications ordinance. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.050 - Franchise Applications. 
All applicants for a new franchise shall submit a written application to the City. All applicants shall be expected to offer to subscribers a modern, efficient, cost-effective system that will facilitate high-quality maintenance, deliver a variety of programming and services, and provide the flexibility needed to adjust to changing technology and new developments in the industry. Applicants are encouraged to formulate their proposals in an innovative fashion, so as to meet the informational requirements of the City and the service needs of subscribers. Proposals shall contain sufficient material to enable the City Council to make fully informed judgments concerning the adequacy of the proposal and the applicant's qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the City. All applicants shall, at a minimum, provide the following information unless waived by the City Manager: 
A.  The name, address and form of business of the applicant, and an identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with 5% or more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the persons who exercise working control over the applicant and its affiliates, and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate parent; all officers and directors of the applicant and its affiliates; and any other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named person. 
B.  A description of the cable services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities. 
C.  A description of the transmission facilities that will be used by the cable operator to offer or provide such cable services. 
D.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
1.  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed cable facilities, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed along the plant route, the power sources that will be used, and a description of the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the operation of the same. 
2.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route. 
3.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other cable operators. 
4.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
E.  If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
F.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
1.  The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's cable facilities; and 
2.  The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's cable facilities. 
G.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates. 
H.  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles by a certified public accountant or other accountant satisfactory to the City demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. If in the normal course of its business, the applicant does not prepare a separate financial statement for the cable system, the applicant may submit a combined financial statement for the local region, which statement shall include the cable system. 
I.  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the facilities and services described in the application, including identification of key personnel. 
J.  Information to establish the applicant's legal qualifications, including evidence that it has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide cable service. 
K.  A detailed description of all other services that the applicant intends to provide and sufficient information to determine whether such services are subject to franchising. 
L.  An accurate map showing the location of any existing facilities in the City that applicant intends to use or lease. 
M.  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the City and other public, educational and governmental institutions. 
N.  A description of applicant's access and line extension policies. 
O.  A written description and detailed map of the exact area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area. 
P.  The number of activated, programmed channels that the applicant intends to provide together with the programming that the applicant intends to provide. 
Q.  All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Section 13.38.060 [Application Fee] of this Chapter. 
R.  Such other and further information as may be requested by the City Manager. 
If a franchise is granted to a person who is acting on behalf of another or presenting its qualifications for the benefit of another and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.060 - Application Fee. 
An application fee for a new or renewal franchise or for transfer of a franchise may be required in the amount established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to the extent consistent with applicable law. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.070 - New Franchise Procedure. 
Upon receipt of an application for a new franchise, the City Council may, by resolution, approve or conditionally approve a franchise agreement with the applicant or deny the application. In making any determination hereunder as to any application, the City Council shall give due consideration to: the quality of the service proposed; rates to subscribers; experience, character, background and financial responsibility of the applicant, its management and owners; system design; technical and performance quality of equipment; willingness and ability to meet construction requirements and to abide by franchise limitations and requirements; and other considerations deemed pertinent by the City Council for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.080 - Franchise Renewal Procedure. 
A.  The procedure for franchise renewal shall be in accordance with applicable Federal and State statutes. 
B.  In the absence of any Federal or State statute specifically governing franchise renewal procedures, the following procedure shall apply, to the extent consistent with applicable law. 
1.  At any time between 24 months and 12 months prior to the expiration of a franchise, a cable operator may apply for renewal of its franchise. Such application shall be made under the provisions of Sections 13.38.050 [Franchise Applications] through 13.38.060 [Application Fee]. 
2.  Within 12 months of receipt of a completed application for renewal, the City Council shall hold a public hearing having afforded the operator reasonable notice of such hearing. After this public hearing, the City Council shall grant or deny the application, basing its decision on the following factors: 
a.  The operator's substantial compliance with the material terms of the existing franchise and applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the operator's services to its subscribers, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services provided over the cable system, has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
c.  Present and future cable-related community needs and interests of the operator's current and potential subscribers, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests; 
d.  The operator's financial, legal and technical qualifications to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the operator's proposal; and 
e.  Such additional factors as the City Council considers relevant to the renewal of the franchise. 
3.  In any renewal proceeding, the operator shall be afforded adequate notice and shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation. The operator at its election and expense may have a transcript made of any such proceeding. 
4.  The City Council, after a public hearing, may grant or deny a renewal application based on the criteria set forth in this Section. The Council shall grant or deny such application by resolution and, where the application is denied, the Council shall state the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.090 - Assignment and Transfer. 
The City shall select persons to whom it issues a franchise based upon the unique technical skills and talents of such persons to operate a cable communications system as well as upon such persons relevant experience and financial condition. As such, a franchise is personal to the franchisee and the identity of a franchisee is a material part of the City's decision to issue a franchise. The granting of approval for a transfer in 1 instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.100 - Transfer of Ownership. 
A.  City Council Approval Required. No transfer shall occur unless prior application is made by the operator to the City and the City Council's prior written consent is obtained, pursuant to the operator's franchise agreement and this cable ordinance. Any such transfer without the prior written consent of the City Council shall be considered to impair the City's assurance of due performance, and shall be invalid. The granting of approval for a transfer in 1 instance shall not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. 
1.  Application. An operator shall promptly notify the City Manager of any proposed transfer. If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the City Manager, the operator shall promptly notify the City that such a transfer has occurred. At least 120 calendar days prior to the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the operator shall submit to the City Manager an application for approval of the transfer. Such an application shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details of the legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the new controlling entity or transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the following information shall be included in the application, provided that, the operator is not required to duplicate information that it submits to the City Manager to comply with its obligations under Federal or State law: 
a.  All information and forms required under Federal law; 
b.  All information required by this Title; 
c.  Any contracts or other agreements that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein; and 
d.  Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that discuss the transaction. 
2.  Supplemental Information. The City shall notify an operator of any insufficiency in the information provided in the application within 30 days after receipt thereof. The failure of the City to notify operator of such insufficiency shall result in the application being deemed complete. For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer, the City or its agents may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling entity or transferee and such other matters as the City may deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied, or conditioned as provided under this Chapter. 
Notwithstanding whether the application has been deemed complete, the City may request additional information related to the proposed transaction to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
B.  Determination by City. In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant subject to conditions, an application for a transfer, the City may consider, without limitation, the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the proposed controlling entity or transferee to operate the cable system; whether the operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this Title, and, if not, the proposed controlling entity transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; and whether operation by the proposed controlling entity or transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare of subscribers or the public. 
C.  Transferee's Agreement. No application for a transfer of the franchise shall be granted unless the proposed controlling entity or transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of its franchise agreement and this Title and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous operator under its franchise agreement and this Title, for all purposes, including renewal. 
D.  Approval Does Not Constitute Waiver. Approval by the City Council of a transfer does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under a franchise agreement or this Title, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
E.  Exception for Intra-Company Transfers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a transfer to an affiliate of the franchisee shall be excepted from the requirements of this Section where (i) the affiliate is wholly owned and managed by the same ultimate parent as the transferor; and (ii) the transferee affiliate: 
1.  Notifies the City within 30 days of the transfer and, at that time, provides the agreements and warranties required by this Section, describes the nature of the transfer, and submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect ownership and control of the cable system after the transfer; 
2.  Warrants that it has read, accepts and agrees to be bound by each and every term of the franchise agreement and related amendments, regulations, ordinances and resolutions then in effect; 
3.  Agrees to assume all responsibility for all liabilities, acts and omissions, known and unknown, of its predecessor franchisee(s), for all purposes, including renewal; 
4.  Agrees that the transfer shall not permit it to take any position or exercise any right which could not have been exercised by its predecessor franchisee(s); 
5.  Warrants that the transfer will not substantially increase the financial burdens upon or substantially diminish the financial resources available to the franchisee (the warranty to be based on comparing the burdens upon and resources that will be available to the transferee compared to its predecessors), or otherwise adversely affect the ability of the franchisee to perform; 
6.  Warrants that the transfer will not in any way adversely affect the City or subscribers; 
7.  Notifies the City that the transfer is complete within 5 business days of the date the transfer is completed; and 
8.  Agrees that the transfer in no way affects any evaluation of its legal, financial or technical qualifications that may occur under the franchise or applicable law after the transfer, and does not directly or indirectly authorize any additional transfers. 
F.  The City's consent to a transfer shall be required upon foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system or upon the termination of a lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, and the cable operator shall notify the City. The notification shall be deemed notice of a change in control of the cable operator, which shall require the approval of the City Council. 
G.  The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a transfer following receipt of all required materials within the period required under Federal law, if any, unless an extension is agree to by the City and the cable operator. Conditions of approval by the City Council may include, but are not limited to, the following: (a) resolution of any outstanding franchise violations or performance deficiencies; (b) payment of any outstanding franchise fees; (c) filing of any appropriate bonds, insurance endorsements, letters of credit or guarantees; and (d) written assumption of all obligations of the transferor by the transferee. 
H.  Within 30 days after the date of the resolution approving transfer of the franchise, or within such extended period of time as the City Council in its discretion may authorize, the transferee shall file with the clerk of the City Council its written acceptance of the franchise, in a form satisfactory to the City, together with all required bonds and insurance certificates, and its agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of it by the provisions of this division and the franchise award resolution. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the transferee before a notary public and shall be in a form and content satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. 
I.  Revocation Following Bankruptcy. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, a franchise will automatically terminate by force of law 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding. 
2.  However, the franchise may be reinstated if, within the 120-day period: 
a.  The assignment, receivership or trusteeship is vacated; or 
b.  The assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this Code. 
J.  Revocation Upon Foreclosure. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of franchisee's facilities, equipment, or property, the City may revoke a franchise after a public hearing before the City Council, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale. 
2.  The franchise will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
a.  The City approves the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
b.  The successful bidder agrees with the City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise and applicable law. 
K.  Failure to comply with the requirements of this Section is a material breach of this Title, subject to the remedies provided for herein. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.110 - Unauthorized Operation of Cable System. 
Any person occupying the public rights-of-way of the City for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system, which person does not hold a valid franchise from the City, shall be subject to all provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, those provisions regarding construction, technical standards and franchise fees. The City at any time may require such person to obtain a franchise agreement within 30 days of receipt of a written notice from the City that a franchise agreement is required; require such person to remove its property from the public rights-of-way, and, at such person's sole expense, restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the City within a reasonable time period as the City shall determine; remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and charge the person the costs therefor; and/or take any other action permitted by law, including, but not limited to, filing for and seeking damages for trespass. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by action of the City Council and the franchise terms are set forth in a franchise agreement. If a cable operator operates a cable system without first obtaining a valid franchise from the City, the cable operator shall forfeit to the City all gross revenues from the system for so long as such unauthorized operation continues. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.120 - Acts at Cable Operator's Expense. 
Any act that a cable operator is or may be required to perform under this Chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law shall be performed at the cable operator's expense, unless expressly provided to the contrary in this Title, a franchise agreement, or applicable law. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.130 - Eminent Domain. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the City's rights of eminent domain to the extent to which such rights may apply to any cable system or franchise. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.140 - Annexations. 
Within 30 days after annexation of areas to the City which are served by a cable operator who does not have a franchise from the City, the cable operator shall apply for a new franchise. Pending consideration of such a franchise, the cable operator shall comply with each and every provision of this Chapter, including but not limited to the franchise fee requirement. If a newly annexed area is not actively served by a cable operator, the cable operator(s) serving the area within the City contiguous to the newly annexed area shall provide service to that area within a reasonable time, subject to the provisions of any applicable franchise agreement, provided that the cable operator may request relief from this requirement upon a showing that it would be economically infeasible to extend service to that area. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.150 - Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement. 
Should a joint exercise of powers agreement (Gov. Code, Section 6500 et seq.) or similar agreement be entered between the City and any other jurisdiction in accordance with law providing for the joint regulation of cable operators and cable services or other cooperative arrangements, involved cable operators shall be governed by, and subject to that agreement, pursuant to this Title's provisions, provided that no such joint powers agreement shall impair any right or obligation of the cable operator under a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.160 - Cable Operator Subject to Other Laws, Police Power. 
A.  A cable operator at all times shall be subject to and shall comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, subject to Section 13.38.020 [Granting]. A cable operator at all times shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the City, including but not limited to all rights the City may have under 47 U.S.C. Section 552. Nothing in a franchise agreement shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes, ordinances, policies, rules, regulations, and practices of the City and the City Council, subject to the operator's lawful rights under its franchise agreement. 
B.  No course of dealing between a cable operator and the City, or any delay on the part of the City in exercising any rights hereunder, or any acquiescence by the City in the actions of a cable operator that contravene any of the City's rights (except to the extent such rights are expressly waived by the City in writing), shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the City. 
C.  The City shall have the maximum authority to regulate cable systems, cable operators, and franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible; unless rights are expressly waived in a franchise agreement, they are hereby reserved, whether expressly enumerated or not. 
D.  The City Manager and the City Council may, from time to time, issue such rules and regulations concerning cable systems as are consistent with, or authorized by, applicable law. 
E.  The City Manager and the City Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of their jurisdiction under this Title. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.38.170 - Interpretation of Franchise Terms. 
A.  The provisions of this Title and any franchise agreement shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate the purposes and objectives of this Title and the franchise agreement and to promote the public interest. 
B.  Subject to Federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.42 - CABLE TELEVISION-CITY ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE 
 
13.42.010 - Administration. 
The office of the City Manager is designated as having primary responsibility for the administration of every cable franchise and this Chapter. Whenever a right may be exercised under this Chapter by the City or the City Manager, such right may also be exercised by a designated employee. No such delegation shall be deemed to constitute a delegation of legislative authority. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.020 - Basic Service. 
The lowest priced level of cable service shall be available to all subscribers. No subscriber shall be required to purchase any other service as a prerequisite to purchasing such level of service. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the lowest priced level of service shall include all public, educational and government channels at no extra charge. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.030 - Performance Evaluation Sessions. 
The City and each cable operator shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions to the extent specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.040 - Cable Service to Public Buildings Occupied by Public Agencies. 
A franchise agreement may include provisions regarding installation of service outlets in buildings occupied by public agencies within the franchise area, and provision of service to such facilities, subject to negotiation between the parties and applicable law. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.050 - PEG Channels. 
Subject to negotiation between the parties and applicable law, a franchise agreement may provide that a cable operator shall make available 1 or more dedicated channels on its cable system for purposes of public, educational and governmental access, as set forth in the franchise agreement. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service, to the extent consistent with the applicable franchise agreement. Such channels shall not be used for any advertisements or commercial programming without the permission of the City. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.060 - PEG Facilities. 
A franchise agreement may include provisions regarding facilities, services and equipment for use in relation to public, educational and governmental access. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.070 - Institutional Network. 
A franchise agreement may include provisions regarding construction and use of institutional networks. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.080 - Public Access Usage Management. 
Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City from delegating to an independent nonprofit entity such as a commission or nonprofit corporation the authority to manage all or any part of the City's PEG facilities, programming and/or funds. The commission or nonprofit corporation may be established jointly with neighboring jurisdictions at the City's sole option. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.090 - Leased Access. 
A cable operator shall provide leased access channels as required by Federal law. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.100 - Interconnection. 
A franchise agreement shall contain provisions related to the interconnection of a cable operator's cable system with other cable systems. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.110 - Emergency Override. 
To provide an emergency alert capability, each cable operator shall install and maintain an emergency alert system which allows the City to simultaneously override audio signals and broadcast emergency messages on all television channels, as provided by the terms of its franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.120 - Tree Trimming. 
When trimming trees, a cable operator shall comply with all City regulations applicable to utilities. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.130 - Removal and Abandonment of Cable System. 
In the event that a franchise is terminated or expires without being renewed, or if all or a portion of a cable system is not used for a period of 90 days, the cable operator shall either remove the cable system or the abandoned portion thereof or shall obtain the permission of the Director of Community Development to abandon the cable system in place within 90 days. The cable operator shall obtain an encroachment permit prior to removing the cable system. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.42.140 - Acquisition of Cable System. 
Notwithstanding the granting of a franchise, the City retains the right to acquire the cable system at any time by negotiated sale or eminent domain, and retains the right to resell the cable system to any third party. If the City denies the renewal of a franchise, the City may acquire the cable system at a price not to exceed fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise. If the City revokes a franchise, the City may acquire the cable system at an equitable price. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.46 - CABLE TELEVISION-CUSTOMER SERVICE 
 
13.46.010 - Continuity of Service. 
A.  Subscribers have the right to receive, and a cable operator has the obligation to provide, efficient service, high-quality reception, prompt repairs and service interrupted only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as they have met financial and other obligations to the cable operator. In the event that the cable operator elects to over build, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the City Council gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the cable operator shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. 
B.  Upon the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise, the operator shall, upon request of the City, continue to operate the cable system for a period of time not to exceed 6 months from the date of such expiration, revocation or termination under the terms and conditions of this Title and its franchise agreement and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time, and to retain all revenues received after payment of all costs and expenses arising in the ordinary course of business prior to the expiration, revocation, or termination. 
C.  A cable operator shall forfeit its rights to notice and a hearing, and the City Council may, by resolution, declare its franchise immediately terminated, in addition to any other relief or remedies the City may have under this Title, a franchise agreement, or other applicable law, if: 
1.  The cable operator fails to provide cable service in accordance with its franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area for 96 consecutive hours, unless the City authorizes a longer interruption of service or the failure is due to force majeure, as characterized in a franchise agreement; or 
2.  The cable operator, for any period, willfully, and without cause refuses to provide cable service in accordance with its franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.020 - Nondiscriminatory Services. 
A.  A cable operator shall comply at all times with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations including the terms of its franchise relating to nondiscrimination. 
B.  All of a cable operator's rates and charges shall be published and nondiscriminatory. Except as provided hereunder, a cable operator shall establish rates and charges for all subscribers without regard for race, color, religion, age, sex, marital or economic status, national origin, sexual orientation, political ideology, creed, ancestry; the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap; or geographic location within the cable operator's franchise area (except as permitted by any provision of a franchise agreement related to the length of subscriber drops or line extensions). 
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the temporary reduction or waiving of rates and charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns or discounted rates for provision of cable services to multiple unit buildings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the cable operator may offer service to senior citizens at discounted rates. 
C.  A cable operator shall not deny cable service, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access programmers or any other persons on the basis of type of dwelling unit, race, color, religion, age, sex, marital or economic status, national origin, sexual orientation, political ideology, creed, ancestry; the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap; or geographic location within the franchise area (except as permitted by any provision of a franchise agreement related to the length of subscriber drops or line extensions). 
D.  A cable operator shall not take any retaliatory action against a subscriber because of the subscriber's exercise of any right it may have under Federal, State, or local law, nor may the cable operator require a subscriber to waive such rights as a condition of service. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.030 - Local Office. 
A franchise agreement may require a cable operator to maintain a local business office in a location specified in the franchise agreement which shall be open during the hours specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.040 - Line Extensions. 
A.  The operator shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to pass every dwelling unit in the franchise area, subject to any limitations specified in a franchise agreement. 
B.  Standard line extension policy shall be 150 aerial feet, 125 feet underground. If the aerial or underground connection for service to a subscriber's location (sometimes known as a "drop") requires no more than a 150 foot aerial extension or 125 foot underground extension measured from the nearest street (unless the operator has obtained a waiver from the City), the operator shall provide the connection to its service at no charge for the initial 150 feet or 125 feet, as applicable, other than the operator's standard installation fee. This provision applies only to extensions from cable plant to a dwelling unit. 
C.  In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, a cable operator shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber desiring service in an unserved area, an estimate of the reasonable costs required to extend service to said subscriber, including materials, labor, overhead and private easements, if necessary. A cable operator shall make reasonable efforts to extend service within 4 months upon request of said potential subscriber, who shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with the extension. A cable operator may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the cable operator. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.050 - New Service Requests. 
A.  A cable operator shall provide service to all dwelling units within the City (subject to the limitations on line extensions in the previous section) pursuant to the following requirements. 
B.  In any case in which either no new drop is required, or a new drop is required of no more than the standard underground or above-ground length prescribed by Section 13.46.040 [Line Extensions], as measured from the nearest active or required feeder line along a reasonably direct route, a cable operator shall make cable service available at the standard connection charge within 7 days of receipt of any service request. In any case in which a new drop is required which is longer than the standard underground or above-ground drop length, as applicable, a cable operator shall make cable service available at the standard connection charge within 14 days of receipt of any service request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the service request requires a drop in excess of the standard underground or above-ground drop length, as applicable, a cable operator may charge the business or resident requesting service an additional amount which shall not exceed the actual time and materials cost of the drop in excess of the applicable drop length. 
C.  Upon receiving a request for new service, a cable operator shall make reasonable efforts to promptly acquire all easements or rights of occupancy necessary for extension of service to such resident's home and not already secured by the cable operator. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.060 - System or Individual Outage Complaints. 
A.  Upon receipt of a request for service in the event of the following circumstances (each, a "service request"), the cable operator shall respond as follows: (1) to a system outage within 2 hours; (2) to a service interruption, within 24 hours; and (3) to all other reception problems, by the next working day or as agreed upon by the subscriber and a cable operator. The cable operator shall have available at all times a sufficient number of technicians capable of responding to the foregoing matters within the foregoing time frames. A service interruption is the loss of picture or sound on 1 or more channels. A system outage is a service interruption resulting from a common cause that affects more than 2 subscribers. 
B.  When the nature of a service request described in subsection (A)(1) of this Section requires work at a service location, a cable operator will be deemed to have responded to such service request when a field service representative competent to fix the problem arrives at the service location (which may be some portion of the cable system and not a subscriber's residence) and begins work on the problem. In the case of a response which involves a request for service at a subscriber's residence, if the subscriber is not home when the field service representative arrives, response will be deemed to have taken place if the field service representative leaves notification of arrival and instructions for rescheduling on the subscriber's front door. 
C.  Where a cable operator is unable to respond to a service request within the applicable time period specified in this Section, the cable operator shall make reasonable efforts, within such time period, to notify the complainant of the reason(s) and the estimated time frame for correction, and shall proceed to correct the service request at the earliest possible time. 
D.  A cable operator shall complete repairs and maintenance for system outages and service interruptions within 24 hours, except in extenuating circumstances or as agreed to between the cable operator and the subscriber. Work on all other requests for service, other than installation, shall be completed within 3 days of the initial request. 
E.  The time standards in Section 13.46.050 [New Service Requests] shall be met at least 95% of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.070 - Scheduling Appointments. 
A.  All appointments for service, installations, or disconnection shall be specified by date. With the approval of the subscriber, weekday service calls shall be scheduled as morning or afternoon appointments during specified 4-hour blocks of time. For service calls responding to system or individual outages, holiday and weekend scheduling shall also be available. If the appointment cannot be kept, a cable operator shall make reasonable efforts to promptly notify the subscriber in advance and reschedule the appointment. Under normal operating conditions, a cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
B.  Subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment due to the fault of a cable operator shall receive installation free of charge if the appointment was for installation. The subscriber shall receive a credit against the basic service charge of $20.00, or such other remediation as may be agreed to between the subscriber and the cable operator, if the missed appointment is for a service call. Alternatively, subscribers may pursue their remedies pursuant to Civil Code Section 1722. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.080 - Notification of Service Interruptions. 
Where service interruptions are planned, a cable operator shall notify subscribers and the City at least 48 hours before the anticipated service interruption, provided that no notification shall be required for service interruptions that require less than 2 hours' interruption of service and that also occur between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Notification need not be repeated before each anticipated interruption as long as the initial notification advises of the possibility of repeated interruptions during a specified period not to exceed 1 month. To the extent feasible, the cable operator shall avoid interruptions between 5:00 p.m. and midnight. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.090 - Notification of Service or Channel Changes. 
The cable operator shall provide 30 days' advance written notice to subscribers and the City of any change in channel assignment or in the video programming service provided over any channel, unless this requirement is waived by the City or by operation of Federal or State law, or due to events beyond the reasonable control of the operator. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.100 - Telephone Communication Services. 
A.  Each cable operator shall render efficient telephone communication service, sufficiently staffed by knowledgeable, courteous personnel. 
B.  Customer Service Response. At a minimum, a cable operator shall have on duty a sufficient number of customer service representatives available to handle customer calls during normal business hours. During times not handled by customer service representatives, each system must have a capable answering service for repair requests or service complaints. Answering machines are not acceptable, except for automated response units that are used to process and route calls to on-duty personnel of the cable operator. 
C.  Telephone System Requirements. Each cable operator shall at all times provide a telephone system meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Each cable operator shall maintain a phone system for purposes of promptly responding to telephone calls. Telephone numbers for customer service shall be listed in a local telephone directory. All telephone lines for customer service shall be toll free to subscribers within the franchise area. 
2.  Knowledgeable, qualified customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
3.  Under normal operating conditions, during normal business hours, telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. Those systems which utilize automated answering and distributing equipment shall limit the number of routine rings to 4 or fewer. Systems not utilizing automated equipment shall make every effort to answer incoming calls as promptly as the automated systems. Under normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal less than 3% of the total time that the telephone system is staffed by customer service representatives. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time measured quarterly. 
4.  Each cable operator shall, by means of automatic monitoring equipment, track all customer service telephone calls and prepare quarterly summaries of all calls according to the criteria listed in subsection C of this Section. Such report shall be delivered to the City annually and, in addition, as agreed to in the franchise agreement. 
5.  In cases of major system outages or major service interruption, a cable operator may provide a recorded message informing customers of the problem and a reasonable estimate under the circumstances of the correction time as long as customers are still able to reach a customer service representative. 
6.  In cases where a cable operator's existing telephone system cannot demonstrate compliance with the standards set forth in subsection C or D of this Section, the franchise agreement may specify comparable criteria for the cable operator's telephone system and the time frame for compliance with the standards set forth in this Section. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.110 - Complaint Log. 
The cable operator shall keep a computer log or written record of (1) service calls and complaints which require the dispatch of a service vehicle to respond to the service call or complaint, and (2) calls regarding outages, regardless of whether a service vehicle was dispatched, together with the disposition of all such calls. Records kept in the ordinary course of business shall be available for public inspection by the affected subscriber at the local office of the cable operator during regular office hours such that each subscriber may examine only his or her own records. The log or record shall be available for inspection by the City, in the presence of the affected subscriber, at any time at the local office of the cable operator during regular office hours. Before making a record available for inspection under this Section, the cable operator may require reasonable advance notice, which shall in no event exceed 1 working day. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.120 - Subscriber Test Requests. 
Upon reasonable request or complaint by a subscriber, a cable operator shall, at its sole expense, perform such signal level tests as necessary to establish if a signal of requisite quality is being delivered to the subscriber's premises. The test shall be conducted at the subscriber's receiver and at other such locations deemed necessary by the cable operator, and a copy of the written test results shall be made available to the subscriber upon request. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.130 - Conditions of Service-Subscriber Information. 
Each cable operator shall send or deliver to all new and reconnected subscribers in writing and to all subscribers at least once a year, information concerning the conditions of service, including but not limited to: rates, fees, charges, deposits, refunds of deposits, available levels of service (tiers), payment options, discounts (if any), service call policy, privacy protections and disconnection and reconnection policy. Each cable operator shall provide a copy of such information to the City concurrent with its distribution to the cable operator's subscribers. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.140 - Complaints-Subscriber Information. 
Upon connection or reconnection to the system and at least once a year, a cable operator shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, printed notice on billing statement, or billing insert, furnish to each subscriber information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints to the cable operator or the City, including the name, address and local telephone number of the cable operator and the City. Each cable operator shall provide a copy of such information to the City concurrent with its distribution to the cable operator's subscribers. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.150 - Investigation of Complaints. 
A.  When there have been a significant number of complaints made, or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the City, indicates a problem with the reliability or quality of cable service as required under this Title or in a franchise agreement, the City Council shall have the right and authority to require a cable operator to evaluate the performance, operation or administration of the cable system including without limitation matters relating to customer service. The cable operator shall fully cooperate with the City in performing such evaluation and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall include the following information: 
1.  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the evaluation; 
2.  What system component, operation or service was evaluated; 
3.  The equipment used and procedures employed; 
4.  The method, if any, by which such complaint or problem could be or has been resolved; 
5.  Any other information pertinent to the evaluation which may be required; and 
6.  The City may require that evaluations be supervised, or conducted, by an engineer, accountant or other consultant selected by the City and not on the permanent staff of the cable operator or the City, at the City's cost. The engineer, accountant or other consultant shall sign all records of the evaluation and forward to the City such records with a report interpreting the results of the evaluation and recommending actions to be taken. The City's rights under this Section, shall be limited to evaluating specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints, circumstances or other evidence which cause the City to reasonably believe that evaluation is necessary to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.160 - Noncompliance with Standards. 
In the event of repeated noncompliance with the customer service standards contained in this Chapter, the City may, in addition to pursuing any other civil or criminal remedy, direct the cable operator to take steps to ensure compliance with such standards. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.170 - Billing, Late Fees, Disconnection of Service and Notification of Rate Changes. 
A.  Bills for service shall be on a regular cycle, on a monthly basis. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit voluntary prepayment of services by subscribers, provided that a cable operator shall not be required to offer or accept any discount or other reduction in the amount paid by any subscriber for a voluntary prepayment of services. Each bill shall include a listing of the cable operator's customer service telephone number in a manner that makes such number significantly more prominent than any other telephone numbers listed on the bill. Bills shall not list the City's telephone number in a manner that causes confusion to the public. 
B.  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, level of service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
C.  In case of a billing dispute, a cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
D.  Before itemizing on subscriber bills any fees, taxes, assessments or other items payable to the City the itemization of which is not expressly authorized by State or Federal statute or regulation, a cable operator shall submit a sample bill to the City for review and comment. 
E.  Charges on a bill shall not be deemed delinquent and a subscriber shall not be subject to a late fee, so long as payment is received from the subscriber in a manner consistent with applicable law. 
F.  A cable operator shall only disconnect a subscriber's service for good cause. A cable operator shall not disconnect service for nonpayment until the cable operator has provided the subscriber with notice, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber's bill and separately from that bill or any other standard monthly bill, at least 10 days in advance of the disconnection. The notice shall specify the earliest date the disconnection will occur, the total payment required to avoid disconnection and the telephone number and office hours to contact a customer service representative. In no event shall disconnection for nonpayment occur less than 14 days after the end of any billing period for which charges are delinquent. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.180 - Credits for Outages. 
A.  Except for loss of service beyond the reasonable control of a cable operator, after notification from a subscriber of a service interruption or system outage and following reasonable notice and opportunity to cure, the cable operator shall, upon request, credit the subscriber's account on a pro-rata basis 1/30 th of the subscriber's monthly rate for each day or portion of a day that the system outage service interruption continues. In addition, in cases where, within any 7-day period, there have been more than 6 system outages or service interruptions of 15 minutes or more, the cable operator shall, upon request, credit the subscriber's account for ¼ of the subscriber's monthly rate. Should a system outage or service interruption affect a pay-per-view or other similarly priced per-event service, the subscriber shall, upon request, be credited the charges for such service. 
B.  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a cable operator from giving other credits. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.190 - Refund of Deposits. 
A cable operator shall refund all subscriber deposits within 30 days of termination of service. Any outstanding balance, including any equipment not returned by the subscriber, may be deducted from the deposit. The refund shall be mailed to the subscriber at no expense, or shall be handled as otherwise agreed to by the subscriber. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.200 - Parental Control Lock. 
Each cable operator shall make available to subscribers, upon request, a parental control locking device or digital code that permits inhibiting the video and audio portions of any channels offered by the operator. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.210 - Privacy. 
A cable operator shall comply with all Federal laws in relation to privacy issues. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.46.220 - Unauthorized Connections and Tampering. 
No person, firm or corporation shall make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound. Also no person, without the consent of the owner, shall tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.50 - CABLE TELEVISION-CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
 
13.50.010 - Construction Requirements. 
All construction (including, but not limited to, the initial construction of the cable system and any major rebuild, expansion, replacement, repair or maintenance of the cable system) shall be performed in compliance with this Title and all other provisions of this Code. At least 90 days prior to initiating any major construction (other than routine maintenance or repair, installation of subscriber drops or minor line extensions), a cable operator shall submit a construction plan to the City. For purposes of this Section, "major construction" means a system upgrade, system rebuild, or any work in the public rights-of-way that can be reasonably expected to affect system plant served by 1 or more fiber optic nodes. The construction plan shall include a description of the work, equipment specifications, existing and proposed locations of all facilities, traffic control plans, resident and business notification plans, steps to be taken to ensure compliance with local regulations, and a detailed construction schedule. The City may approve, conditionally approve or deny the construction plan. The City may require the posting of construction bonds. Additional construction requirements may be specified in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.020 - Standards. 
A.  Any construction, rebuild, upgrade, operation, maintenance, and repair of the system shall be in accordance in all material respects with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended; the National Electrical Safety Code and National Electric Code; Obstruction Marking and Lighting, AC 70/7460 i.e., Federal Aviation Administration; Construction, Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structures, Federal Communications Commission Rules, Part 17; and other applicable Federal, State, or local laws and regulations, all as hereafter may be amended or adopted. In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, accepted cable industry practices shall control (except insofar as such practices, if followed, would result in a cable system that could not meet express requirements of Federal, State or local law, or in instances in which such practices are expressly preempted by other standards). Consistent with the foregoing, the City may ensure that work continues to be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, reflecting any changes that may occur over the franchise term. 
B.  A cable operator shall construct, install and maintain its cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All such work shall be performed in close coordination with other public and private utilities following accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines on the same poles. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
C.  A cable operator's cable system within the City shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 76.601, et seq., and any other applicable technical standards. 
D.  Upon reasonable request by the City, based on subscriber complaints or other evidence of noncompliance with a franchise agreement or applicable law, a cable operator shall perform, at its sole cost, all tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of a franchise agreement and other technical and performance standards established by applicable law. Unless a franchise agreement or applicable law provides otherwise, all tests shall be conducted in accordance with Federal rules and in accordance with the most recent edition of the National Cable Television Association's "Recommended Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems," or such other manual as may be directed under FCC regulations. A written report of any test results shall be filed with the City within 7 days of this test. If a location fails to meet technical or performance specifications, the cable operator, without requirement of additional notice or request from the City, shall promptly take corrective action, and retest the locations. Any deficiencies shall be corrected within 30 days of the original test. 
E.  Should the cable operator fail to meet technical or performance tests, the cable operator shall bear all costs associated with the test. Should the cable operator advise the City that testing is not necessary or required to resolve the system performance issue at hand, and the City still insists on testing pursuant to this Section, then the City shall bear the operator's reasonable cost of testing in the event that the cable operator passes the technical or performance test. 
F.  Every system, and all parts thereof, shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection and testing by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this Title, a franchise agreement, and other applicable law. The City shall have the right, upon request, to be notified and to be present when a system is tested by a cable operator, provided that the cable operator need not delay or reschedule testing to accommodate such a request. Each cable operator shall respond to requests for information regarding its system and its plans for the system as the City may from time to time issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for construction, operation, and repair, and the purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated or repaired. 
G.  A cable operator shall comply with all of the same standards and codes, including but not limited to the payment of inspection fees, to construct and maintain its system within private rights-of-way as are required for construction in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.030 - Permits. 
A cable operator shall obtain all necessary permits and pay all generally applicable related fees, including but not limited to permit processing and inspection fees, from the City before commencing any construction, repair, upgrade, rebuild or extension of the system, including the opening or disturbance of any public rights-of-way, on private or public property within the City. The operator shall adhere to all State and local laws and building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation, or maintenance of the system in the City and give due consideration at all times to the aesthetics of the property. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.040 - Placement of Facilities. 
A.  Cable system operators shall follow City requirements for placement of facilities in public rights-of-way or City-owned property including the specific location of facilities in the public rights-of-way or City-owned property, and shall in any event install facilities in a manner that minimizes interference with the use of City-owned property and public rights-of-way by others, including others that may be installing cable systems, other communications facilities, or utilities. The City shall have the right to inspect all facilities being placed underground before they are covered. It shall be a cable operator's responsibility to arrange for inspection of underground facilities by the appropriate City official, and the City shall have the right to require an operator to reopen a trench or other underground installation if any facilities are covered before the City has inspected them. 
B.  Upon order of the City Manager, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans or specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Title, the franchise, or other applicable law, shall be promptly removed by the cable operator at its expense. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.050 - Marking of Facilities. 
Each cable operator that places facilities underground shall be a member of USA and shall field mark the locations of its underground facilities upon request. Throughout the term of a franchise, a cable operator shall locate its facilities for the City at no charge to the City. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.060 - Existing Poles and Conduits. 
To the extent possible, a cable operator shall use existing poles and conduits within the public rights-of-way in installing its cable system. If such poles and conduits are unavailable, then a cable operator shall construct its own wireholding structures within the public rights-of-way, and install its facilities in those structures, provided there is sufficient room for additional structures in the public rights-of-way. Where the public rights-of-way cannot be used, a cable operator shall, to the extent possible, use existing poles and conduits located outside the public rights-of-way, after obtaining any necessary authorizations. In no case may additional poles or other structures be installed in the public rights-of-way or on any public property without the prior permission of the City. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.070 - Notice of Work. 
Work by or on behalf of a cable operator concerning installation, maintenance, replacement or removal of a cable system, or any part thereof, shall be publicized by the cable operator, at its cost, in the manner and at the times the City Manager periodically may direct. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.080 - Use of Public and Private Property. 
A.  Should the grades or lines of the public rights-of-way, whether on City-owned or private property, that a cable operator is authorized to use and occupy be changed at any time during the term of a franchise, the cable operator shall, if necessary, as determined by the City, relocate or change its system, at its own cost and expense, so as to conform with the new grades or lines. 
B.  Any alteration to any water and sewage mains or lines, to any drainage system or to any publicly-owned structures in the public rights-of-way, whether on City-owned property or on private property, which alteration is required on account of the presence of a cable operator's system in the public rights-of-way or on such City-owned property or private property, shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the cable operator. During any work of constructing, operating or maintaining of a system, a cable operator shall, at its own expense, protect all existing structures belonging to the City and any other person. The City may prescribe the manner in which a cable operator shall perform any work performed within the public rights-of-way, whether on City-owned property or on private property. 
C.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise, all system facilities shall be constructed, installed, and located in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and policies, and in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
1.  Poles, underground conduits, ducts or other wireholding structures shall not be installed in the public rights-of-way or on other City property without the written permission of the City, or on private property of any third party without the written permission of the owner. 
2.  Whenever any existing telephone, electric utility, cable system, or other similar facilities are located underground within the public rights-of-way or on City-owned property, a person installing another cable system also shall place its cables and passive electronic facilities underground. 
3.  Whenever any existing telephone, electric utility, or communications facilities are located or relocated underground within the public rights-of-way or on City-owned or private property, cable operators that then occupy the same public rights-of-way, City-owned property or private property shall concurrently relocate their respective cables and passive electronic facilities underground, at their own expense, or in accordance with applicable law or current joint-use practices. 
D.  Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the upgrade, rebuild, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction of a system shall be repaired, replaced and restored, in a good workmanlike, timely manner, to substantially the same condition as immediately prior to the disturbance (including appropriate landscape restoration). All repairs, replacements and restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 30 days after the damage is incurred, and shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible thereafter. The City may require that repairs, replacements and restoration take place in a shorter period of time in situations in which City determines that a dangerous condition exists. The operator shall warrant such repairs, replacements and restoration for at least 3 years against defective materials or workmanship, with the exception of plants installed in the course of restoration. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.090 - Interference with Public Projects-Relocation of Facilities. 
A.  Nothing in this Chapter or any franchise agreement shall be in preference to, or in hindrance of, the right of the City, the City Council or any board, authority, commission or public service corporation to perform or carry on any construction, public works or public improvements of any description. Subject to applicable law, should a cable operator's system in any way interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of any public works or public improvements, the cable operator shall, at its sole cost and expense, protect or relocate its system, or part thereof, as directed by the City, the City Council, the City Manager or any City official, board, authority, or commission. 
B.  If any person that is authorized to place facilities in the public rights-of-way, or on City-owned or private property requests a cable operator to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate its facilities to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of such other person, the cable operator shall, after 7 calendar days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested. If the requested action is necessary to address an emergency that, in the opinion of the City, might affect the public health, safety or welfare, then the cable operator shall take immediate action upon receipt of notice of the request to complete the requested action. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract, a local ordinance, regulation or policy, or a State or Federal law or regulation, or in other cases where the system that is being requested to move was not properly installed, the reasonable cost of the same shall be borne by the party requesting the protection, support, temporary disconnection, removal, or relocation and performed at no charge to the City. 
C.  A cable operator shall, at the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the temporary or permanent moving of buildings, structures, equipment of whatever nature, or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be borne solely by the requesting party, unless otherwise agreed upon by the cable operator and the requesting party. A cable operator shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.50.100 - Other Permits. 
In addition to such permits as may be required by the City, a cable operator shall be required to obtain permits required by any other entity having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.54 - CABLE TELEVISION-ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
13.54.010 - Franchise Fees. 
A.  All cable operators shall pay a franchise fee to the City in an amount equal to 5% of the cable operator's gross revenues. The cable operator shall make franchise fee payments on the first day of each calendar quarter, or at such other times specified in the franchise agreement. Franchise fee payments shall be submitted together with documentation of the cable operator's gross revenues in such form as may be agreed to in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Payment of the franchise fee shall not be considered in the nature of a tax or in lieu of other taxes or fees imposed by the City. 
C.  The franchise fee is in addition to all other taxes, fees and payments that a cable operator may be required to pay under its franchise agreement or any Federal, State, or local law, and to any other tax, fee, or assessment imposed by utilities and cable operators for use of their services, facilities, or equipment, including any applicable amusement taxes and annual license taxes, except to the extent that such fees, taxes, or assessments shall be treated as a franchise fee under Section 622 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 542. 
D.  A cable operator shall not designate the franchise fee as a tax in any communication to a subscriber. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.020 - Fees on Noncable Operator Revenues. 
In consideration of the use of public property, any person other than a cable operator who provides cable service over a cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but which are not received by a cable operator shall pay a fee to the City in an amount equal to 5% of that person's revenues. The cable operator whose cable system is used by such person shall collect the foregoing fee from such person no later than the 10th day prior to the close of each calendar quarter and shall remit the fee to the City no later than the 1st day of the following calendar quarter. If the cable operator fails to collect or remit all or part of this fee, the cable operator shall be directly liable to the City for payment of the uncollected or unremitted fee. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.030 - Audit. 
The City, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within 90 days of the close of the calendar year, certified by an officer of the operator reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments and computations of the franchise fee for the previous calendar year. The City shall have the right to conduct an audit of the operator's books and records reasonably related to the calculation of gross revenues and franchise fees for the audit period not more frequently than once every 3 years, upon 60 days' prior written notice to the operator, and shall provide the City or its designee copies of such books and records, subject to the terms of a mutually satisfactory confidentiality agreement, substantially identical to the form of an agreement to be appended to the operator's franchise agreement. If such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of at least 5%, and such finding is not contested, the operator shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. If there is any underpayment, the operator shall remit to the City all applicable franchise fees. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.040 - Late Payments. 
In the event that the cable operator does not make any payments required by this Code on or before the date due, a late payment penalty shall accrue at a rate of 1-½% per month on the unpaid amount until paid, or such other amount as may be set by applicable law. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.050 - No Accord or Satisfaction. 
No acceptance by or payment to the City of a franchise fee, or any portion thereof, shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums due or for the performance of any other obligation of a cable operator, or as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.060 - Records and Reports. 
A.  Access to Books and Records. 
1.  The City or its designee shall have the right to review, upon reasonable and timely written notice, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at the operator's local office, all books, documents, and records reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the franchise. 
2.  To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the operator shall have the right to designate confidential and proprietary any confidential, proprietary, trade secret and privileged information that may be provided to the City and the City shall thereupon treat such information as privileged from disclosure under the California Public Records Act. The City shall provide the operator with at least 10 business days' advance notice of any request by a third party for disclosure of information designated by the operator as confidential, proprietary, trade secret or privileged. To the extent that any information regarding the local cable system is maintained, either separately or cumulatively with information concerning other cable systems or operations, by the operator or an affiliate, the operator shall make copies of such records available for inspection and auditing at the local office within 7 days after receipt of a written request by the City. 
3.  If any documents, books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a cable operator may request that the inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the City and a cable operator, provided that the cable operator shall pay all travel and additional expenses incurred by the City (above those that would have been incurred had the documents, books and records been produced at the operator's local office) in inspecting those documents, books and records or having those documents, books and records inspected by its designee. 
4.  Without limiting the foregoing, a cable operator shall provide the City with the following within 10 days of receipt or (in the case of documents, books or records created by the cable operator or its affiliate) filing: 
a.  Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the system; and 
b.  Copies of any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by a cable operator, or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the cable operator directly or indirectly. 
c.  Upon reasonable request and limited to matters directly affecting the cable system or the City's authority over the cable system, operator will provide copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by the operator or on behalf of the operator to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other governmental authority having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting the cable system. Copies of responses from any such governmental authority to the operator shall likewise be furnished upon request to the City. 
B.  Reports. A cable operator shall within 90 days of each calendar year end, submit a written end of the year report to the City with respect to the preceding calendar year containing the information required by such operator's franchise agreement. 
C.  Records Required. A cable operator shall at all times maintain: 
1.  Records of all complaints received with information sufficient to allow a cable operator to prepare the reports required in this Section, and the operator's franchise agreement. 
2.  Records of outages known to a cable operator, with information sufficient to allow a cable operator to prepare the reports required in this Section and the operator's franchise agreement. 
3.  Records of service calls for repairs and maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was solved. 
4.  Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension, indicating the date of request, the date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended. 
5.  System financial records prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
D.  Additional Records and Reports. The City may require cable operators to maintain records and to prepare reports relevant to determining a cable operator's compliance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter and a franchise. 
E.  Maps. The operator shall at all times maintain and upon request make available for review by the City: a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the location of the cable system installed or in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. To the extent technically and economically feasible, the operator shall also make records and strand maps available to the City in electronic format compatible with the City's computer system. 
F.  Waiver of Reporting Requirements. The City may, at its discretion, waive in writing the requirement of any particular report specified in this Section. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.070 - Location of Cable Operator's Properties. 
A.  Each cable operator shall at all times make and keep on file in the office of the Community Development Director current, full and complete plans and records to a scale and form approved by the Community Development Director, showing the location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets, alleys and public places in the City. 
B.  Each cable operator shall file with the Community Development Director, on or before the last day of March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to a scale designated by the Community Development Director, showing all cable system equipment installed in streets, alleys and public places of the City during the previous year. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.080 - Insurance. 
A cable operator shall obtain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire term of the franchise, at its own cost and expense and keep in force and effect insurance policies in accordance with the requirements of its franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.090 - Indemnification. 
A.  No franchise or other authorization to use the public rights-of-way, or any independent permission to use City-owned property granted to a cable operator shall be valid or effective until and unless the City obtains adequate indemnity from such cable operator. 
B.  Neither the provisions of this Section nor any damages recovered by the City shall be construed to limit the liability of a cable operator for damages to the City, its elected and appointed officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, agents, and volunteers, and any other person or persons, under the franchise. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.100 - Performance Bond. 
A franchise agreement may require the cable operator to post a performance bond in an amount acceptable to the City to secure the performance of the cable operator's obligations to repair and restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with this Code. A franchise agreement may also require a cable operator to post a separate performance bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement to secure the cable operator's obligations under the franchise agreement and this Title. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.110 - Possessory Interest. 
The granting of a franchise pursuant to this Title may create an interest subject to property taxation pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107 et seq. Each cable operator shall be solely responsible for payment of any such taxes. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.54.120 - Violations. 
A.  Civil and Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Title may be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, as otherwise provided by applicable law. 
B.  Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Title, or who violates any condition of any license or permit issued hereunder, or who breaches any franchise agreement or other agreement with the City may be liable for a civil penalty, as otherwise provided by applicable law. 
C.  Revocation, Reduction of Term, or Forfeiture of Franchise. 
1.  The City shall have the right to revoke the franchise for any material violation of a franchise agreement. 
2.  Notice of Violation or Default. In the event the City believes that a cable operator has not complied with a material term of the franchise, it shall notify the operator in writing with specific details regarding the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance or default. No opportunity to cure is required for fraud. 
3.  Operator's Right to Cure or Respond. The operator shall have 90 days from the receipt of the City's written notice: (A) to respond to the City, contesting the assertion of noncompliance or default; or (B) to cure such default; or (C) in the event that, by nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the 90-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the City of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
4.  Public Hearings. In the event the operator fails to respond to the City's notice or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 90 days or the date projected by the operator, the City may give the operator written notice of its intent to revoke the franchise, stating its reasons. Prior to revoking the franchise, the City shall schedule a public hearing, on at least 30 calendar days' notice, at which time the operator and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing, the City may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the information presented at the hearing, and other information of record, or, where applicable, grant additional time to the operator to effect any cure. If the City determines to revoke the franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the operator. 
5.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may declare a franchise forfeited where the cable operator (i) fails to begin to exercise its rights under the franchise within a period specified in the franchise agreement; (ii) transfers the franchise in a manner inconsistent with the terms of this Title or the franchise agreement; (iii) fails to pay the fees owed hereunder; or (iv) defrauds or attempts to defraud the City or its customers. 
6.  Upon revocation, final denial of renewal pursuant to Federal law, or forfeiture of a franchise, a cable operator shall be obligated to cease using its system for the purposes authorized by the franchise. The City may (i) purchase the cable operator's facilities at a price established in accordance with 47 U.S.C. Section 547, (ii) effect a transfer of the cable operator's facilities to another person at such a price; or (iii) require the cable operator or its surety to remove some or all of the cable operator's facilities from the public rights-of-way or City-owned property and to restore the public rights-of-way and City-owned property to their proper condition. Notwithstanding anything in this Title to the contrary, should a cable operator fail, refuse, or neglect to remove such facility, the City may remove the facility at the expense of the cable operator. Regardless of the existence or amount of any security fund or performance bond, the obligation of a cable operator to remove shall survive the termination of the franchise. This provision does not authorize the City to purchase, effect a transfer of, or require a cable operator to remove, any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the cable operator holds a valid franchise issued by the City Council. 
D.  Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed nonexclusive, cumulative remedies and in addition to any other remedy the City may have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.58 - CABLE TELEVISION—RATE REGULATION 
 
13.58.010 - Authority. 
The City reserves all of its rights under applicable law regarding the regulation of the rates charged by cable operators. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
13.58.020 - Notice of Rate Increases. 
No later than 30 days prior to the effective date of any proposed increase in rates, the cable operator shall notify its subscribers of its proposed rates by mailing such notice to all subscribers, either separately or in conjunction with bills or other notices sent to subscribers. 
(Ord. 1330 C.S. § 1 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 13.62 - REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDERS 
 
13.62.010 - Purpose and Authority. 
This Chapter implements the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (the "Act"; AB2987), as set forth at Public Utilities Code Section 5800 and following. The Act creates a process for the state, rather than local cities and counties, to grant video service franchises. It will be administered by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). Under the Act, some authority is retained by local cities and counties, and the purpose of this Chapter is to implement that local authority in the City. 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
13.62.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The terms "video service," "video franchise" and "holder" shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in CPUC Section 5830. 
B.  "Gross revenue" has the meaning set forth in CPUC Section 5860(d). 
C.  Terms not defined here shall have the same meaning as established in (in order of priority): (1) the CPUC; (2) commission rules implementing the CPUC; and (3) Title 47 United States Code Title VI. 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
13.62.030 - State Video Franchise Applications. 
A.  Copy of Application to City. An applicant for a state video franchise within the City must concurrently provide a complete copy to the City Manager of any application or amendments to an application filed with the CPUC (CPUC Section 5840(n)). 
B.  City Manager Comments to CPUC. Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the CPUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
13.62.040 - State Video Franchise and PEG Fees. 
A.  Franchise Fee. For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City, there shall be a fee paid to the City equal to 5% of the gross revenues derived from the operation of its franchise within the City (CPUC Section 5840(q)). A state video franchise holder shall pay the franchise fee to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
B.  PEG Fees. 
1.  Current Fees. Any state video franchise holder operating within the City shall pay a PEG fee to the City in an amount equal to the existing unsatisfied obligations of the incumbent operator's franchise. 
2.  Fee to Take Effect Upon Expiration of Incumbent Operator's Franchise. Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall, upon the expiration of the incumbent operator's franchise, pay a PEG fee to the City equal to 1% of the gross revenues derived from the operation of its franchise within the City. A state video franchise holder shall pay the PEG fee to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The City will use the receipts of the PEG fee for purposes consistent with state and federal law (CPUC Section 5870(n)). 
C.  Authority to Examine Records. The City Manager may examine the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with this Section. The City may conduct such an examination not more than once each year (CPUC Section 5860(i)). 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
13.62.045 - Reauthorization of Ordinance Establishing PEG Fees. 
A.  In accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), Ordinance Number 1347 establishing PEG fees is hereby reauthorized as to any state franchise which has expired as of the effective date of this ordinance, or will expire at any time thereafter. 
B.  Nothing in this Section shall amend, alter, supersede, modify, or supplant any of the provisions of Section 13.62.040, nor shall it apply if the reauthorization procedure in Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n) is not applicable to Ordinance Number 1347. 
(Ord. No. 1403 C.S. , § 1, 3-15-2017)  
13.62.050 - Customer Service Penalties. 
A.  Compliance with Customer Service and Protection Standards. The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service in the City (CPUC Section 5900(a) and (b)). 
B.  City Monitoring; Notice of Violation; Penalties. The City Manager shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following City penalties: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation (CPUC Section 5900(c) and (d)). 
C.  Appeal. A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall set the matter for hearing, and hear all evidence and relevant testimony. The City Council may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty is final. 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.)  
13.62.060 - Public Rights-of-Way. 
A.  A state video franchise holder is required to obtain an encroachment permit from the City in accordance with Title 12, Real Property, Section 1, Chapters 12.04—12.20 of the Martinez Municipal Code before constructing, operating, maintaining, or repairing its facilities within the public right-of-way. 
B.  The City shall either approve or deny an encroachment permit application within 60 days of receiving a completed application. An application is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (Pub. Res. Code Section 21000 and following). 
C.  If the City denies the encroachment permit, it shall provide the applicant with a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. A determination regarding the encroachment permit by the Assistant City Manager—Community and Economic Development, may be appealed (CPUC Sections 5830(o), 5840(e) and 5885(c)). 
(Ord. 1347 C.S. § 1 (part), 2008.) 
TITLE 13 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding sewers generally, see Gov. Code § 38900 et seq. 
2.  For statutory provisions regarding underground utilities, see Sts. § Hwy. Code § 5896.1 et seq.; for provisions on subdivisions, see Title 21; for provisions on zoning, see Title 22. 
3.  Ord. No. 1387 C.S. , § 2, adopted August 8, 2015, adopted provisions pertaining to water supply and interruption of service. The inclusion as §§ 13.07.010—13.07.070 was at the discretion of the editor. 
4.  Reference to Appendix A at the end of Section 14 applies to City's Water System Regulations, a copy of which can be found at the office of the City Clerk. 
Issued: 5/94  
TITLE 14 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 14.04 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS 
 
14.04.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this ordinance are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.020 - Definition. 
As used in this ordinance, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.030 - Disaster Council Membership. 
The Martinez Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The Mayor, who shall be Chairman. 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Vice Chairman. 
C.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current Emergency Plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this ordinance. 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.040 - Disaster Council Powers and Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Martinez Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairman or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice Chairman. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.050 - Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
B.  There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.060 - Powers and Duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  The Director or Assistant Director is hereby empowered to: 
1.  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this ordinance. 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
5.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director is hereby empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers; 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as Chief of Police all of the special powers conferred upon him by this ordinance or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council. 
C.  The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.070 - Emergency Organization. 
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 14.04.060 of this ordinance, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II, 1993)  
14.04.080 - Emergency Plan. 
The Martinez Disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Martinez Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II , 1993)  
14.04.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1204 C.S. § II , 1993)  
14.04.100 - Punishment of Violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this ordinance. 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. 
(Ord.  1204 C.S. § II, 1993) 
TITLE 14 FOOTNOTES 
1.  Original Ordinance No. 1214 C.S. designated Sections 14.04.110 - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances and Resolutions, 14.04.120 - Effective Date and 14.04.130 - Severability. These sections have been deleted for codification purposes. 
ISSUED: 2/94  
TITLE 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 15.02 - BUILDING OFFICIAL 
 
15.02.010 - Building Official Designated. 
The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall be designated as the Building Official for the purpose of enforcing all codes and regulations contained within or adopted by this Title. 
(Ord. 1341 C.S. § I, 2007: Ord. 1228 C.S. § I, 1995; Ord. 1170 C.S. § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
15.02.020 - Design Review and Zoning. 
No permit or approval shall be issued which does not conform to all applicable provisions of Chapter 8.50, this Title and Title 22, including Design Review. 
The determination of conformance with Title 22 shall be made by the Community Development Director or designated staff member of the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 1353, § 2, 7-15-09; Ord. 1170 C.S. § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
CHAPTER 15.04 - BUILDING CODE [1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— For provisions on building in flood hazard areas, see Chapter 2138; for building security regulations, see Chapter l544. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption of the California Building Code. 
The City hereby adopts by reference the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, also known as Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates a California version of the 2015 International Building Code published by the International Code Council with the amendments set forth in this chapter and excluding all appendices with the exception of the following: Appendix J as amended herein. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.020 - Section 115 Amended—Stop Work Orders. 
Section 115 of the California Building Code is hereby removed and replaced to read as follows: 
Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to, respectively, the provisions of this Code or any provision of the Martinez Municipal Code, or any condition imposed by the City on a permit or approval issued or granted under the Martinez Municipal Code, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. Such orders may also be served by the Chief of Police. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order except such work as that person has been directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Title 1 of the Martinez Municipal Code or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.030 - Section 114 Amended—Violations and Penalties. 
Section 114.4 of the California Building Code is hereby removed and replaced to read as follows: 
114.4. Violation Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth by Section 15.04.200 of Chapter 15.04 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.035 - Section 105.2 Amended—Exempted Work. 
Section 105.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to remove and replace Building category exceptions 1 through 13 with the following: 
105.2 Exempted Work. A building permit will not be required for the following: 
A.  One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the projected roof area does not exceed 100 square feet and 6 feet, 6 inches, in height. 
B.  Fences not over 6 feet in height when in compliance with other applicable codes. 
C.  Cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches high. 
D.  Retaining walls not over 3 feet in height measured from grade to top of cut or fill unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III liquids. 
E.  Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 18 inches above grade and not over any basement or story below. 
F.  Painting, papering and similar finish work. 
G.  Temporary motion picture, television, and theatre stage sets and scenery. 
H.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R, Division 3, and Group M occupancies when projecting not more than 1/3 the distance to a property line, providing the projection does not exceed 54 inches. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.040 - Section 105.3 Amended—Application. 
Section 105.3 of the California Building code is here by amended to add the following after (7): 
8.  The plans shall include 2 copies of the site plan with the location of all existing trees as defined in Section 8.12.020 of the Martinez Municipal Code, in addition to the location of proposed structures, existing structures, proposed improvements, easements and such other information that may be required by the Building Official. The plot plan shall show the location of existing curbs, sidewalks, public sewers, public conduits, waterways and culverts on or affecting the property, and any rights-of-way, existing easements or proposed easements required in connection therewith. 
The site plan shall be reviewed by the City Engineer for required public improvements and when the plans include such improvements they shall comply with City standards. Four copies of the site plan, with contours, are required where improvements and/or grading is necessary. 
Public improvements as used in this section shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Improvements required for general access by the public (e.g., parking lots, common driveways, private streets, etc.) 
B.  Improvements required for access by police, fire, ambulance and/or other emergency vehicles. 
C.  Improvements required for the public health, safety and welfare of those occupying or using the proposed construction (e.g. storm drains, drainage ditches, guardrails, fences, etc.) 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.045 - Permit Fees—Amend Section 109. 
Section 109.2 of the California Building Code is hereby removed and replaced to read as follows: 
Permit fees for work regulated by this Chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.150 - Appendix Chapter J Amended—Excavation and Grading. 
Appendix Chapter J-Excavation and Grading, shall be amended in the manner described below: 
A.  Section J103.2 further amend by adding a new paragraph 8 as follows: 
8.  Grading of streets in subdivisions for which improvement plans have been approved by the City Engineer when such grading is being inspected by the City Engineering Department. 
B.  Section J102—Amend by adding the following definition in proper sequence: 
Building Official. For the purpose of this chapter this title shall be the Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
C.  Section J104.2—Amend by deleting entire section and substituting the following in place thereof: 
Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by four sets of plans 24 inches x 36 inches in size prepared at a scale of 1 in. = 40 feet or greater. The plans shall be accompanied by specifications and supporting data consisting of a soils report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer when required by the Building Official. Upon approval, three sets of the approved corrected plans shall be submitted to the City for use during the course of the work. 
At the completion of work and prior to release of the permit by the City, one reproducible set and one set of prints shall be submitted to the Building Official. The plans shall be designated 'As Built' and shall include any changes from the approved plan made during the course of work. The 'As Built' plans shall be signed and dated by the Civil Engineer and Soils Engineer. 
D.  Section J102.1—Amend by deleting the entire section and substitute the following in place thereof: 
a)  Plan review and permit fees for work regulated by this chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
b)  Separate plan review and permit fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. 
E.  Section J105.2.1—Amend by adding a new Subsection J105.2.1 to the end of the section as follows: 
Pad  Certification. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, as specified in this code, the Civil Engineer shall certify, in writing, that pad elevations are in conformance with the approved grading plans and the rough lot will drain according to drainage patterns specified on the plan. 
The area of the pad within the foundation of the proposed structure shall be certified by the Civil Engineer to be within 0.1 feet (±) of the pad elevation specified on the approved grading plan. 
The engineer's certification shall state that in his opinion finish lot grading may be done to provide positive drainage away from the foundation and to approved drainage facilities (curb underdrains, lined ditches, etc.) as specified on the approved grading plan. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.155 - Site Development Permit. 
A site development permit shall be required for each single parcel residential and non-residential development for the plan checking and inspection of all non-building site improvements including grading, drainage, streets, driveways, parking lots, walkways, and other related improvements. The site development permit shall serve as a grading permit and permit for all other non-building on-site improvements. An encroachment permit for improvements within the public rights-of-way is still required. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.165 - Section J110 Amended—Erosion Control. 
Section J110 of the Appendix Chapter J Excavation and Grading is hereby amended to delete the entire section and substitute the following in place thereof: 
A.  Title and Purpose. This ordinance shall be known as the "Erosion Control Ordinance." The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and procedures to protect the public interest by managing construction practice of land excavation, fill, storage and grading. 
B.  Erosion Control Measures—Required. Erosion control measures are required prior to commencing work under any of the following conditions: 
1.  The area of land disturbed exceeds one-half acre; 
2.  Natural and finished slopes exceed 10% and area of land disturbed exceeds 3,000 square feet. 
3.  Volume of soil stored exceeds 200 cubic yards. 
C.  Work Not Requiring Erosion Control Measures. Erosion control measures will not be required for: 
1.  Routine maintenance work; 
2.  Work specifically determined by the City Engineer which meets the intent of this erosion control ordinance. 
D.  Permit—Application. Erosion mitigation measures shall be a requirement of the grading permit. The plans submitted with the application for a grading permit shall include erosion mitigation measures and may include or be accompanied by all or part of the following items as required by the City Engineer: 
1.  Site plan; 
2.  Grading plan; 
3.  Erosion control plan; 
4.  Soil engineer's report on erosion potential due to wind or water runoff and mitigation measures; 
5.  Contractor's name and emergency phone number; 
6.  Checking and inspection fees; 
7.  Security bonds or deposits; 
8.  Work schedule. 
If Erosion Control Plans prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer have not been submitted to the City for review by September 1, the City may have plans prepared and the cost shall be deducted from the deposit. The deposit, or any unexpended portions, shall remain with the City until release of the bond for the Grading Permit or acceptance of the improvements by the City, whichever occurs later. 
E.  Security for Erosion Control Measures. At the time of issuance of an Encroachment Permit, Grading Permit, Site Development Permit, or other approval to commence work by the City, an additional cash deposit shall also be required to guarantee installation of erosion control measures, cleanup of siltation, dust, and debris from the project site onto public and private property, repair of public improvements damaged by activity, installation of emergency measures to protect public health and safety, and continuing maintenance of erosion control facilities during the period from October 15 through April 15. The required deposit may be used at the discretion of the City. The required amount of the deposit shall be set forth in the development agreement or permit. The applicant shall maintain the deposit at the required amount at all times as specified in the Agreement or Permit. 
At acceptance of improvements or final approval of the work covered by the permit, whichever comes later, all unexpended funds of the applicant's cleanup deposit shall be refunded. 
In the event it is necessary for the City to use any portion of the cleanup deposit, the applicant will be billed by the City for the costs of the required corrective work and administrative costs incurred for City staff time. The applicant shall deposit the required amount to bring the deposit to its specified level within ten days of notification by the City. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be cause for issuance of a Stop Work Order on the project or not granting final approvals and additional permits. 
This deposit shall be required for all grading permits, site development permits, subdivision improvement agreements or for other work as required by the City. 
F.  Standards. The minimum Erosion Control Standards shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall include the following: 
1.  Wind Related Erosion. 
a.  Temporary erosion control measures shall be part of the grading plan. 
b.  Temporary erosion control measures shall be maintained pending the installation of permanent erosion control. 
c.  Planting for permanent erosion control shall be established by October 1, or mitigation for water related erosion implemented as specified below. 
2.  Water Related Erosion. 
a.  Period when erosion control measure is in effect is October 15 to April 15; 
b.  Erosion control design shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall meet the approval of the City Engineer; 
c.  Erosion control standard plans and design criteria on file with the City Engineer are to be used as guidelines by the Engineer; 
d.  Two sets of erosion control plans shall be submitted by September 1 for review by the City Engineer. 
G.  Violation. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to: 
1.  Perform work without a permit; 
2.  Perform work without an approved plan; 
3.  Continue to work in violation of a stop work order. 
H.  Enforcement. Any violation of this ordinance shall be a public nuisance and a misdemeanor which may be punishable by imposing a maximum fine of $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for up to six (6) months for each such violation. 
I.  Permit—Inspection. City Engineer is authorized to inspect and initiate enforcement procedures as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.170 - Minimum Building Permit Valuation Basis. 
The following shall apply to any work that is subject to the provisions of this Chapter: 
A.  The minimum valuation basis to be used in computing permit fees shall be such as are fixed from time to time by resolution of City Council. 
B.  Building permit fees shall be based on the above-mentioned minimum valuation schedule or the actual value, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.180 - Moved Buildings. 
The following shall apply to any work that is subject to the provisions of this Chapter: 
Buildings or structures proposed to be moved within the City limits shall be inspected by the Building Department prior to moving and issuance of permits. Fees for such inspections shall be such as fixed by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.190 - Section 101.2 Amendment. 
Section 101.2 (Scope) is hereby amended to remove the paragraph entitled "Exception" in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.200 - Penalty for Violation. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or Chapter 15.44 or any order made hereunder, or the provisions of any permit issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. Nothing in this section is intended to be the exclusive remedy for any violation of this Chapter, Chapter 15.05, or Chapter 15.44, or any order or permit issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.210 - Appeals Board. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated by any of the provisions of the California Building Code, the Appeals Board for any appeal that may be made under this Chapter is hereby designated to be the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.220 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Building Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.230 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
15.04.240 - Unsafe and Substandard Buildings. 
A.  No person may occupy, inhabit, reside or remain within, any building or structure that has been determined by the Building Official to be unsafe pursuant to Section 116 of the California Building Code and posted in compliance with that section. 
B.  No person may occupy, inhabit, reside or remain within, any building or structure that constitutes a substandard building as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, as it may be amended from time to time, after such building or structure has been designated a substandard building and a notice to vacate has been issued in accordance with the provisions of the State Housing Law (Part 1.5 of Division 13, commencing with Section 17910, of the Health and Safety Code). 
C.  Nothing in this Section shall prevent the Building Official from authorizing any repairs, alterations, or corrections necessary to remove or abate the conditions that have been determined to be unsafe or that constitute a substandard building under this Section. Any person acting in accordance with such authority shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.05 - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
15.05.010 - Adoption of the California Residential Code. 
There is adopted by reference the 2016 Edition of the California Residential Code, which incorporates a California version of the 2013 Edition of the International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council, also known as Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, with amendments set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 2(Exh. B), 11-16-2016)  
15.05.020 - Applicability. 
Division 1, Chapter II of the California Residential Code shall be excluded from this Chapter. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the California Residential Code, the provisions of Chapter 15.04 shall be applied to any work subject to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 2(Exh. B), 11-16-2016)  
15.05.030 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Residential Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 2(Exh. B), 11-16-2016)  
15.05.040 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this Chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 2(Exh. B), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.06 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, adopted April 3, 2013, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.06, §§ 15.06.010—15.06.170, and adding a new Ch. 15.06. Former Ch. 15.06 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1318 C.S. of 2005. 
Prior ordinance history— Ord. 1227. 
 
15.06.010 - Intent and Purpose. 
A.  The intent of this Chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality in the City of Martinez's watercourses pursuant to, and consistent with the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.). 
B.  This Chapter also carries out the conditions in the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit that require implementation of appropriate source control and site design measures and stormwater treatment measures for development projects. 
C.  It is the purpose of the City Council in enacting this Chapter to protect the health, safety and general welfare of Martinez's citizens by: 
1.  Minimizing non-stormwater discharges, whose pollutants would otherwise degrade the water quality of local streams, to the stormwater system. 
2.  Minimizing increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development that would otherwise degrade local water quality. 
3.  Controlling the discharge to the City's stormwater system from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater. 
4.  Reducing stormwater runoff rates and volumes and nonpoint source pollution whenever possible, through stormwater management controls and ensuring that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall be as defined herein. Words and phrases in this Chapter and not otherwise defined shall be interpreted as defined in the regulations issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to implement the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act, and as defined by the State Water Resources Control Board to implement the Porter-Cologne Act: 
A.  Best management practices or BMP are structural devices, measures, stormwater management facilities, activities, prohibitions, or practices; general good housekeeping, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands. 
B.  City's NPDES permit shall mean the NPDES permit issued to the City of Martinez, Permit No. CAS612008 and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit. 
C.  Development runoff requirements shall mean the provisions in the City's NPDES permit that contain performance standards to address both the construction and post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality. 
D.  Director shall mean the City Manager of the City of Martinez or his or her designee. 
E.  Enforcement officer or Officer shall mean those individuals designated by the Director to act as authorized enforcement officers. 
F.  Guidebook shall mean the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3. Guidebook. 
G.  Non-stormwater discharge is any addition of any pollutant to the City's stormwater system, except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit, or discharges further exempted in Section 15.06.060 C. and D. of this Chapter. 
H.  Pollutant shall mean any material other than stormwater including, but not limited to, petroleum products or by-products, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, sewage sludge, heat, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into the water or stormwater system. 
I.  Premises shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation, (including a building's grounds or other appurtenances), and adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
J.  Responsible person shall mean the owner or occupant of any premises or who engages in any activity from which there is or may be a non-stormwater discharge or any person who releases pollutants to the City's stormwater system. 
K.  Stormwater shall mean flow on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation. 
L.  Stormwater control plan shall mean a plan that meets those criteria contained in the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3. Guidebook. 
M.  Stormwater management facility shall mean any device that utilizes detention, retention, filtration, harvest for reuse, evapotranspiration or infiltration to provide treatment (and/or control volume, flows, and durations) of stormwater for purposes of compliance with development runoff requirements. 
N.  Stormwater operation and maintenance plan shall mean a detailed plan that incorporates requirements for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater control management facilities that meets those criteria contained in Chapter 6 of the most recent version on the Contra Cost Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3 Guidebook. 
O.  Stormwater system is that system of facilities by which stormwater may be conveyed to any stream, watercourse, other body of water or wetlands, including flood control channels, any roads with drainage systems, City streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, improved channels, storm drains or storm drain system, which are not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works ("POTW") as that term is defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.030 - Responsibility for Administration. 
The Director or his or her designee shall administer this Chapter for the City. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.040 - Construction and Application. 
This Chapter shall be construed consistent with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and amendments thereto or applicable implementing regulations and the City's NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.050 - Stormwater Control Plan Required. 
A.  In accordance with thresholds and effective dates in the City's NPDES Permit, every application for a development project, including but not limited to a rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variance, site development permit, design review, or building permit that is subject to the development runoff requirements in the City's NPDES permit shall be accompanied by a stormwater control plan that meets the criteria in the most recent version of the Contra Costa Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3 Guidebook. 
B.  Implementation of an approved stormwater control plan and submittal of an approved stormwater control operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a project subject to this Section. 
C.  All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the Guidebook. 
D.  All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the Guidebook and the approved stormwater control operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the stormwater control operation and maintenance plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facility at least annually. The stormwater operation and maintenance plan shall also describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to maintain a stormwater management facility in accordance with this Chapter or the plan, the City may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Sections 15.06.170 and 15.06.180. 
E.  Easements or recorded covenants for access to stormwater management facilities for inspections and maintenance, shall be provided by the property owner for access by the City, the Contra Costa Mosquito and Vector Control District, and the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.060 - Prohibited Discharges. 
A.  The release of non-stormwater discharges to the City stormwater system is prohibited. 
B.  The discharge of stormwater from premises or an activity that causes or contributes to a violation of receiving water limitations in the City's NPDES permit is prohibited. 
C.  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A above: 
1.  Any discharge in compliance with a NPDES permit issued to the discharger. 
2.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flows, flows from natural springs, rising ground waters, uncontaminated and unpolluted groundwater infiltration, single-family homes' pumped groundwater, foundation drains, and water from crawl space pumps and footing drains, and pumped groundwater from drinking water aquifers. 
D.  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A above, if and only if, the discharges are in accordance with conditions including but not limited to specific conditions for each type of discharge set forth in Section C.15 of the City's NPDES permit: pumped groundwater from non-drinking-water aquifers; pumped groundwater from other sources, foundation drains, and water from crawl space pumps and footing drains; air conditioning condensate; planned discharges from routine operation and maintenance activities in the potable water distribution system; unplanned discharges from breaks, leaks, overflows, fire hydrant shearing, or emergency flushing of the potable water distribution system; emergency discharges of the potable water distribution system as a result of firefighting, unauthorized hydrant openings, or natural or man-made disasters; individual residential car washing; swimming pool, hot tub, spa, and fountain water discharges, and discharges from irrigation water, landscape irrigation, and lawn or garden watering. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.070 - Discharges in Violation of NPDES Permit. 
Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the City's NPDES permit either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.080 - Unlawful Discharge and Unlawful Connections. 
A.  It is unlawful to establish, use, maintain or continue unauthorized drainage connections to the City's stormwater system, and to commence or continue any unauthorized discharges to the City's stormwater system. 
B.  No discharge shall cause the following conditions, create a nuisance, or adversely affect beneficial uses of waters of the State: 
1.  floating, suspended or deposited macroscopic matter or foam; 
2.  bottom deposits or aquatic growth; 
3.  alterations of temperature, sediment load, nutrient load, or dissolved oxygen, which cause significant adverse impacts to native aquatic biota; 
4.  visible, floating, suspended or deposited oil or products of petroleum origin; or 
5.  substances present in concentrations or quantities which cause deleterious effects on aquatic biota, wildlife or waterfowl, or which render any of these unfit for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.090 - Best Management Practices and Standards. 
A.  Generally. Any person owning or operating premises that may contribute pollutants to the City's stormwater system shall undertake best management practices to reduce the potential for pollutants entering the system to the maximum extent practicable. Examples of such premises include, but are not limited to, parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, and other commercial enterprises. Examples of best management practices include, but are not limited to, those described in publications by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the California Water Boards, the California Stormwater Quality Association, the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, the Contra Costa Clean Water Program, and, the City of Martinez. 
B.  Litter. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or other litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, business place, creek, stormwater system, fountain, pool, lake, stream, river or any other body of water, or upon any public or private parcel of land so that the same might become a pollutant, except in containers or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities. 
C.  Sidewalks. The occupant or tenant of, or in the absence of an occupant or tenant, the owner or proprietor of any real property in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained as required for the disposal of solid waste. This section constitutes an alternative procedure and shall not limit or restrict the City from the civil, criminal or administrative enforcement of this or other city ordinances in any other manner provided by law. 
D.  Maintenance of Facilities and Landscaped Areas. Best Management Practices shall be implemented to minimize the release of pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides, and other related materials used to maintain landscaping and facilities. 
E.  Parking Lots, Paved Areas and Related Stormwater Systems. Persons owning, operating or maintaining a paved parking lot, the paved areas of a gasoline station, a paved private street or road, and related stormwater systems shall clean those premises as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in the discharge of pollutants to the City's stormwater system. Upon a determination by the Director that a discharge of pollutants to the City's stormwater system is likely to occur based upon the condition or use of such paved areas, the Director may require installation and maintenance of devices or facilities to prevent the discharge of trash or other pollutants from private parking lots, streets, roads, and drainage facilities into the storm drain system. The Director shall provide written notice of such determination and requirement for the installation of devices or facilities to the persons owning, operating or maintaining such paved area. Failure or refusal to comply with such requirement is prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
F.  Construction Activities. All construction projects shall incorporate site-specific BMPs, which can be a combination of BMPs from the California BMP Handbook, Construction, January 2003, the Caltrans Stormwater Quality Handbooks, Construction Site Best Management Practices Manual, Manual, March 2003, the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board Erosion and Sediment Control Field Manual, 2002, the City's grading and erosion control ordinance and other generally accepted engineering practices for erosion control as required by the Director. The Director may establish controls on the rate, volume, and duration of stormwater runoff from new developments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. Such controls shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval or permit conditions for the new development. 
G.  Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits. Each discharger associated with construction activity or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region, shall provide the Director with the notice of intent, comply with and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such dischargers. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by the permit. 
H.  Development Runoff Requirements. For each new development project subject to the development runoff requirements, every applicant will submit a stormwater control plan and implement conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of treatment measures and other appropriate source control and site design measures. Similarly, increases in runoff volume, flows, and durations shall be managed in accordance with the development runoff requirements "that meets the requirements of the conditions of approval and those criteria contained in the most recent version of the Contra Cost Clean Water Program Stormwater C.3 Guidebook." 
I.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The Director may require any business or utility in the City that is engaged in activities that may result in non-stormwater discharges or runoff pollutants to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading, fueling, vehicle maintenance, food handling or processing, or cleanup procedures, carried out partially or wholly out of doors. The Director shall provide written notice of the requirement for such plan to such building or utility. Failure or refusal to comply with such requirement is prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
J.  Coordination with Hazardous Material Release Response and Inventory Plans. Any business subject to the Hazardous Material Release Response and Inventory Plan, Division 20, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with section 25500), shall include, in that Plan, provision for compliance with this Chapter, including the prohibitions of non-stormwater discharges and the requirement to reduce release of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.100 - Authority to Inspect. 
A.  Generally. Routine or scheduled inspections shall be based upon as reasonable a selection process as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, evidence of the discharge of non-stormwater to the stormwater system, inspection of stormwater treatment and flow-control facilities for proper operation and evidence of routine and corrective maintenance, inspections for compliance with the City's Enforcement Response Plan, or similar activities. Inspections may also be conducted in conjunction with routine or scheduled inspections conducted by other public agencies or special districts, including but not limited to the Central Contra Costa Sanitary District, the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District, County Environmental Health Department, the Contra Costa Mosquito and Vector Control District, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board. The City Council may by resolution establish a schedule of fees for inspections. 
B.  Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. With the consent of the owner or occupant, or pursuant to a search or inspection warrant, any Officer may establish on any property such devices as are reasonably necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all authorized inspections, the Officer may take any sample deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on-site. 
C.  Notification of Spills. All persons in charge of the premises or responsible for emergency response for the premises have a responsibility to train premises' personnel and maintain notification procedures to ensure that immediate notification is provided to the City of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of pollutants creating a risk of non-stormwater discharge into the City stormwater system. 
As soon as any person in charge of the premises or responsible for emergency response for the premises has knowledge of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of non-stormwater discharge entering the City stormwater system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the detection and containment and clean up of such release and shall notify the City of the occurrence by telephoning the Director. This notification requirement is in addition to and not in lieu of other required notifications. 
D.  Requirement to Test or Monitor. Any Officer may require that any person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any premises that may cause or contribute to non-stormwater discharges, undertake such monitoring activities or analysis and furnish such reports as the Officer may specify in writing. The burden, including costs of these activities, analysis and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analysis and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analysis and reports required. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.110 - Violations. 
A.  The violation of any provision of this Chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, any violation constituting a misdemeanor under this Chapter may, at the discretion of the Officer or City Attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. 
B.  Any person required to perform monitoring, analysis, reporting or corrective activity pursuant to this Chapter by any Officer may be informed of such decision, in writing, by a notice of violation. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Officer, may file a written appeal of the notice of violation to the Director within 10 days following the date of the notice of violation. Upon receipt of such request, the Director shall request a report and recommendation from the Officer and shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, all evidence and testimony deemed relevant and admissible by the Director shall be considered, and the Director may reject, affirm, or modify the Officer's decision. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Failure to request a hearing or appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver and failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
In addition to the penalties and procedures provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. Such condition is hereby declared and deemed to be a nuisance, which may be abated as provided in Chapters 12 and 13 of Title 1 of this Code including the assessment of the costs of abatement which may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes as provided by Government Code section 38773.5, and by civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.120 - Penalty for Violation. 
A.  Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code section 36901. 
B.  Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code section 36900. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.130 - Continuing Violation. 
Every day that any violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.140 - Concealment. 
Concealing, aiding or abetting a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.150 - Acts Potentially Resulting in Violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, or who releases a non-stormwater discharge, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the enforcement provisions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement actions authorized pursuant to this Chapter may also include notice to the violator of such potential liability pursuant to federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.160 - Civil Actions. 
A.  In addition to any other remedies provided in this Chapter, any violation of this Chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such action, the City may seek, as appropriate, any and all of the following remedies: 
1.  a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and permanent injunction; 
2.  an action for an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 17206. 
B.  In addition any person violating this Chapter shall be liable for: 
1.  reimbursement for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring which led to the discovery of the violation; 
2.  costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effect(s) resulting from the violation; 
3.  compensatory damages for the loss of, or destruction to, water quality, wildlife, fish or aquatic life. Costs and damages under this subsection shall be paid to the City and shall be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing a stormwater discharge pollution control system and implementing or enforcing the provisions of this Chapter; 
4.  the cost of maintenance and repair of any BMP or stormwater management facility that is not maintained in accordance with the Guidebook or the stormwater control plan; 
5.  the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing administrative action under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.170 - Remedies Not Exclusive. 
The remedies identified in this Chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other remedies, administrative, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.180 - Judicial Review. 
The provisions of Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 are applicable to judicial review of determinations made pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
15.06.190 - Appeal. 
Decisions by the Director made pursuant to this Chapter are appealable to the City Council. Appeals shall be made, within ten (10) calendar days of the date a decision was rendered. All appeals shall be submitted in writing, together with the name, address, phone number and signature of the appellant and the filing fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. The written appeal shall specifically state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1368 C.S., § 1, 4-3-2013.)  
CHAPTER 15.07 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
15.07.010 - Adoption of the California Green Building Standards Code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code as published by the International Code Council, also known as Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, excluding all appendices and with the amendments stated by this Chapter, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the planning, design, operation, construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure unless otherwise indicated in the California Green Building Standards Code. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), 11-16-2016)  
15.07.020 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), 11-16-2016)  
15.07.030 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this Chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), 11-16-2016)  
15.07.040 - Appeals Board. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated by any of the provisions of the California Green Building Standards Code, the Appeals Board for any appeal that may be made under this Chapter is hereby designated to be the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), 11-16-2016)  
15.07.050 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any order made hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months. A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. Nothing in this Section is intended to be the exclusive remedy for any violation of this Chapter, or any order or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.09 - PERMITTING PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
15.09.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Solar Energy System" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
B.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and all state and City health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by Chapter 22 of this Code. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; 
2.  The internet; 
3.  Facsimile. 
D.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. A "common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
E.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
F.  "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
G.  "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000.00, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10%, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10% as originally specified and proposed. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
15.09.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Government Code Section 65850.5) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The provisions of this Chapter encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This Chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Martinez. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
15.09.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter derived are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
15.09.040 - Solar Energy System Requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the City and the Contra Costa Fire District. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
15.09.050 - Duties of Building Department and Building Official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. Applications shall be considered complete when all information is received and payment made. An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
C.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
15.09.060 - Permit Review and Inspection Requirements. 
A.  The City Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist for the administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems on or before September 1, 2015. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall be available on the City's website and shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
B.  The Building Department shall issue a building permit (the same day for over-the-counter applications or within 3 business days for electronic applications) of receipt of a complete application which meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission. 
C.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
D.  If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Planning Commission. 
E.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
F.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The City shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
G.  Approval of an application shall not be conditioned upon the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
H.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
I.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be required by the Contra Costa Fire District. 
J.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within 2 business days of a request and provide a 2-hour inspection window. 
K.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection shall be required. Such subsequent inspection shall not be required to comply with the requirements of subsection J above. 
(Ord. No. 1386 C.S., § 2, 6-17-2015)  
CHAPTER 15.10 - POST—DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS 
 
15.10.010 - Intent. 
This Chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or manmade disaster. The Chapter further authorizes the Community Development Department and the Department of Public Services, as well as authorized representatives of those departments to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.  
15.10.020 - Application of Provisions. 
The provisions of this Chapter are applicable, following each natural or manmade disaster, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Martinez, County of Contra Costa. The Council may extend the provisions as necessary.  
15.10.030 - Definitions. 
Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy following a natural or manmade disaster.  
15.10.040 - Placards. 
The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. 
A.  INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
B.  RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
C.  UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the department that posted the building. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
This ordinance number, the name of the department, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the department or upon written notification from the department. 
(Ord. 1203 C.S. § 1, 1993)  
CHAPTER 15.16 - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
15.16.010 - Adoption of the Mechanical Code. 
The City hereby adopts by reference, with the amendments set forth in this Chapter and excluding all of the appendices, the 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code which incorporates a California version of the 2015 edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, also known as Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
15.16.020 - Permit Fees. 
Permit fees for work regulated by this Chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by Resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
15.16.030 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any order made hereunder, or the provisions of any permit issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of no more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. Nothing in this Section is intended to be the exclusive remedy for any violation of this Chapter, or any order or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
15.16.040 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Mechanical Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
15.16.050 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this Chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
15.16.060 - Appeals Board. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated by any of the provisions of the California Mechanical Code, the Appeals Board for any appeal that may be made under this Chapter is hereby designated to be the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE 
 
15.20.010 - Adoption of the California Plumbing Code. 
The City hereby adopts by reference, with the amendments as set forth in this Chapter and excluding all appendices, the 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code which incorporates a California version of the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, also known as Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, for the purpose of prescribing minimum regulations for the installation, alteration, repair and inspection of plumbing and drainage systems. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
15.20.020 - Amendment—Section 108.4.2 Fees. 
Section 108.4.2 shall be removed and replaced to read as follows: 
Permit fees for work regulated by this Chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
15.20.030 - Appeals Board. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated by any of the provisions of the California Plumbing Code, the Appeals Board for any appeal that may be made under this Chapter is hereby designated to be the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
15.20.040 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any order made hereunder, or the provisions of any permit issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nothing in this Section is intended to be the exclusive remedy for any violation of this Chapter, or any order or permit issued hereunder. 
A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
15.20.050 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Plumbing Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
15.20.060 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this Chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.21 - EXCESS FLOW GAS SHUT-OFF DEVICES AND GAS SHUT-OFF DEVICES ACTIVATED BY MOTION 
 
15.21.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Downstream of Gas Utility Meter refers to all customer owned gas piping. 
B.  Residential Building means any single family dwelling, duplex, apartment building, condominium, townhouse, lodging house, congregate residence, hotel, or motel. 
C.  Excess Flow Gas Shut-Off Device shall mean those valves or devices that are not actuated by motion, but are activated by significant gas leaks or overpressure surges, which can occur when pipes rupture inside the structure. The design shall provide a proven method to automatically provide for expedient and safe gas shutoff in an emergency. The design of the device shall provide a capability for ease of consumer or owner resetting without concern for safety. The operational and functional design of the device shall be certified by the Independent Laboratory of the International Approval Services (IAS) [formerly American Gas Association] or Underwriters Laboratory (UL). 
D.  Seismic Gas Shut-Off Device means a system consisting of a seismic sensing means and actuating means designed to automatically actuate a companion gas shut off means installed in a gas piping system in order to shut-off the gas downstream of the location of the gas shut-off means in the event of a severe seismic disturbance. The system may consist of separable components or may incorporate all functions in a single body. The design of the device shall minimize or preclude the disruption to the flow of gas from erroneous vibrations, alien forces, or both erroneous vibrations and alien forces. Standards for such devices developed by the Z-21 American National Standards Committee, the California State Architect's office and the comments or suggestions from various public utilities shall be utilized to certify the appropriate utilization and design of these devices. 
E.  Upstream of Gas Utility Meter refers to all gas piping installed by the utility up to and including the meter and the utility's bypass tee at the connection to the customer owned piping. 
F.  Gas Shut-Off Device , as used in this Chapter, refers to either a seismic gas shut-off device or excess flow gas shut-off device. 
(Ord. 1269 C.S. § 1 (part), 1999.)  
15.21.020 - Scope. 
An approved seismic gas shut-off device (motion sensitive) or an approved excess flow gas shut-off device (non-motion sensitive) shall be installed downstream of the gas utility meter on each fuel gas line where the gas line serves the following building or structures: 
A.  Any building or structure (commercial, industrial or residential) containing fuel gas piping for which a building permit is first issued on or after 60 days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter; or 
B.  Any existing building or structure (commercial, industrial or residential) which is altered or added to; and 
1.  Such a building or structure has fuel gas piping supplying the existing building or structure or the addition to the building or structure; and 
2.  The alteration or addition is valued at more than $10,000.00 and a building permit for the work is first issued on or after 60 days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
a.  With respect to commercial or industrial buildings, alterations or additions to individual units or tenant spaces shall require a gas shut-off device to be installed for all gas piping serving that commercial or industrial building. 
b.  With respect to residential buildings, alterations or additions to an individual condominium or apartment unit shall require a gas shut-off device to be installed for all gas piping serving that building. 
(Ord. 1269 C.S. § 1 (part), 1999.)  
15.21.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  Gas shut-off devices may be installed upstream of a gas utility meter provided they are installed by a public utility in accordance with manufacturer's guidelines. 
B.  Gas shut-off devices installed on a building or structure prior to 60 days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are exempt from the requirements of this Section provided they remain installed on the building or structure and are maintained for the life of the building or structure. 
C.  Gas shut-off devices installed on a gas distribution system owned or operated by a public utility shall not be subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. 1269 C.S. § 1 (part), 1999.)  
15.21.040 - General Requirements. 
Gas shut-off device installed either in compliance with this Chapter or voluntarily with a permit issued on or after 60 days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Be installed by a contractor licensed in the appropriate classification by the State of California. 
B.  In the case of seismic gas shut-off devices (motion sensitive) only, such devices must be mounted rigidly to the exterior of the building or structure containing the fuel gas piping. This requirement need not apply if the Building Inspection Department determines that the seismic gas shut-off device (motion sensitive) has been tested and listed for an alternate method of installation. 
C.  Be listed by an approved testing laboratory (IAS, formerly AGA, or IAMPO) or the office of the State Architect, or Underwriters Laboratory (UL). 
D.  Have a 30 year warranty which warrants that the valve or device is free from defects and will continue to properly operate for 30 years from the date of installation. 
E.  Where gas shut-off devices are installed as required by this Section, they shall be maintained for the life of the building or structure or be replaced with a valve or device complying with the requirements of this Section. 
(Ord. 1269 C.S. § 1 (part), 1999.)  
15.21.050 - List of Approved Valves and Devices. 
The Building Inspection Department shall maintain a list of all seismic gas shut-off devices (motion sensitive) and excess flow gas shut-off devices (non-motion sensitive) which are approved for installation in the State of California. 
(Ord. 1269 C.S. § 1 (part), 1999.)  
CHAPTER 15.24 - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
15.24.010 - Adoption of California Electrical Code. 
The City hereby adopts by reference, with the amendments as set forth in this Chapter and excluding all appendices, the 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code which incorporates the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Agency, also known as Part 3 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.020 - Amended Section 89.108.4.2 Fees. 
Section 89.108.4.2 is hereby removed and replaced to read as follows: 
Permit fees for work regulated by this Chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.030 - Administrative Authority and Assistants Defined. 
Whenever the term "Administrative Authority" is used in the Code adopted by this Chapter and in the following Sections it shall be construed to mean the building official; and whenever the term "assistants" is used, it shall be construed to mean the building inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.040 - Appeals Board. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated by any of the provisions of the California Energy Code, the Appeals Board for any appeal that may be made under this Chapter is hereby designated to be the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.050 - Penalty for Violations. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, or any order made hereunder, or the provisions of any permit issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than 6 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nothing in this Section is intended to be the exclusive remedy for any violation of this Chapter, or any order or permit issued hereunder. A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.060 - Conflict or Inconsistency. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any of the provisions of the California Electrical Code and any of the provisions stated expressly by this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
15.24.070 - No Mandatory Duty. 
By adoption of this Chapter the City Council does not intend to create, establish, or impose any mandatory duty or liability on the part of the City, its officers, employees, or any other person acting on its behalf, notwithstanding the use of "shall", "will", "must", or similar terms stated expressly or incorporated into this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.28 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE [5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— For statutory provisions authorizing a city to adopt County Codes by reference, see Government Code § 5002.21 et seq. 
 
15.28.010 - Adopted. 
In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7, the City hereby ratifies the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District Fire Code, adopting by reference the 2016 California Fire Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9 [based on the 2015 International Fire Code published by the International Code Council) as amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth in District Ordinance No. 2016-23. The chief, or the chiefs authorized representative, of the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District is hereby delegated the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code within the City of Martinez, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7. 
(Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 7(Exh. G), 11-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.30 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
15.30.010 - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Martinez does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Martinez are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by uses which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately own land within flood-prone, mudslide [i.e. mudflow] or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
7.  Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes regulations to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
15.30.020 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
A.  "A zone" - See "Special flood hazard area". 
B.  "Accessory structure" means a structure which is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and $1,500.00 in value. 
C.  "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
D.  "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
E.  "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
F.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
G.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
H.  "Area of special flood hazard" - See "Special flood hazard area." 
I.  "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this ordinance. 
J.  "Base flood elevation" (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
K.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
L.  "Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
2.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
M.  "Building" - See "Structure". 
N.  "Coastal high hazard area" means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
O.  "Development" means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
P.  "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Q.  "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 11, 1995. 
R.  "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
S.  "Flood, flooding, or floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood related erosion. 
T.  "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
U.  "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
V.  "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
W.  "Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - See "Flooding." 
X.  "Floodplain Administrator" is the City official designated by Section 15.30.040 to administer and enforce the Floodplain Management Regulations. 
Y.  "Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, Floodplain Management Regulations, and open space plans. 
Z.  "Floodplain Management Regulations" means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
AA.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 and any amendment to these Bulletins. 
BB.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
CC.  "Floodway Fringe" is the area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
DD.  "Fraud and Victimization" as related to Section 15.30.060, means the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the review authority will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings which are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
EE.  "Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities which are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
FF.  "Governing Body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
GG.  "Hardship" as related to Section 15.30.060 of this ordinance means the exceptional hardship which would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. This requires the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
HH.  "Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
II.  "Historic Structure" means any structure which is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Listed individually on the California Register of Historical Resources; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs which have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
JJ.  "Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
KK.  "Levee System" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
LL.  "Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor which is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.30.050.A.3.c; 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.30.050.A.1; 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.30.050.A.2; and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.30.050.B. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
MM.  "Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
NN.  "Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
OO.  "Market Value" is defined in the City of Martinez substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.30.040.B.2.a. 
PP.  "Mean Sea Level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map applicable to the City are referenced. 
QQ.  "New Construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after January 11, 1995, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
RR.  "New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 11, 1995. 
SS.  "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
TT.  "One-Hundred-Year Flood" or "100-Year Flood" - See "Base Flood." 
UU.  "Primary Frontal Dune" means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope. 
VV.  "Program Deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
WW.  "Public Safety and Nuisance" as related to Section 15.30.060 of this ordinance, means the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
XX.  "Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
YY.  "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
ZZ.  "Remedy a Violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways which impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
AAA.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
BBB.  "Sand Dunes" mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
CCC.  "Sheet Flow Area" - See "Area of Shallow Flooding." 
DDD.  "Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
EEE.  "Start of Construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
FFF.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
GGG.  "Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the Structure before the damage occurred. 
HHH.  "Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "Start of Construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "Substantial Damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
III.  "V Zone" - See "Coastal High Hazard Area." 
JJJ.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance. 
KKK.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided. 
LLL.  "Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
MMM.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
15.30.030 - General Provisions. 
A.  Lands to which this ordinance applies. This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of City of Martinez. 
B.  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Martinez, dated March 15, 1978, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM's) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM's), dated March 15, 1978, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRM's and FBFM's are on file at the City of Martinez Public Works Department, 525 Henrietta Street, Martinez, California 94553. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor and a public nuisance in which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of Title 1. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
F.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City, any official, officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages which result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
15.30.040 - Administration. 
A.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Public Works Director or person designated by the City Manager is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
a.  Permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; structure(s) shall be in compliance with the requirements of City's Floodplain Management Ordinance in effect at the time of issuance construction permit(s); 
b.  All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Martinez; and 
e.  All Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "Start of Construction" definition. 
2.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
a.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
b.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
3.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.30.030.B, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 15.30.050. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
4.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
a.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
i.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
ii.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
iii.  Assure the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
b.  Base Flood Elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
i.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
ii.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building Permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "Start of Construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
c.  Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
5.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by Section 15.30.050.A.3.a and Section 15.30.050.D (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by Section 15.30.050.A.3.b (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by Section 15.30.050.A.3.c (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.30.050.C.1.c (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
e.  Certification required by Section 15.30.050.F.2 (floodway encroachments); 
f.  Information required by Section 15.30.050.G.6 (coastal construction standards); and 
g.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including evidence supporting their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
6.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.30.040.D. 
7.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this ordinance as specified in Section 15.30.030.C. 
8.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA. 
9.  Planning. Assure community's General Plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
C.  Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.30.030.B. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Martinez. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
1.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
c.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
d.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
e.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.30.030.B or Section 15.30.040.B.3; 
f.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
g.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.30.050.A.3.b of this ordinance and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
2.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.30.050.A.3.b. 
3.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.30.050.A.3.c of this ordinance and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93 and any amendment of these Bulletins. 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
5.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.30.040.B.5 of this ordinance. 
D.  Appeals. 
1.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Floodplain Administrator pursuant to this chapter, the decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the applicant or any other interested party who alleges there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
2.  An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall be filed with the Planning Department. The appeal shall state specifically the basis of the appeal and the basis under which it is claimed there was an error, abuse of discretion or lack of evidence in the record to support the decision by the Floodplain Administrator. An appeal fee shall be required pursuant to the City's fee schedule. 
3.  Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the appeal and shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Floodplain Administrator. Approval of any permit at issue shall require a majority vote of the members of the Planning Commission voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying any permit at issue. 
4.  The decision of the Planning Commission which has been the subject of an appeal shall become effective 10 days following the date on which the decision is made by the Planning Commission on appeal. 
5.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission on an appeal, the decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically the basis of the appeal and the basis under which it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion or the basis of why the appellant claims the decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. An appeal fee shall be required pursuant to the City's fee schedule. 
6.  The City Council shall hold a noticed public hearing on the appeal and shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Planning Commission. Approval of any permit at issue shall require a majority vote of the members of the City Council voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying any permit at issue. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
15.30.050 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
A.  Standards of construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
b.  Using methods and practices which minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities which are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  Within Zones AH or AO, so there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
a.  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
i.  In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
ii.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
iii.  In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.30.040.B.3. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the City building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.30.050.A.3.a or: 
i.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 15.30.050.A.3. so the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Sections 15.30.050.A.3.b.i and 15.30.050.A.3.b.ii are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
c.  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  For non-engineered openings: 
1.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
4.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or 
ii.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
d.  Manufactured homes. 
i.  See Section 15.30.050.D. 
e.  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
f.  Attached garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See Section 15.30.050.A.3.c. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See Section 15.30.050.A.2. 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
g.  Detached garages and accessory structures. "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.30.020, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
ii.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
iii.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
iv.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
v.  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.30.050.F; and 
vi.  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 15.30.050.A.3.c. 
h.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.30.050.A. 
B.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development. 
1.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
a.  Identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) and Base Flood Elevations (BFE). 
b.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
c.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain Administrator: 
i.  Lowest floor elevation. 
ii.  Pad elevation. 
iii.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
2.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
3.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes which are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
a.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  Within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, meets the requirements of Section 15.30.050.G. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map which are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.30.050.D.1 will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so either the: 
a.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength which are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
E.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30 and VE will either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.30.040.C of this ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.30.050.D. 
2.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 15.30.050.E.1 and Section 15.30.050.G. 
F.  Floodways. Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Martinez. 
2.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of Martinez shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  If Sections 15.30.050.F.1 and 15.30.050.F.2 are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.30.050. 
G.  Coastal High Hazard Areas. Within coastal high hazard areas, Zones V, V1-30, and VE, as established under Section 15.30.030.B, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  All new residential and nonresidential construction, including substantial improvement/damage, shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. 
2.  All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Section 15.30.020 of this ordinance. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. 
4.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
5.  Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited. 
6.  The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records: 
a.  Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with Section 15.30.050.G.1; and 
b.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
15.30.060 - Variance Procedure. 
A.  Nature of Variances. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law providing that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the City to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
B.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the procedures of Sections 15.30.040 and 15.30.050 of this ordinance have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.30.020 of this Chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to the elevation which the Review Authority believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
5.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the Contra Costa County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
6.  The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  Consideration of Variance. 
1.  In passing upon requests for variances, the review authority shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public Safety and Nuisance"), cause "Fraud and Victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided the provisions of Sections 15.30.060.C.1 through 15.30.060.C.4 are satisfied and the structure or other development is protected by methods minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
4.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.30.060.B.1 and the purposes of this chapter, the review authority may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, 8-19-2015)  
CHAPTER 15.32 - WOODBURNING APPLIANCES 
 
15.32.010 - Applicability. 
Except as specifically provided by Section 15.32.030 of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to each of the following categories of woodburning appliances installed within the limits of the City of Martinez: 
A.  Any woodburning appliance installed on or after January 1, 2006, in any building as that term is defined by the most current edition of the Uniform Building Code, which shall include but not be limited to residences, hotels and restaurants; 
B.  Gas fireplaces shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. Notwithstanding the above, however, the conversion of a gas fireplace to a woodburning appliance on or after January 1, 2006, shall constitute the installation of a woodburning appliance and shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter; 
C.  Any woodburning appliance installed on or after January 1, 2006, or that is located within a building that is renovated, altered or modified, which requires opening up walls immediately adjacent to the woodburning appliance. 
(Ord. 1322 C.S. § I (part), 2005.)  
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Bay Area Air Quality Management District" means the air quality agency for the San Francisco Bay Area pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 40200. 
B.  "EPA" means United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
C.  "EPA-certified wood heater" means any wood heater or woodburning insert that meets the standards in Title 40, Part 60, subpart AAA, Code of Federal Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations. 
D.  "Fireplace" means any permanently installed masonry or factory-built woodburning appliance, except a pellet-fueled wood heater, designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to 35 to 1. 
E.  "Garbage" means all solid, semisolid and liquid wastes generated from residential, commercial and industrial sources, including trash, refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphaltic products, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. 
F.  "Gas fireplace" means any device designed to burn natural gas in a manner that simulates the function and appearance of a woodburning fireplace. 
G.  "Install" means to construct, lay or insert a woodburning appliance in a building in which no woodburning appliance had existed at the time of such act, or replace an existing woodburning appliance with another woodburning appliance in a building. 
H.  "Paints" means all exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers, stains, primers, sealers, undercoatings, roof coatings, wood preservatives, shellacs, and other paints or paint-like products. 
I.  "Paint solvents" means all original solvents sold or used to thin paints or to clean up painting equipment. 
J.  "Pellet-fueled wood heater" means any woodburning appliance that operates exclusively on wood pellets. 
K.  "Solid fuel" means wood or any other nongaseous or nonliquid fuel. 
L.  "Treated wood" means wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated, painted or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or weathering. 
M.  "Waste petroleum products" means any petroleum product other than gaseous fuels that has been refined from crude oil, and has been used, and as a result of use, has been contaminated with physical or chemical impurities. 
N.  "Woodburning appliance" means fireplace, wood heater or pellet-fired wood heater or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purposes. 
(Ord. 1322 C.S. § I (part), 2005.)  
15.32.030 - Prohibitions. 
It shall be a violation of this Chapter to do any of the following: 
A.  Notwithstanding Section 15.32.010 of this Chapter, use any woodburning appliance that has been installed before, on or after January 1, 2006, when the Bay Area Air Quality Management District issues a "Spare the Air Tonight" warning and a gas, electric or woodburning heat source that is otherwise permitted by this Chapter is available for use in the building; 
B.  Install a woodburning appliance that is not one of the following: (1) a pellet-fueled wood heater; (2) an EPA-certified wood heater; or (3) in the event that EPA develops a fireplace certification program, a fireplace certified by EPA; 
C.  Notwithstanding Section 15.32.010 of this Chapter, use any of the following prohibited fuels in a woodburning appliance that has been installed before, on or after January 1, 2006: 
1.  Garbage; 
2.  Treated wood; 
3.  Plastic products; 
4.  Rubber products; 
5.  Waste petroleum products; 
6.  Paints; 
7.  Paint solvents; 
8.  Coal; 
9.  Glossy or colored paper; 
10.  Particle board; 
11.  Salt water driftwood. 
(Ord. 1322 C.S. § I (part), 2005.)  
15.32.040 - Enforcement. 
Any person who plans to install a woodburning appliance must submit documentation to the Building Department, with a permit application, demonstrating that the appliance is a pellet-fueled wood heater, an EPA-certified wood heater, or in the event that the EPA develops a fireplace certification program, a fireplace certified by EPA. 
Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a maximum $500.00 fine and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for no more than 6 months. A continuing violation shall be deemed to be and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day or portion thereof that such violation continues. 
(Ord. 1322 C.S. § I (part), 2005.)  
CHAPTER 15.36 - NUMBERING BUILDINGS 
 
15.36.010 - Required—Conformance Required. 
A.  Every person owning any building (or the agent thereof) shall place or cause to be placed on the building, where it may be readily seen from the street at all times, the proper number of the building as herein specified. 
B.  All existing buildings shall conform to the terms and conditions of this chapter, within 1 year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. New buildings shall conform to this Chapter before occupancy of the building. 
C.  Where a building cannot be seen from the street, acceptable identification or addressing shall be located at the driveway entrance to the building. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VII part, 1987: Ord. 755 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code § 9800.)  
15.36.020 - Manner. 
A.  Unless otherwise approved by the enforcing agency, each building shall be numbered with nonswitched internally lighted house numbers and every subdivision of or apartment within the building shall have the entrance into same, numbered with identifying letters or numbers at least 1 ¾ inches in height. The numbers or letters placed at each entrance shall be of a contrasting color from the background on which they are placed; and it is unlawful for any person, whether owner or occupant of the building or any apartment therein, to place, maintain or allow to remain thereon any number other than the one required by this chapter. All numbers shall be of substantial and permanent material and must be so placed or affixed as not to be easily removed or affected. The numbers and the surrounding area shall be maintained in such a fashion that the house number may be readily seen from the street at all times. 
B.  Every dwelling or commercial complex with buildings not fronting directly on the street, shall have installed at the entry of said complex, a lighted directional map showing the location and number of each subdivision within the site served by that entry. The map shall be constructed of a substantial material with numbers of sufficient size to be easily read. A plan of the map shall be submitted to the Planning and Building Department for review and approval prior to installation. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VII part, 1987: Ord. 898 C.S. § 2, 1979: Ord. 755 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 9801.)  
15.36.030 - Determination of Numbers to be Used. 
All houses shall be numbered in accordance with the numbers shown and delineated on the map of the City on the file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 755 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972: prior code 9802.)  
CHAPTER 15.40 - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
15.40.010 - Compliance Required Prior to Removal. 
No person, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved any building on, over or along any public street or highway within the City except having first complied with the provisions of this chapter and Section 8.08.100. 
(Prior code § 4300.)  
15.40.020 - Consent of Property Owners Required. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move or have removed a building shall first obtain the written assent to such removal from persons owning a majority of feet front of lots in same block of the street in which it is proposed to locate such removed building; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person removing a building upon his own premises and not going upon the premises of any other person, or upon any street, alley or other public place in making such removal. 
(Prior code § 4301.)  
15.40.030 - Permit—Bond—Required. 
No person shall move, or cause to be moved on, over or through any public street or highway any building without obtaining from the Director of Public Works a permit in writing to do so. The permit shall be issued upon the presentation of the written assent to the removal of such building, or upon the waiver of such assent by the Director of Public Works, and shall not be issued until after the person so applying therefor shall have first delivered to the City Clerk a bond, running to the City, in the sum of $1,000.00 with at least two good and sufficient sureties, approved by the City Manager, which bond shall be conditioned that the party so desiring to move a building in the City will strictly comply with all the conditions and requirements of this chapter and of any ordinance hereafter passed regulating house moving and of any other rule or regulation concerning house moving that may hereafter be passed by the City Council, and that the party will pay any and all damages which may result by reason of any house moving in the City by said party, his agents, employees or workmen, to any fence, tree, pavement, street sidewalk, telegraph pole or wire belonging to the City or belonging to any telegraph or telephone company having a franchise in the City, and conditioned further that said party, said principal, will save, indemnify and keep harmless the City against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in anywise accrue against the City in consequence of the granting of such permit, and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of such permit. Any such bond filed by any person shall operate as a bond for the purposes required by the ordinances of the City, for the term of one year from the date of filing thereof, insofar that no other or additional bond need be given by such party for the removal of houses in the City during the period of one year, and at the expiration of one year a new bond shall be required to be filed by such party before the issuance to such party of any permits hereunder. 
(Prior code § 4302.)  
15.40.040 - Permit—Contents. 
The permit referred to in Section 15.40.030 shall specify the character of the building to be removed, the place from which and to which the building is to be removed, and the street on, over or through which such removal may be made; and the building shall not be moved on, over or through any other streets, except those named in the permit. 
(Prior code § 4303.)  
15.40.050 - Permit—Revocation. 
The City Council may, at any time, for such cause as it, upon investigation, deems sufficient, revoke any permission or license granted under this chapter. All permits and licenses granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, although granted for the nominal term of one year, are held at the pleasure of the Council. 
(Prior code § 4307.)  
15.40.060 - Standard of Care Required. 
All removals made under such permits shall be done in a careful manner, and shall be prosecuted with diligence and shall be under the superintendence and control and to the satisfaction and approval of the superintendent of streets. 
(Prior code § 4304.)  
15.40.070 - Period of Obstruction Limited. 
No person owning or having charge of the removal of any building through the public streets, shall permit the building to be or stand on any street, lane, alley or public grounds within the limits of one block for a longer period than 24 hours. 
(Prior code § 4305.)  
15.40.080 - Cutting of Wire. 
When the cutting or temporary removal of any pole or poles of any public or private telegraph, telephone, electric light wire or any other wire passing along or over any street, lane or alley, becomes necessary for the removal of any building, the person in charge of such removal, at least six hours in advance of reaching the same, shall notify the person or persons having charge of and control over such wire or wires, and the person so notified shall cause such wires to be promptly cut or removed and replaced. 
(Prior code § 4306.)  
CHAPTER 15.44 - BUILDING SECURITY REGULATIONS 
 
15.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  "Building Official" is the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code or his duly authorized representative. 
B.  "Commercial building" is any building or structure used to conduct, manage or carry on any business. Storage of any merchandise, household goods or products shall be included as a business. 
C.  "Cylinder guard" is a hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock cylinder or other device which is so fastened so as to protect the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling by attack tools. 
D.  "Dead bolt" is a bolt which has no automatic spring action and is operated by a key cylinder, thumbturn or lever. 
E.  "Deadlatch" is a latch in which the latchbolt is positively held in the projected position by a guardbolt, plunger or auxiliary mechanism. 
F.  "Insert" is a hardened steel roller inside unhardened bolts to prevent bolt cutting or sawing with common tools. 
G.  "Latch" is a moveable piece which automatically holds a door in a closed position by entering a notch or cavity. 
H.  "Owner" as referred to in this chapter includes a designated agent, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or part of any building or land in the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (909).)  
15.44.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum security standards to safeguard property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and quality of materials and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the City. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (901).)  
15.44.030 - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction and to buildings and structures to which additions, alteration or repairs are made except as specifically provided in this chapter. No portion of this chapter shall supersede any local, State or Federal laws regulating egress for life safety and panic conditions. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (902).)  
15.44.040 - Application to Existing Buildings. 
A.  When additions, alterations or repairs exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of an existing structure within any twelve-month period, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures. 
B.  Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with the provisions of the building code for new buildings. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (903).)  
15.44.050 - Administration and Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced and administered by the Building Official who may call on the Chief of Police or his authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. The City Attorney may be called upon to institute necessary legal proceedings to obtain compliance, and is authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (904).)  
15.44.060 - Responsibility for Compliance. 
The owner(s) or his designated agent(s) shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (905).)  
15.44.070 - Alternate Security Provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the use or installation of any security device or method not specifically prescribed herein when such alternate is found to provide equivalent or better security and approval by the Building Official prior to installation. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (908).)  
15.44.080 - Commercial Buildings—Securing Exterior Doors. 
All exterior doors shall be secured as follows: 
A.  A single door shall be secured with either a double cylinder dead bolt or a single cylinder dead bolt without a turnpiece, with a minimum throw of 1 inch. A hook or expanding bolt may have a throw of 3/4 inch. Any dead bolt must contain an insert of hardened material to repel attempts at cutting through the bolt and must have a minimum of 6,000 possible key changes or locking combinations. 
B.  On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type of lock required for single doors in subsection A. The inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush bolts protected by hardened material with a minimum throw of 5/8 inch at head and foot. Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf and satisfying this subsection and subsection A may be used in lieu of flush bolts. 
C.  Any single door or pair of doors requiring locking at the bottom or top rail shall have locks with a minimum 5/8 -inch throw bolt at both the top and bottom rails. 
D.  Cylinders shall be so designed or protected that they cannot be gripped by pliers or other wrenching devices. 
E.  Exterior sliding commercial entrances will be secured as in subsections A, B and D, with special attention given to safety regulations. 
F.  Rolling overhead doors, solid overhead swinging, sliding or accordion garage-type doors shall be secured with a cylinder lock or a padlock on the inside when not otherwise controlled or locked by electric power operation. If a padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel shackle, with a minimum 5 pin tumbler operation with non-removable key when it is in an unlocked position. 
G.  Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track, top and bottom, and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle and minimum 5 pin tumbler operation with non-removable key when in an unlocked position. The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position. 
H.  Outside hinges on all exterior doors shall be provided with non-removable pins or hinges of the interlocking stud type when using pin-type hinges. 
I.  Doors with glass panels and doors that have glass panels adjacent to the door frame shall be secured as follows: 
1.  Rated burglary resistant glass or glass-like material; or 
2.  The glass shall be covered with iron bars of at least ½ inch round or 1 inch by ¼ inch flat steel material mortised, spaced not more than 5 inches apart, secured on the inside of the glazing; or 
3.  Iron or steel grills of at least 1/8 inch material of 2-inch mesh secured on inside of the glazing. 
J.  Inswinging doors shall have rabbetted jambs. 
K.  Wood doors, not of solid core construction, or with panels therein less than 1 3/8 -inch thick, shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel or its equivalent attached with screws on a minimum of 6-inch centers. 
L.  Jambs for all doors shall be so constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of the function of the strike. 
M.  All exterior doors shall have a minimum of a 60-watt bulb over the outside of the door. Such bulb shall be protected with a vapor cover or cover of equal breaking resistant material. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IA).)  
15.44.090 - Commercial Buildings—Glass Windows. 
A.  Accessible rear and side windows not viewable from the street shall consist of rated burglary resistant glass or glass-like material. 
Exception: Window openings required by the building code for access by the Fire Department shall be protected by a material approved by the Fire Department. 
Protection of these window openings should be by glass, i.e., tempered glass, which may be broken without unnecessary delay and use of specialized equipment. 
B.  If the accessible side or rear window is of the openable type it shall be secured on the inside with a locking device capable of withstanding a force of 300 pounds applied in any direction. 
C.  Louvered windows shall not be used within 8 feet of ground level, adjacent structures or fire escapes. 
D.  Outside hinges on all accessible side and rear glass windows shall be provided with non-removable pins. If the hinge screws are accessible, the screws shall be of the non-removable type. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IB).)  
15.44.100 - Commercial Buildings—Accessible Transoms. 
A.  All exterior transoms exceeding 8 inches by 12 inches on the side and rear of any building or premises used for commercial purposes shall be protected by one of the following: 
1.  Rated burglary resistant glass or glass-like material; or 
2.  Outside iron bars of at least ½-inch round or 1 inch by ¼-inch flat steel material, spaced no more than 5 inches apart; or 
3.  Outside iron or steel grills of at least 1/8 -inch material but not more than 2-inch mesh. 
B.  The window barrier shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IC).)  
15.44.110 - Commercial Buildings—Roof Openings. 
A.  All glass skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be provided with: 
1.  Rated burglary resistant glass or glass-like material meeting building code requirements; or 
2.  Iron bars of at least ½-inch round or 1 inch by ¼-inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
3.  A steel grill of at least 1/8 -inch material of 2-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
B.  All hatchway openings on the floor of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows: 
1.  If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel or its equivalent attached with screws. 
2.  The hatchway is to be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. The use of a crossbar or padlock must be approved by the Fire Marshal. 
3.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
C.  All air duct or air vent openings exceeding 8 inches by 12 inches on the roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following: 
1.  Iron bars of at least ½-inch round or 1 inch by ¼-inch flat steel material, spaced no more than 5 inches apart and securely fastened; or 
2.  A steel grill of at least 1/8 -inch material of 2-inch mesh and securely fastened; 
3.  If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside. 
D.  Ladders. Any ladder, excluding fire escapes, located on the exterior of any building which could provide access to the roof shall be protected from such access by a continuous piece of wood or metal covering the rungs. The wood or metal shall be locked with a padlock. The padlock shall have a minimum of five pin tumblers and be of case-hardened steel. Hinges used on the covering shall be of a non-removable pin type. The wood or metal barrier shall be of a minimum of 8 feet continuous covering of not less than ½-inch thickness and located 4 feet from ground level or be secured in a manner approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(ID).)  
15.44.120 - Commercial Buildings—Special Security Measures. 
A.  Safes. Commercial establishments having $1,000.00 or more in cash on the premises after closing hours shall lock such money in at least a Class E or higher rated safe after closing hours. 
B.  Office Buildings (Multiple Occupancy). All entrance doors to individual office suites shall have a dead bolt lock with a minimum 1-inch throw bolt which can be opened from the inside. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IE).)  
15.44.130 - Commercial Buildings—Intrusion Detection Devices. 
A.  If it is determined by the enforcing authority of this chapter that the security measures and locking devices described in this chapter do not adequately secure the building, he may require the installation and maintenance of an intrusion detection device (burglar alarm system). 
B.  Establishments having specific type inventories shall be protected by the following type alarm service: 
1.  Silent Alarm—Central Station—Supervised Service: 
a.  Jewelry store, manufacturing, wholesale and retail, 
b.  Guns and ammunition, 
c.  Wholesale liquor, 
d.  Wholesale tobacco, 
e.  Wholesale drugs, 
f.  Fur stores; 
2.  Silent Alarm: 
a.  Liquor stores, 
b.  Pawnshops, 
c.  Electronic equipment including musical instrument 
d.  Wig stores, 
e.  Clothing (new), 
f.  Coins and stamps, 
g.  Industrial tool supply houses, 
h.  Camera stores, 
i.  Precious metal storage facility, 
j.  Drugstores; 
3.  Local Alarm (Bell Outside Premises): 
a.  Antique dealers, 
b.  Art galleries, 
c.  Service stations. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IF).  
15.44.140 - Residential Structures—Purpose for Provisions. 
The purpose of Sections 15.44.150 through 15.44.220 is to set forth minimum standards of construction for resistance to unlawful entry to the residential structures located in the City. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIA).)  
15.44.150 - Residential Structures—Alternatives. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the use of alternate materials, devices or measures when such alternate provisions are by the Building Official as providing equivalent security. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIB).)  
15.44.160 - Residential Structures—Sliding Glass Windows and Doors—Testing. 
A.  Sliding Glass Doors. Panels shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order: 
1.  Test A. With the panels in the normal positions a concentrated load of 300 pounds shall be applied separately to each vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device at a point on the stile within 6 inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the door. 
2.  Test B. Repeat Test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of 150 pounds to the same area of the same stile in a direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the door. 
3.  Test C. Repeat Test B with the 150 pounds force in the reversed direction towards the exterior side of the door. 
4.  Tests D, E and F. Repeat Tests A, B and C with the movable panel lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the door frame. 
B.  Sliding Glass Windows. The sash shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order: 
1.  Test A. With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of 150 pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member within 6 inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the window. 
2.  Test B. Repeat Test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of 75 pounds to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the window. 
3.  Test C. Repeat Test B with 75-pound force in the reversed direction towards the exterior side of the window. 
4.  Tests D, E and F. Repeat Tests A, B and C with the movable sash lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the window frame. 
C.  Testing Agency. All tests shall be performed by an approved independent testing agency. Written reports shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIC).)  
15.44.170 - Residential Structures—Doors—Generally. 
A door forming part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit shall be of solid core construction installed and secured as set forth in Sections 15.44.180, 15.44.190 and 15.44.200, when such door is accessible from a street, highway, yard, court, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants or similar area. A door enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Sections 15.44.180, 15.44.190 and 15.44.200. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VIII part, 1987: Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IID).)  
15.44.180 - Residential Structures—Doors—Swing Doors. 
A.  A single swing door, the active leaf of a pair of doors and the bottom leaf of dutch doors shall be equipped with a dead bolt with a minimum throw of 1 inch and a deadlocking latch. Dead bolts shall contain hardened inserts, or equivalent, so as to repel cutting tool attack. The lock or locks shall be key operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or disengaged from the interior side of the door by a device not requiring a key or special knowledge or effort. 
B.  Flushbolts with a minimum throw of 5/8 inch shall be provided at the head and foot (floor and ceiling) of the inactive leaf of double doors, and at the top and bottom of the upper leaf of dutch doors. 
C.  Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swing doors shall be of one piece construction with the jamb or joined by a rabbet. 
D.  Non-removable pins or interlocking stud-type hinges which are accessible from the outside when the door is closed. 
E.  Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIE).)  
15.44.190 - Residential Structures—Doors—Sliding Glass. 
A.  Sliding glass doors shall be equipped with locking devices and shall be so installed that, when subject to tests specified in Section 15.44.160, they remain intact and engaged. Movable panels shall not be rendered easily openable or removable from the frame during or after the tests. A secondary locking device shall be installed to allow the sliding door to be opened a minimum 2" and a maximum of 4" to provide ventilation. The door in the secondary locking position shall not be removable by lifting. 
B.  Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or time-type cylinder locks which project beyond the face of the door or are otherwise accessible to gripping tools. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VIII part, 1987: Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIF).)  
15.44.200 - Residential Structures—Doors—Overhead and Sliding. 
A.  Metal or wooden overhead sliding doors shall be secured with a cylinder lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, metal slide bar, bolt or equivalent on the inside when not otherwise locked by electric power operations. In the event that this type door provides the only entrance to a garage, the cylinder lock or padlock may be on the outside. 
B.  Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks which project beyond the face of the door or are otherwise accessible to gripping tools. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIG).)  
15.44.210 - Residential Structures—Windows—Generally. 
A window, skylight or other light forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Section 15.44.220 when such window, skylight or light is not more than 12 feet above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants or similar area. A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Section 15.44.220. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VIII part, 1987: Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(IIH).)  
15.44.220 - Residential Structures—Windows—Locking Devices. 
A.  Sliding glass windows shall be provided with locking devices that, when subjected to the tests specified in Section 15.44.160 remain intact and engaged. A secondary locking device shall be installed to allow the movable panel to be opened a minimum 2" and a maximum of 4" to provide ventilation. The window in the secondary locking position shall not be removable by lifting. 
B.  Movable panels shall not be rendered easily openable or removable from the frame during or after the tests. 
C.  Other openable windows shall be provided with substantial locking devices which the Building Official finds render the building as secure as the devices required by this chapter. 
D.  Louvered windows, except those above the first story shall not be permitted. 
E.  Open parking lots (including lots having carports) providing more than ten parking spaces shall be provided with a maintained minimum of 3 foot-candles of light on the parking surface during hours of darkness. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § VIII part, 1987: Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (910)(II-I).)  
15.44.230 - Failure to Provide Security Devices Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for the owner(s) of a building or structure to fail to provide the security devices required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (906).)  
15.44.240 - Appeal—Board of Appeals. 
Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Building Official by filing a notice with the Secretary of the Board of Appeals; the Police Chief or his designated representative shall be a member of the Appeals Board to pass upon matters pertaining to this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (907)(part).)  
15.44.250 - Appeal—Notice—Contents. 
The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language the following: 
A.  Date of appeal; 
B.  Name of appellant; 
C.  Appellant's representative (if any); 
D.  Address(es) to which notices shall be sent; 
E.  Telephone number of appellant and/or representative; 
F.  Name of owner, if different from appellant; 
G.  Date of action or decision from which appeal is taken; 
H.  Action or decision being appealed; 
I.  Grounds for appeal; 
J.  Estimated time required by appellant to present appeal; 
K.  Address and description of real property involved. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (907)(a).)  
15.44.260 - Appeal—Filing Fee. 
No filing fee shall be required for an appeal from actions or decisions pertaining to this chapter. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (907)(b).)  
15.44.270 - Appeal—Hearing. 
The Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall cause the notice of appeal to be placed on the agenda as soon as practicable. Such date for the hearing shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed. Each appellant shall receive notice of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. 796 C.S. § 5 (part), 1974: prior code § 9108 (907)(c).) 
TITLE 15 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt codes by reference, see Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. ; for State law adopting building and other codes to apply as housing construction regulations throughout the State, see Health § Safety Code § 17922; for swimming pool construction regulations, see Title 17; for provisions on environmental quality, see Title 20. 
4.  For provisions on public rights-of-way, see Title l2. 
5.  For penalty provisions, see § l504.200 of this Code. 
6.  Ord. No. 1388 C.S. , § 2, adopted August 19, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 15.30, §§ 15.30.010—15.30.050, and enacted a new Ch. 15.30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.30 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for complete derivation. 
7.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.04, and adding a new Ch. 15.04. Former Ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 1, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 1, 12-15-2010. Former Ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1341 C.S. of 2007; Ord. 1297 C.S. of 2002; Ord. 1268 C.S. of 1999; Ord. 1228 of 1995; Ord. 1218 of 1995; Ord. 1188 of 1992; Ord. 1182 C.S. of 1992; Ord. 1181 C.S. of 1992; Ord. 1170 C.S. of 1991; Ord. 1094 C.S. of 1987; Ord. 1091 C.S. of 1987; Ord. 1011 C.S. of 1984; Ord. 995 C.S. of 1983; Ord. 916 C.S. of 1980; Ord. 875 C.S. of 1978; Ord. 851 of 1976; Ord. 796 C.S. of 1974; and prior code §§ 9100, 9101, 9103—9105, 9109. 
8.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 2(Exh. B), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.05, and adding a new Ch. 15.05. Former Ch. 15.05 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 2, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 9, 12-15-2010. 
9.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 3(Exh. C), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.07, and adding a new Ch. 15.07. Former Ch. 15.07 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 3, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 8, 12-15-2010. 
10.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 4(Exh. D), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.16, and adding a new Ch. 15.16. Former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 4, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 4, 12-15-2010; Ord. 1341 C.S., § III, 2007; Ord. 1297, C.S. § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 1268 C.S., § 3 (part), 1999; Ord. 1228 C.S., § I, 1995; Ord. 1188 C.S., § I, 1992; Ord. 1170 C.S., § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S., § IV (part), 1987; Ord. 1011 C.S., § 4 (part), 1984; Ord. 916 C.S., § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 851 C.S., § 4 (part), 1976; Ord. 796 C.S., § 7 (part), 1974; prior code §§ 9300, 9301, 9302. 
11.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 5(Exh. E), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.20, and adding a new Ch. 15.20. Former Ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 5, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 5, 12-15-2010; Ord. 1341 C.S., § IV (part), 2007; Ord. 1297 C.S., § 1 (part), 2002; Ord. 1268 C.S., § 3 (part), 1999; Ord. 1228 C.S., § I, 1995; Ord. 1188 C.S., § I, 1992; Ord. 1170 C.S., § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S., § V (part), 1987; Ord. 1011 C.S., § 5 (part), 1984; Ord. 916 C.S., § 3 (part), 1980; Ord. 851 C.S., § 5 (part), 1976; Ord. 796 C.S., § 6 (part), 1974; prior code §§ 9200, 9201 (part). 
12.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 6(Exh. F), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.24, and adding a new Ch. 15.24. Former Ch. 15.24 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 6, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 6, 12-15-2010; Ord. 1341, C.S. § V (part), 2007; Ord. 1297 C.S., § I (part), 2002; Ord. 1268 C.S., § 3 (part), 1999; Ord. 1228 C.S., § I, 1995; Ord. 1170 C.S., § 1 (part), 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S., § VI (part), 1987; Ord. 964 C.S., § 1 (part), 1982; Ord. 898 C.S., § 1 (part), 1979; Ord. 851 C.S., § 6, 1976; Ord. 754, § 2, 1972; prior code §§ 9400 (part), 9401, 9402, 9403. 
13.  Ord. No. 1399 C.S. , § 7(Exh. G), adopted November 16, 2016, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former Ch. 15.28, and adding a new Ch. 15.28. Former Ch. 15.28 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1375 C.S., § 7, 12-4-2013; Ord. No. 1358 C.S., § 7, 12-15-2010; prior code § 3100. 
Issued: 12/95  
TITLE 16 - SIGNS 
CHAPTERS: 
I.  GENERALLY 
II.  REGULATIONS 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
I. - GENERALLY  
CHAPTER 16.04 - SIGN CODE 
 
16.04.010 - Adoption of Uniform Sign Code. 
There is adopted by reference the Uniform Sign Code, with amendments as set forth herein, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing installation, location, electrification and maintenance of signs within the corporate limits of the City, the Uniform Sign Code, 1994 Edition, recommended by the International Conference of Building Officials and includes Chapters 16.20 through 16.68 of this Code, is adopted and made a part of this Code as if set out in full herein. 
(Ord. 1228 C.S. § I, 1995; Ord. 1188 C.S. § II, 1992; Ord. 1170 C.S. § 2, 1991; Ord. 1091 C.S. § X part, 1987: Ord. 1011 C.S. § 6, 1984: Ord. 852 C.S. § 1 (part), 1976; Ord. 796 C.S. § 9 (part), 1974; prior code § 9600 (part).)  
16.04.020 - Amendments to Uniform Sign Code. 
A.  Section 303 of the Uniform Sign Code is amended by deleting paragraph (3.) in its entirety; 
B.  Permit fees for work regulated by this chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by Resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § X part, 1987: Ord. 916 C.S. § 7, 1980: Ord. 852 C.S. § 1 (part), 1976; Ord. 796 C.S. § 9 (part), 1974; prior code § 9600 (part).)  
CHAPTER 16.08 - SIGNS ADJACENT TO LANDSCAPED AREAS 
 
16.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
A.  "Advertising display" refers to advertising structures and to signs; 
B.  "Advertising structure" refers to a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary; 
C.  "Freeway" means a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access, and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the State; 
D.  "Landscaped freeway" means a section or sections of a freeway which is now, or hereafter may be, improved by the planting, at least to one side of the freeway right-of-way, of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers or other ornamental vegetation which shall require reasonable maintenance. Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control, traffic safety requirements, reduction of fire hazards or traffic noise abatement, shall not change the character of a freeway to landscaped freeway; 
E.  "Signs" refers to any card, cloth, metal, painted or wooden sign of any character, placed for outdoor advertising purposes, on or to the ground, or any tree, wall, bush, rock, fence, building, structure or thing, either publicly or privately owned, other than an advertising structure; 
F.  Neither "advertising structure" nor "sign" as used in this chapter includes: 
1.  Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or by any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or authorized by law or by Federal, State or Municipal Authority. 
G.  The verb "to place" and any of its variants, as applied to advertising displays, includes the maintaining and the erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, stitching, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making visible, any advertising display on or to the ground, or any tree, bush, rock, fence, post, wall building, structure or thing. 
(Prior code § 9700.)  
16.08.020 - Prohibitions. 
No advertising displays shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a section of freeway which has been, or hereafter may be, landscaped as defined herein, if the advertising display is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on such landscaped section of a freeway. 
(Prior code § 9701.)  
16.08.030 - Exemptions. 
The provision of Section 16.08.020 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following listed advertising structures or signs used exclusively to: 
A.  Advertise the sale or lease of the property on which the advertising display is placed; 
B.  Designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is placed or to identify such premises; 
C.  Advertise the business conducted or goods manufactured or produced, or services rendered upon the property upon which the advertising display is placed. 
(Prior code § 9702.)  
16.08.040 - Removal of Prohibited Displays. 
Any advertising structure or sign which is now, or hereafter nay be, in violation of the provisions of Sections 16.08.020 shall be removed within three years from the effective date of this chapter or within three years from the date when the project for the landscaping of a section or sections of a freeway has been completed or accepted, and the character of the section or sections has been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway, whichever is later. 
(Prior code § 9703.)  
II. - REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 16.20 - PURPOSE 
 
16.20.010 - Designated. 
The purpose of this chapter and Chapters 16.24 through 16.68 is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, materials, construction, size, location and maintenance of signs and sign structures. These regulations further have the purpose of allowing for identification of a business in a manner that is most harmonious with an aesthetic and functional business district, to encourage signs that are well designed and pleasing in appearance, and to reduce overhead clutter and enhance property values It is not the intent of these regulations that on-site signs be used for general advertising purposes as opposed to identifying the business to which the sign relates. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.0.)  
CHAPTER 16.24 - DEFINITIONS 
 
16.24.010 - Generally. 
For the purposes of Chapters 16.20 through 16.68 certain words and terms herein are defined as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1 (part).)  
16.24.020 - Accessory Sign (on-premises sign). 
"Accessory sign (on-premises sign)" means any sign which advertises goods manufactured or produced or services rendered on the property upon which such sign is located. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(3).)  
16.24.030 - Approved Plastic Material. 
"Approved plastic material" means a material which the building official has found to meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code approved standards of the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(4).)  
16.24.040 - Area Identification Sign. 
"Area identification sign" means a permanent sign used to identify a neighborhood, subdivision, shopping district, industrial district or any area composed of more than one ownership. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10, 201.1(5).)  
16.24.050 - Awning. 
"Awning" means any movable structure attached to a building and projecting over a thoroughfare or sidewalk. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(6).)  
16.24.060 - Building Area. 
"Building area" means the total square footage of floor area of a building used for commercial, office, industrial, quasi-public or agricultural farm product sale. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(7).)  
16.24.070 - Building Line. 
"Building line" means a line established by ordinance beyond which no building may extend. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(8).)  
16.24.080 - Combination Sign. 
"Combination sign" means a sign incorporating any combination of the features of ground sign, sign tower, projecting and roof signs. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(9).)  
16.24.090 - Curbline. 
"Curbline" means the line at the face of the curb nearest to the street or roadway. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(10).)  
16.24.100 - Double-Faced Sign. 
"Double-faced sign" means a sign designed to be viewed from two directions and which at no point is thicker than 24 inches measured from the exterior surfaces of each face, and the two faces of the sign are either parallel or the angle between them is less than 30 degrees. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(11).)  
16.24.110 - Electric Sign. 
"Electric sign" means any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(12).)  
16.24.120 - Erect. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, including the painting of wall signs. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(13).)  
16.24.130 - Flyer. 
"Flyer" means letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular forms attached to or superimposed upon any sign structure or display surface. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(14).)  
16.24.140 - Free-Standing Sign. 
"Free-standing sign" means a sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground, with no portion of the sign over a building, other than a combination sign or a portable sign as defined herein. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(15).)  
16.24.150 - Freeway. 
"Freeway" means a highway to which the owners of abutting lands have limited or no access. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(16).)  
16.24.160 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means the property line of a site abutting on a street, other than the sideline of a corner lot. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(17).)  
16.24.170 - Incombustible material. 
"Incombustible material" means material which meets the requirements of the Uniform Building code approved standards for the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(18).)  
16.24.180 - Marquee. 
"Marquee" means a permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(19).)  
16.24.185 - Non-Commercial Sign. 
"Non-Commercial Sign" means any sign which does not advertise goods or commercial services, events or establishments Non-commercial signs include signs expressing ideological or political views. 
(Ord. 1059 C.S. § 5, 1986).  
16.24.190 - Nonstructural Trim. 
"Nonstructural trim" means molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing, flyers and walkways which are attached to the sign structure or display surface. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(20).)  
16.24.200 - Occupancy Sign. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all signs shall only identify the occupant of the building upon which the sign is attached. Such signs shall contain only the name of the business and the type of service rendered. Such signs are referred to herein as "occupancy signs." No occupancy sign shall be placed upon any portion of the building except that portion occupied by the business which is identified by the sign. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(21).)  
16.24.210 - Off-Site Sign. 
"Off-site sign" means a sign which advertises products, services or other uses not associated with any use established on the premises on which such a sign is located. Nonaccessory includes, but is not limited to, such terms as "billboard" and "outdoor advertising structures." 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(22).)  
16.24.220 - Permanent Sign. 
"Permanent sign" means any sign which from the nature and effect of its proposed composition, construction, message to be carried or its proposed placement, would make it reasonable to determine that it was intended for continuous display for a period of time greater than 90 days. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(23).)  
16.24.230 - Person. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(24).)  
16.24.240 - Political Sign. 
"Political sign" means any sign which is designed to influence the action of the voters either for the passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot of any national, State or local election, or which is designed to influence the action of the voters either for the election or defeat of a candidate for nomination or election to any public office at any national, State or local election. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(25).)  
16.24.250 - Portable Free-Standing Sign (A-Frame Signs). 
"Portable free-standing sign (including A-frame type signs)" means a sign that is designed to be movable and is not structurally attached to the ground, a building, a structure or any other sign. Such sign may or may not be in the configuration of an "A." 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(26).)  
16.24.260 - Projection. 
"Projection" means the distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the building line or eaves of a building. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(27).)  
16.24.270 - Projecting Sign. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign other than a wall sign which projects from and is supported by a wall or roof of a building, structure or sign structure, and projects beyond the eaves of a building. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(28).)  
16.24.280 - Roof Sign. 
"Roof sign" means a sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building or structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(29).)  
16.24.290 - Shall. 
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(1).)  
16.24.300 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any lettering or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, plastic, wood or other material of any kind whatsoever erected for advertising, identification or other purposes upon the ground, or upon any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence, roof, building, structure, vehicle or any place whatsoever; provided however that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein: 
A.  Any device not exceeding 2 square feet in area and bearing only the property address numbers, post box number, names of occupants or premises, or other identification of the premises not having commercial connotation, providing such device is not located where other signs are prohibited; 
B.  Flags or insignia of any government except where displayed in connection with commercial promotion; 
C.  Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies; 
D.  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights; 
E.  Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property providing such sign contains no business or product name or trademark or otherwise identifies the use of the premises upon which such sign is located and further provided that such sign is not located where other signs are prohibited; 
F.  Window signs not exceeding 36 square inches identifying acceptable credit cards or trading stamps. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(30).)  
16.24.310 - Sign Area. 
The area of a sign having an integral part of a building as its background shall be the area within the smallest of a circle, square or rectangle drawn to include all letters, designs and tubing which are a part of the sign. The area of all other signs shall be the smallest of a circle, square or rectangle drawn to encompass all portions of the sign including background and tubing, but excluding posts without attached sign lighting. In computing the area of a double-faced sign, only the 1 face of the sign shall be included. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(31).)  
16.24.320 - Sign Structure. 
"Sign structure" means the supports, uprights, braces and frame work of the sign. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(32).)  
16.24.330 - Sign Tower. 
"Sign tower" means a tower erected for the specific purpose of supporting a sign or having a sign attached flat against the face or faces. The tower may or may not be an integral part of the building. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code 10,201.1(33).)  
16.24.340 - Street. 
"Street" means any public street, alleyway, place or thoroughfare. The sidelines of the right-of-way constitute the sidelines of a street. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code 10,201.1(34).)  
16.24.350 - Structure. 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together with some definite manner. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(35).)  
16.24.360 - Temporary Sign. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a period of not more than 90 calendar days. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(36).)  
16.24.370 - Uniform Building Code. 
"Uniform Building Code" means the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code adopted by the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(37).)  
16.24.380 - Wall Sign. 
"Wall sign" means any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall, and not extending beyond the eaves or building face. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.1(38).)  
16.24.381 - City Gateway Sign. 
City gateway signs that identify the City, are signs located at the primary gateways to the City, on land owned by the City or on land in which the City has an interest and which may be sponsored by a specific commercial enterprise. Gateway signs shall be permitted only at the following 6 gateway points to the City: 
1.  Within the City median on the north side of State Route 4 at the Morello Avenue exit; 
2.  On the south side of State Route 4 and on the west side of the Pine Street/Center Avenue exit (directly adjacent to the John Muir Inn); 
3.  On the east side of Alhambra Avenue directly north and adjacent to the freeway exit from westbound SR 4; 
4.  Within the landscaped median on Alhambra Avenue north of Devon Avenue (in the proximity of the existing City sign); 
5.  Within the landscaped median between Marina vista and Escobar; and 
6.  Within the City right of way on the north side of the Pacheco Boulevard/Bush Street intersection. 
The manner in which the City is featured shall be equally as noticeable as the sponsoring business, including colors, size and character of letters and lighting. 
(Ord. 1278 C.S. § 2, 2000.)  
CHAPTER 16.28 - DESIGN REVIEW 
 
16.28.010 - Findings for Approval. 
All proposed signs shall be subject to design review in accord with the provisions of Sections 22.34.030 through 22.34.070 of this Code. All proposed signs with areas in excess of 20 square feet, and all free-standing signs shall be reviewed by the Board of Adjustments under design review. In approving a sign, the following findings shall be made: 
A.  The sign is in architectural harmony with the building and/or premises upon which the sign is to be erected; 
B.  That any structure supporting the sign is an integral part of the sign design; 
C.  That there will be no visible angle iron, guy wires or such other bracing or supports that may detract from the appearance of the sign; and 
D.  That all provisions of Chapters 16.20 through 16.68 including the intent and purpose thereof have been complied with. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.2.)  
CHAPTER 16.32 - GENERAL RESTRICTIONS 
 
16.32.010 - Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title the restrictions set out in this chapter shall apply to all signs in all zoning districts in the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3 (part).)  
16.32.020 - Occupancy Signs. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all occupancy signs shall be placed flat against the wall of the building, or placed on the roof parallel to the front wall of the building, or suspended from the eaves or from the ceiling of a covered walkway, or any combination thereof. No wall or roof sign shall extend, project or protrude laterally from the building or portion thereof occupied by the business identified by such sign other than as necessitated by the thickness of such sign or as may be necessary to comply otherwise with the sign placement regulation contained herein. Occupancy signs shall not contain moving parts. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(a).)  
16.32.030 - Roof Signs. 
Roof signs shall only be permitted on a roof covering the ground floor of a building or covering a ground floor walkway, and shall be placed in such a manner that the difference in vertical distance between the highest point on the sign and the top edge of the roof is equal to or greater than the difference between the lowest point on the sign and the low edge of the roof in front of the sign. Roof signs shall be placed only above or in front of the business identified by such sign. No roof sign shall have a vertical dimension of more than 30 inches. Roof signs shall not contain moving parts. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(b).)  
16.32.040 - Free-Standing Signs. 
Free-standing signs shall not project into or over a public street or thoroughfare, or the right-of—way thereof. The maximum size of a free-standing sign shall be 20 square feet, or 200 square feet if a use permit is obtained under Chapter 22.40. Free-standing signs shall not contain moving parts. A free-standing sign not exceeding 20 feet in height from the finished grade of the ground at the base of the sign to the top of the sign structure may be permitted as part of the total allowable sign area by the Board of Adjustments only if the following findings can be made: 
A.  A free-standing sign is the only feasible means by which the business conducted on the premises can have the same degree of identification to the traveling and shopping public as that available to business on neighboring premises without free-standing signs; and 
B.  The free-standing sign will not give the business on the premises a greater degree of identification to the public than that available to business on neighboring premises without free-standing signs; and 
C.  The free-standing sign is consistent with the objectives of the zoning regulations prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Code; and 
D.  The free-standing sign, if granted, would not adversely affect the preservation of property values in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 1051 C.S. § I, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(c).)  
16.32.041 - City Gateway Signs. 
A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated in this Chapter, City gateway signs ("gateway signs"), which identify the City and may be sponsored (paid for and maintained) by a single commercial enterprise in accordance with the provisions of this Section, shall be permitted at any or all of the following 6 gateway points to the City: 
1.  Within the City median on the north side of State Route 4 at the Morello Avenue exit; 
2.  On the south side of State Route 4 and on the west side of the Pine Street/Center Avenue exit (directly adjacent to the John Muir Inn); 
3.  On the east side of Alhambra Avenue directly north and adjacent to the freeway exit from westbound SR 4; 
4.  Within the landscaped median on Alhambra Avenue north of Devon Avenue (in the proximity of the existing City sign); 
5.  Within the landscaped median between Marina Vista and Escobar; 
6.  Within the City right of way on the north side of the Pacheco Boulevard /Bush Street intersection. 
B.  Gateway signs shall feature and identify the words, "City of Martinez", and may identify the business sponsoring the sign. The manner in which the City is identified shall be equally as noticeable as the sponsoring business, including colors, size and character of letters and lighting. 
C.  Gateway signs shall be designed as a monument style sign not to exceed 8 feet in overall height (measured from the finished grade of the ground at the base of the sign to the top of the sign structure) and 200 square feet in area size. An exception may be granted to allow a sign up to 60 feet tall at any of the above identified gateways if the following finding can be made: 
That surrounding site constraints prevent or substantially interfere with views of the gateway sign from major arterial roads and/or freeways if the gateway sign is no taller than 8 feet in height. 
For purposes of this subsection, "site constraints" shall include but not be limited to the following: limited visibility from the freeway or major arterials, Caltrans improvements, roadway alignment or existing topographic conditions. 
In the event a sign taller than 8 feet is requested, it shall not exceed 60 feet in overall height (measured from the finished grade of the ground at the base of the sign to the top of the sign structure). 
D.  The following design requirements shall apply to gateway signs: 
1.  Sign colors shall be compatible with surrounding structures. 
2.  The signs shall contain raised block letters and if the letters are lighted, they shall be back lit and shall have no moving parts. The sign and raised letters shall reflect natural materials, i.e. wood. The materials and style of the sign shall be compatible with the architectural style of the surrounding structures wherever possible. Neon tubing and individual steel poles or uprights are not permitted for gateway signs. The sign shall be placed on two supports finished in the same material as the sign face. 
3.  All interior illuminated signs shall have an opaque background. 
E.  Prior to and as a condition precedent to the issuance of a sign permit for the construction and installation of a gateway sign permitted hereunder, the applicant must enter into an agreement with the City, prepare and execute an easement in favor of the City or enter into some other legally binding arrangement with the City which shall include, at a minimum, the following terms and conditions: 
1.  The applicant shall maintain and repair the gateway sign as long as the sign is standing or as long as the agreement/easement/arrangement is in effect, whichever is longer; 
2.  The nature and frequency of maintenance shall be determined by the City, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, and should the applicant fail to maintain the gateway sign at the times and in the fashion specified by the City, the City shall have the right to go upon the property on which the sign is erected and effect the maintenance or repair, all at the sole cost of the applicant; 
3.  Once approved by the City, the sign cannot be changed and the approval to allow an applicant's business identification to appear on the sign cannot be assigned or transferred (collectively "transfer") without the written approval of the City; provided, that any such approval must be sought and obtained by utilizing the procedures set forth in subsection F, of this Section, provided, further, that as long as the modification and/or transfer has as its sole purpose the changing of the name of the business identification without a change in the nature of the business, the City may not withhold its consent unreasonably; otherwise, the City may withhold its consent for any or no reason; 
4.  The applicant shall provide security or other evidence that it possesses the resources to perform the terms and conditions of the arrangement; 
5.  The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from any and all liability, damages, expenses, attorney's fees and costs arising out of the approval, installation, maintenance and repair of the sign; and 
6.  The applicant shall comply with the provisions of subsection (F)(5) or (6) of this Section, whichever is applicable. 
All other terms and conditions shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. 
F.  1.  Any person desiring to install a sign described in this section must submit an application for design review approval of same with the Community Development Department on forms approved by the Department, pursuant to Chapter 16.28. 
2.  Any person desiring to invoke the exception specified in subsection C of this Section shall also submit an application for a use permit with the Community Development Department as required by the Department, pursuant to Chapter 22.40. Not withstanding Chapter 22.40 to the contrary, the application for the use permit shall be made to and decided by the Planning Commission; the hearing and notice thereof shall be held and given pursuant to Sections 22.40.040 and 22.40.050; the Planning Commission shall have the powers and make the findings specified in Section 22.40.070; and any appeal of the Planning Commission or Design Review decision shall be taken pursuant to Section 22.40.100. 
3.  The applications shall be considered and acted upon by the Planning Commission whose decision shall be final unless appealed to the City Council within 10 days after the Planning Commission makes its decision. Notice of hearing for design review before the Planning Commission and, if appealed, before the City Council, shall conform to the noticing requirements of the City Code. 
4.  As to gateway signs which are proposed to be installed and/or constructed on a gateway point owned by the City, the City shall have the right to deny the application therefor for any or no reason. 
5.  As to gateway signs which are proposed to be installed and/or constructed on a gateway point owned by the City, the City shall have the right to terminate such use of its property and to compel the applicant to remove the sign, all at the applicant's sole cost, upon reasonable notice (not to exceed 90 days), which said notice and the City's rights described in this subsection shall be specified in the arrangement described in subsection E of this Section. 
6.  As to gateway signs which are proposed to be installed and/or constructed on a gateway point owned by the City, the City shall have the right to terminate such use and to compel the applicant to remove the sign, all at the applicant's sole cost, in the event that the applicant has (a) violated this Section; (b) with respect to the sign, violated any other provision of this Code, State or federal law and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder; and/or (c) breached the arrangement described in subsection E of this Section. Said rights to terminate the use and compel the removal of the gateway sign shall be exercisable by the City only after it has given the applicant reasonable notice to cure the violation/breach, and if such cure has not occurred within the time specified by the City, then the City may exercise its rights hereunder after (i) providing the applicant notice of hearing, (ii) conducting a hearing to revoke the applicant's privilege to use its property in the fashion permitted under this Section and (iii) making written findings specifying the reasons for any decision made by the City after the conclusion of said hearing. Provisions substantially similar to those specified in this subsection shall be included in the arrangement described in subsection E of this Section. 
(Ord. 1278 C.S. § 1, 2000.)  
16.32.045 - Portable Free-Standing A-Frame Signs. 
Portable free-standing A-frame type signs shall be permitted in all commercial zone districts subject to the exceptions and conditions following: 
A.  A business shall be allowed a maximum of one A-frame sign to be placed in front of the business or in front of a nearby business, a maximum of 100 feet from and on the same side of the street as the advertising business, with the written approval of the property owner of the neighboring business and the approval of the Community Development Department. 
B.  A business which conducts any part of its operation above the ground floor shall be permitted to install an A-frame sign pursuant to this Title with the written approval of the property owner and the approval of the Community Development Department. A maximum of one A-frame sign may be placed in front of each business. 
C.  Portable A-frame signs shall be placed so that the free flow of pedestrian traffic is not obstructed. Specifically, signage shall be placed adjacent to curbs, at least 14 feet from the street corner (see sketch B, below) or as approved by the Community Development Department. 
D.  A business in a shopping center may place a maximum of one A-frame sign behind or on the sidewalk in front of the shopping center or in other locations on the shopping center property, with the written consent of the property owner. The location of these signs shall be subject to review by the Community Development Department to ensure that visibility and/or pedestrian use of the sidewalk are not impeded by the sign. 
E.  The maximum size of a portable freestanding A-frame sign shall be three feet in height by two feet in width. 
F.  Lights, moving parts, removable flyers and/or flexible materials shall be prohibited on portable A-frame signs. 
G.  Prior to installation or use, the location, the design and materials of portable free-standing A-frame signs must receive the Administrative Design Review approval of the Community Development. Department which is authorized to impose conditions on the approval. 
H.  Administrative variances to the restrictions on the number of signs and the distance of signs from the advertising business may be approved by the Community Development Director. 
I.  Portable Free-standing A-frame signs shall be properly maintained and removed when the establishment is not open for business. If there exists a safety hazard due to the lack of lighting after dark an A-frame sign shall be removed from the exterior of the business prior to dark. 
J.  All A-frame signs existing on May 16, 1994 may be grandfathered in, but administrative design review approval by the Community Development Department shall be required. If the existing sign does not meet the location standards of this section, an administrative variance must be applied for. There shall be no fee for the design review. The fee for the variance shall be that as set by City Council Resolution. 
K.  The business owner and the property owner of new and existing A-frame signs shall sign an agreement holding the City harmless for damages caused by their signs located in the City right-of-way. 
(Ord. 1215 C.S. § I, 1994; Ord. 979 C.S § 2 1982.)  
16.32.050 - Height Limits. 
No part of any sign attached to a building shall be higher than 25 feet from the finished grade of the ground below the sign to the highest elevation of the sign structure, except that the Board of Adjustments may allow a sign to be higher than otherwise permitted herein providing the following findings are made: 
A.  Good design criteria requires a higher sign; and 
B.  The business identified by the sign occupies all floor space adjacent to the wall upon which the sign is to be placed, from the ground to the top of the sign; and 
C.  That the higher sign improves the architectural appearance of the building. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(d).)  
16.32.060 - Size Limits. 
A.  No individual sign face, or elements related in such a manner as to comprise one sign, shall exceed 200 square feet of surface area. The maximum total sign surface area permitted for a business shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each front foot of principal building frontage occupied by such business, plus one square foot of sign area for each 200 square feet of gross floor area occupied by such business. Notwithstanding the above limitations, no ground floor business shall be restricted to less than 20 square feet of sign area, and the total sign area for any one ground floor business shall not exceed 200 square feet, except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Any business occupying a building or portion of a building which is set back more than 100 feet from a street may increase the wall sign area otherwise permitted to face such street by twenty-five percent (25%). 
C.  Any business which has customer entrances on other than the major street frontage may have additional wall sign area on each building face which contains a customer entrance. The sign area on each such other building faces for any building occupying less than 50,000 square feet of floor area shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the sign area permitted on the primary building face. The Board of Adjustments may allow additional sign area not to exceed 200 square feet of signing on each of such other building faces for any business occupying in excess of 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
D.  "Frontage," as used in this chapter, means the length of the principal frontage of a building or portion thereof occupied by one business and exposed to a public street or parking lot. If the building frontage does not consist of any straight line, the frontage of any offset portion shall be projected for computation purposes to the extension of the line of the major portion of the frontage. 
E.  Any business which is not on the ground floor shall not be allowed any sign on the exterior of the building except where the principal access to the business is by a stairway opening to the outside, in which case such business shall be permitted 3 square feet of sign area. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(e).)  
16.32.070 - Shingle and Suspended Signs. 
Shingle signs and suspended signs shall be subject to review by the Board of Adjustments. In approving a shingle or suspended sign, the Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings in addition to the findings required of all signs: 
A.  The sign, if nonilluminated, is constructed of painted or stained wood, or material simulating wood; 
B.  The message on the sign is limited to the name of the business and the principal classification of goods or services rendered on the property; 
C.  The sign will not be attached to any structure other than a building; 
D.  No portion of the sign will exceed the elevation of the eaves of the building to which it is attached, and in no case will it exceed 11 feet from the finished grade of the ground below the sign; 
E.  The sign will be not more than 3 inches thick nor less than ½ inch thick except as reasonably required in connection with some graphic element of the sign; 
F.  The sign will be not less than 7 ½ feet above any pedestrian walkway, and not above any vehicular passageway; 
G.  The installation of the sign will not exceed the permitted sign surface area; 
H.  There is no on-site free-standing sign accessory to the same business; 
I.  The sign is reasonably required for and assists in the identification of the premises by pedestrians approaching along public passageways or open space; 
J.  The sign will have no garish or obtrusive qualities and will embody strong elements of quality graphic design; 
K.  Neither the supporting structure nor the proposed external lighting will materially detract from the design quality of the sign or building. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(f).)  
16.32.080 - Real Estate Signs. 
One temporary real estate sign not exceeding 12 square feet of sign surface area may be displayed during any period a parcel of real property is for sale, rent or lease; and such a sign may be continued for not more than fifteen (15) days thereafter. The sign shall state the name of the seller, telephone and address, and whether for sale, rent or lease. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(g).)  
16.32.090 - Future Use. 
One temporary sign not exceeding 12 square feet in surface area announcing a future use is permitted providing such sign shall not be erected until there is a valid permit for such use and/or construction, and shall be removed not later than fifteen (15) days after the completion of the main building. Such sign may be combined with a real estate sign as permitted by Section 16.32.070, but shall not be in addition thereto. In addition to the future use sign, a temporary sign not exceeding 12 square feet in surface area denoting the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or persons of similar capacity, may be placed upon real property upon which a building is being constructed. The signs permitted by this section and Section 16.32.070 may be combined into one sign not exceeding a surface area of 24 square feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(h).)  
16.32.100 - Window Signs. 
Temporary signs attached to or painted on windows are exempt from these regulations. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(i).)  
16.32.110 - Lights. 
No sign shall contain flashing lights, lights in any manner that are excessively bright, lights that depict moving arrows or animation, or lights that could result in confusion with traffic lights. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(j).)  
16.32.120 - Flexible Signs—Permit Required When. 
No pennants, banners or other paraphernalia composed of paper, cloth, plastic or other flexible material shall be permitted except as authorized by the City Council for city-wide promotional events or celebrations, except that permits may be issued for pennants, banners and similar advertising devices placed over private property to advertise business openings, providing such pennants, banners or similar devices are permanently removed within fifteen (15) calendar days after the first day of such opening, or within twenty (20) calendar days of installation whichever occurs first. The term "business opening" shall not be construed to include openings of sales or rentals of subdivisions or real estate development projects. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.3(k).)  
16.32.130 - Placement of Non-Commercial Signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, non-commercial signs may be placed in lieu of the identification, occupancy and commercial advertising signs which are allowed by the provisions of this title, provided such non-commercial signs do not exceed the number, location, height and other applicable requirements or restrictions for such identification, occupancy and commercial advertising signs on the particular property on which they are placed, and provided that such non-commercial signs meet the other requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 1059 C.S. § 6, 1986).  
16.32.140 - Business Identification Signs. 
On office buildings four or more stories tall, a maximum of one tenant identification sign in addition to the master identification sign may be permitted with a Use Permit subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The tenant must occupy a minimum of 25,000 gross square feet of the building area; 
B.  The sign copy shall be limited to the company name and logo; 
C.  The sign shall be compatible with the architecture of the building; 
D.  The signing and logo shall consist only of individual letters mounted on an architectural surface, and shall be indirectly lighted (no cabinet signs or floodlights); 
E.  Letter size shall be appropriate to the size of the building but in no case higher than 48 inches; 
F.  The maximum total sign surface area permitted shall be one square foot of sign for each 200 square feet of gross area occupied by such business. The total area of the sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1134 C.S. § I, 1989.)  
CHAPTER 16.36 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
16.36.010 - Permitted Signs Designated. 
No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be permitted except the following: 
A.  Home Occupation: One nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area pertaining to a home occupation; 
B.  Residential Office Activity: One sign per site not exceeding 4 square feet in area; 
C.  Real Estate Sign: One temporary real estate sign, nonilluminated, not exceeding 6 square feet in area. If the site has 150 feet or more of street frontage, and two or more acres in area, two such signs shall be permitted. For sites having frontage on more than one street, the provisions of this subsection shall apply to each street; 
D.  Permitted Use Identification Sign: One identification sign, not directly illuminated, not exceeding 8 square feet in area, located flat against a wall and not projecting above the cornice or roof of a lodging house, apartment hotel, or professional office building, or located on the premises of a parking lot; 
E.  Conditional Use Identification Sign: One identification sign, not directly illuminated, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, located flat against a wall and not projecting above the eaves, of a conditional use which occupies a structure, or located on the premises of a conditional use which does not occupy a structure, provided that no sign shall be located in or project into a required front, side or rear yard area. An exception is that a church bulletin board, otherwise complying with the provisions of this section may be located in a required front yard area, but not closer than 10 feet to any street line; 
F.  Subdivision Sign: permitted in accord with the regulations prescribed in Section 16.56.010 of this title; 
G.  Regional Identification: permanent signs not exceeding 12 square feet in total surface area are permitted at each main entrance to a region containing more than 400 dwelling units, or consisting of more than 200 acres in area, providing such signs contain only the name of such region. Such signs may be larger than 12 square feet or may identify a smaller region provided that the Board of Adjustments shall make a finding that the area is sufficiently unique to require such identification and will not have an adverse effect on the neighborhood in which it is located. If such a sign is used for identification of a subdivision or groups of subdivisions during the time of development and sales of such subdivision or groups of subdivisions, the sign shall be removed at the end of the sales program, or the perpetual maintenance thereof shall be guaranteed; 
H.  Future Use: signs permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.32.090 of this title; 
I.  Roof Sign: no roof signs of any kind shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 822 § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.4.)  
CHAPTER 16.40 - PROFESSIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE DISTRICT 
 
16.40.010 - Permitted Signs Designated. 
No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be permitted except the following: 
A.  Home occupation signs shall be the same as provided in Section 16.36.010A; 
B.  Real estate signs shall be the same as provided in Section 16.36.010C; 
C.  Permitted use identification lodging house and apartment hotel signs shall be the same as provided in Section 16.36.010D; 
D.  Permitted use occupancy sign shall be permitted in accord with the regulations prescribed in Chapter 16.32 of this title, except no roof signs shall be permitted; 
E.  Future use shall be the same as provided in Section 16.36.010H; 
F.  Master Signs. Any site containing four or more offices shall be permitted one master identification sign, not exceeding 4 square feet per acre of site nor 24 square feet total area, subject to the approval of the Board of Adjustments, who shall make the following findings in approving such master signs: 
1.  The master identification sign is in architectural harmony with the design of the buildings intended to be identified; 
2.  Where feasible, the master identification sign is designed as an integral part of the wall of a building or directly on the ground, rather than visibly pole-supported, and is properly landscaped; 
3.  The master identification sign contains only the name of the office complex or institutional use and its street address; directional signs, not exceeding 72 square inches of additional sign area each, may be erected for each occupant as part of the master sign concept. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.5.)  
CHAPTER 16.44 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 
16.44.010 - Permitted Signs Designated. 
The following signs shall be permitted in all commercial districts: 
A.  Occupancy signs for permitted and conditional uses shall be in accord with the provisions of Chapter 16.32 of this title; 
B.  Other signs shall be as prescribed in Chapter 16.32 of this title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.6.)  
CHAPTER 16.48 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
16.48.010 - Permitted Signs Designated. 
No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be permitted except the following: 
A.  Occupancy signs for permitted and conditional uses in accord with the provisions of Chapter 16.32 of this title; 
B.  Other signs as prescribed in Chapter 16.32 of this title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.7.: Ord. 1059 C.S. § 2, 1986).  
CHAPTER 16.52 - OTHER DISTRICTS 
 
16.52.010 - Appropriate Criteria to be Established. 
Signs in other zoning districts shall be considered by the Board of Adjustments, who shall establish appropriate criteria for their approval. All signs shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 16.32 of this title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.8.)  
CHAPTER 16.56 - SUBDIVISION SIGNS 
 
16.56.010 - Permitted Signs Designated. 
Each subdivision within the City wherein the initial sales promotion is active may have two on-site signs not exceeding a surface area of 32 square feet each. In addition, upon application to the Board of Adjustments, subdivisions in locations which are difficult to reach or describe may be permitted one to four off-site directional signs, each not exceeding a surface area of 8 square feet. Under no circumstances shall two or more such signs be combined into a larger sign. The Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings prior to approving any off-site signs: 
A.  The proposed subdivision location is difficult to reach or describe, and off-site directional signing is essential for reasonable sales and development; 
B.  Each proposed directional sign is essential for the potential purchaser to reach the site; 
C.  The proposed signing concept, two on-site and up to four off-site, is the total signing planned for the subdivision, inside and outside the City limits, within the Martinez planning area. In the event the signing plan approved by the Board of Adjustments is exceeded at any time, the building official shall immediately order the removal of all off-site signs for the particular project within the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,201.9.)  
CHAPTER 16.64 - PROHIBITED SIGNS 
 
16.64.010 - Designated. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title the following signs are prohibited in the City: 
A.  Nonaccessory signs and arrows; 
B.  Placards, posters, announcements and similar signs posted or attached to any fence, utility pole, signpost, tree or any object in a public thoroughfare, except those required by City Ordinance; 
C.  Sign "A" boards, structures or merchandise for sale placed on any portion of a street, sidewalk or right-of-way, and not in compliance with Section 16.32.045, and portable signs on parked vehicles and excluding newspaper vending devices which may be permitted by action of the City Council; 
D.  Signs of any kind in residential zones except those expressly permitted in this title; 
E.  Any signs expressly prohibited by any other ordinance of the City; 
F.  Any sign which because of its lighting, shape, design, color or reflected light is a detriment to surrounding property or prevents the peaceful enjoyment of residential uses or presents a conflict with traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 979 C.S. § 1, 1982: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,201.12.)  
CHAPTER 16.68 - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
 
16.68.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maintenance, continued use and/or removal and replacement of signs not conforming to the regulations prescribed in this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.0.)  
16.68.020 - Continued Maintenance. 
Nonconforming signs lawfully existing on the date this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 become applicable may be maintained without being made to comply with the requirements of this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Such nonconforming signs shall be altered or moved only after approval of a valid application thereof, except that no permit shall be required for the removal of a nonconforming sign. The term "alter" shall not be construed to apply to normal maintenance, upkeep or the changing of the advertising or the sign face. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.1.)  
16.68.030 - Record. 
Within three years of April 18, 1975, the Planning Director shall compile a list of signs which as of said date do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 and Titles 20 and 22 and shall notify owners of the nonconforming signs and the time within which same must be made to conform or be abated. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.2.)  
16.68.040 - Small and Inexpensive Signs. 
Each nonconforming A-frame sign, portable sign, temporary sign, sign composed of flexible material or off-site sign containing 24 or less square feet per face, and each nonconforming sign painted on a building wall or painted on or attached to a motor vehicle or trailer, shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 within six months following April 18, 1975. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.3.)  
16.68.050 - Subdivision Signs. 
All on-site and off-site subdivision signs not conforming to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 shall be removed or altered to comply with these provisions within six months following April 18, 1975. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.4.)  
16.68.060 - Amortization of Excessively High Free-Standing Signs. 
A.  Each and every existing free-standing sign which exceeds by more than 100 percent the maximum permissible height specified in this chapter, Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 and Titles 20 and 22 shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 not later than three years from April 18, 1975. 
B.  The Planning & Building Director may grant an exception to the owner of a free-standing sign which exceeds by more than one hundred percent (100%) the maximum permissible height specified in this chapter, Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 and Titles 20 and 22 for a period of time not greater than the period of time necessary to amortize the cost of the sign, for tax purposes, under Section 167 of the Internal Revenue Code. Request for such extension shall be supported by legal documents, sworn statements, affidavits or other documents clearly establishing a need for additional time beyond the standard three-year amortization period. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.5(a).)  
16.68.070 - Signs With Moving Parts, Flashing, Bright Lights or Animation. 
Each and every existing sign which contains moving parts, flashing lights, animation or excessively bright lights shall be modified and altered to eliminate the movement, flashing or animation, or to reduce the level of lighting to an acceptable level within six months of April 18, 1975. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.5(b).)  
16.68.080 - Off-Site Signs. 
A.  Each non-conforming off-site sign shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 not later than August 16, 1978 or three years after such sign becomes non-conforming, whichever date is later. 
B.  The provisions of A above shall not apply to any sign made non-conforming that is not permitted to be removed under local regulations or laws without the payment of just compensation as required under the provisions of the California Outdoor Advertising Act which validly preempt the City's police power and other authority which has been granted to it by the State Constitution and/or general law; provided, however, that any off-site sign not permitted to be removed without the payment of compensation under such provisions of the Act shall be removed in the manner required by law, upon the adoption of a Resolution by the City Council authorizing the payment of such compensation, as may be required by law, for its removal. 
C.  Off-site signs existing pursuant to the provisions of subsection B above on or after the removal date set forth in subsection A above, may be approved by the City to be relocated in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. An application to relocate an existing sign may only be approved if all of the following criteria are met: 
1.  Signs may only be relocated to be within the Heavy Industrial (HI) district; 
2.  There must be a minimum distance of 2 miles between electronic non-accessory signs and 1,000 feet between non-electronic, non-accessory signs; 
3.  The relocated sign may not significantly impact any biological resources; 
4.  The applicant for a relocated sign must provide a geotechnical study and incorporate the recommended measures; and 
5.  All relocated signs shall be subject to a relocation agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1364 C.S., § 1, 9-21-2011; Ord. 1059 C.S. § 4, 1986; prior Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,202.5(c).)  
16.68.090 - Vacating Premises—Sign Removal. 
All nonconforming on-site signs shall be removed immediately upon the vacating of the premises by the occupant which the sign advertised, identified or otherwise pertained to. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.5(d).)  
16.68.100 - Signs for Nonconforming Buildings and Uses. 
A.  The sign control regulations contained in this chapter and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64 for the various land use districts should not be interpreted to prevent the placement of signs on nonconforming uses or buildings. The Board of Adjustments shall hear and decide upon all requests to identify nonconforming buildings and/or uses. 
B.  In making exceptions to the sign control regulations as provided in this chapter, and Chapters 16.20 through 16.64, the Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings that: 
1.  Strict adherence to the sign control regulations will not allow the proper functioning of the nonconforming use to which the owner thereof is entitled; 
2.  The exception will not exceed, or be more lenient than would be allowed if the land were zoned such that the use would be conforming; 
3.  The placement of the sign on the premises does not increase the degree of incompatibility of the nonconforming use with its environs. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.6.)  
16.68.110 - Signs for Abandoned Uses. 
A.  Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product available for purchase by the public, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure or land upon which such sign may be found within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice is mailed by the building official. 
B.  Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the building official is authorized to cause removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or land on which such sign can be found. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.7.)  
16.68.120 - Illegally Constructed Signs. 
If the building official finds that any sign has been constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions herein, he shall give written notice of such conditions to the permittee, or in the absence of a valid permit, to the owner of the building, land or sign. If the permittee, or owner, as the case may be, fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth thirty (30) calendar days or less after such notice is mailed, such signs may be removed by the building official at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.8.)  
16.68.130 - Unsafe Signs. 
Any sign found to be unsafe and an immediate peril to persons or property may be removed summarily and without notice by the building official. The cost of such removal shall be assessed against the owner of the sign removed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.9.)  
16.68.140 - Unauthorized Signs Erected on Public Property. 
Any sign erected upon public property in violation of the provisions herein may be removed or destroyed by the building official. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.10.)  
16.68.150 - Costs of Removal. 
The cost of the removal or alteration of any sign and any expense incidental thereto which by the terms of this section shall be paid by a permittee, sign owner, property owner or any other person, shall become a debt owing to the City for the collection of which the City may maintain civil action thereon in its own name. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.11.)  
16.68.160 - Appeal to the Board of Adjustments. 
The Board of Adjustments shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals involving the administration of this chapter and chapters 16.20 through 16.64 by the building official when such appeals are based upon questions of the interpretation of the administration hereof. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,202.12.) 
TITLE 16 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt codes by reference, see Gov. Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
For statutory provisions regarding outdoor advertising, see Bus. § Prof. Code §§ 5230 and 5231. 
Revised: 12/95  
TITLE 17 - SWIMMING POOL CODE 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.04.010 - Short Title. 
This title shall be known as the "Uniform Swimming Pool Code," and may be cited as such and will be referred to in this title as "this Code." 
(Prior code Ch. 9, Art. 1, (part).)  
17.04.020 - Scope and Application. 
A.  No provisions of this Code shall be deemed to require a change in any portion of a swimming pool system or any other work regulated by this Code in or on an existing swimming pool when such work was installed in accordance with the law prior to the effective date of this Code; except when any swimming pool system or work regulated by this Code is determined by the Administrative Authority to be in fact dangerous, unsafe and a menace to life, health or property. 
B.  The provisions of this Code shall apply to all new construction, to any alterations, repairs or reconstruction, except as provided in this Code. 
C.  All work performed in the construction of a pool shall comply with the provisions of this Code. 
D.  Where this Code provides for the use of approved equipment and components, it is expressly understood that such approved equipment and components will not be required for a period of six months following the effective date of the Code. 
(Prior code § 9900.14.)  
CHAPTER 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.08.010 - Generally. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this chapter. 
No attempt is made to define ordinary words which are used in accordance with their established dictionary meaning, except where the word has been loosely used and it is necessary to define its meaning as used in this Code to avoid misunderstanding. Singular shall include the plural unless it is clear from the text to the contrary. 
Because the primary purpose is to define terms rather than words, the definitions are arranged alphabetically according to the first word of the term rather than the noun. 
(Prior code § 9901.)  
17.08.020 - Administrative Authority. 
"Administrative Authority" is the individual office, board, department or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city or other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of the swimming pool code as adopted or amended. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.030 - Approved. 
"Approved" means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or cited in this Code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and power of the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.040 - Approved Testing Agency. 
"Approved Testing Agency" means an organization primarily established for the purpose of testing to approved standards and approved by the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.050 - Backwash Piping. 
See "Filter waste discharge piping," Section 17.08.230. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.060 - Body Feed. 
"Body Feed" means filter aid fed into a diatomite-type filter throughout the filtering cycle. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.070 - Cartridge Filter. 
"Cartridge Filter" means a filter using cartridge-type filter elements. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.080 - Chemical Piping. 
"Chemical Piping" means piping which conveys concentrated chemical solutions from a feeding apparatus to the circulation piping. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.090 - Circulating Piping System. 
"Circulating Piping System" means the piping between the pool structure and the mechanical equipment, and usually includes suction piping, face piping and return piping. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.100 - Design Head. 
"Design Head" means the total head requirement of the circulation system at the design rate of flow and at the end of the normal filtration cycle. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.110 - Design Rate. 
"Design Rate" means the average system flow rate in gallons per minute (G.P.M.) over the filtration cycle. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.120 - Diatomite (Diatomaceous Earth). 
"Diatomite (diatomaceous earth)" is a type of filter aid. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.130 - Face Piping. 
"Face Piping" means the piping, with all valves and fittings, which is used to connect the filter system together as a unit. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.140 - Filter. 
"Filter" means any apparatus by which water is clarified. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.150 - Filter Aid. 
"Filter aid" means a nonpermanent type of filter media or aid such as diatomite, alum, etc. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.160 - Filter Cartridge. 
"Filter Cartridge" means a disposable or renewable filter element which generally employs no filter aid. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.170 - Filter Element. 
"Filter Element" means that part of a filter which retains the filter media. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.180 - Filter Media. 
"Filter Media" means the fine material which entraps the suspended particles and removes them from the water. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.190 - Filter Rate. 
"Filter Rate" means the average rate of flow per square foot of filter area. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.200 - Filter Rock. 
"Filter Rock" means specially graded rock and gravel used to support filter sand. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.210 - Filter Sand. 
"Filter Sand" means a specially graded type of permanent filter media. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.220 - Filter Septum. 
"Filter Septum" means that part of the filter element in a diatomite-type filter upon which a cake of diatomite or other nonpermanent filter aid may be deposited. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.230 - Filter Waste Discharge Piping. 
"Filter Waste Discharge Piping" means piping that conducts waste water from a filter to a drainage system. Connection to drainage system is made through an air break or other approved methods. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.240 - Fresh Water. 
"Fresh Water" means those waters having a specific conductivity less than a solution containing 6,000 parts per million of sodium chloride. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.250 - Inlet Fitting. 
"Inlet Fitting" means the fitting or fixture through which circulated water enters the pool. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.260 - Main Outlet. 
"Main Outlet" means the outlet(s) at the deep portion of the pool through which the main flow of water leaves the pool when being drained or circulated. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.270 - Swimming Pool. 
See "Swimming Pool," Section 17.08.390. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.280 - Pool Depths. 
"Pool Depths" means the distance between the floor of pool and the maximum operating water level. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.290 - Portable Pool. 
"Portable Pool" means a prefabricated pool which may be erected at the point of intended use and which may be subsequently disassembled and reerected at a new location, and generally installed on the surface of the ground and without excavation. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.300 - Precoat. 
"Precoat" means in a diatomite-type filter, the initial coating or filter aid placed on the filter septum at the start of the filter cycle. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.310 - Receptor. 
"Receptor" means an approved plumbing fixture or device of such material, shape and capacity as to adequately receive the discharge from indirect waste piping, so constructed and located as to be readily cleaned. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.320 - Return Piping. 
"Return Piping" means that portion of the circulation piping which extends from the outlet side of the filters to the pool. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.330 - Saline Water. 
"Saline Water" means those waters having a specific conductivity in excess of a solution containing 6,000 parts per million of sodium chloride. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.340 - Sand Filter. 
"Sand Filter" means a filter designed to be used with sand as the filter media. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.350 - Separation Tank. 
"Separation Tank" means a device used to clarify filter rinse or waste water, and sometimes called a "reclamation tank." 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.360 - Skim Filter. 
"Skim Filter" means a surface skimmer combined with a vacuum diatomite filter. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.370 - Suction Piping. 
"Suction Piping" means that portion of the circulation piping located between the pool structure and the inlet side of the pump and usually includes the following: main outlet piping, skimmer piping, vacuum piping and surge tank piping. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.380 - Surface Skimmer. 
"Surface skimmer" means a device generally located in the pool wall which skims the pool surface by drawing pool water over a self-adjusting weir. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.390 - Swimming Pool. 
"Swimming Pool" means any constructed or prefabricated pool used for swimming or bathing, over 18 inches in depth. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.400 - Swimming Pool, Private. 
"Private Swimming Pool" includes all constructed pools which are used as a swimming pool in connection with a single-family residence, and available only to the family of the householder and his private guests. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.410 - Swimming Pool, Public. 
"Public Swimming Pool" means any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool. (See Title 17, California Administrative Code.) 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.420 - Turnover Time. 
"Turnover Time" means the time in hours, required for the circulation system to filter and recirculate a volume of water equal to the pool volume. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.430 - Vacuum Fitting. 
"Vacuum Fitting" means a fitting in the pool which is used as a convenient outlet for connecting the underwater suction cleaning equipment. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.440 - Vacuum Piping. 
"Vacuum Piping" means the piping from the suction side of a pump connected to a vacuum fitting located at the pool and below the water level. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.450 - Waste Piping. 
See "Filter waste discharge piping," Section 17.08.230. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
17.08.460 - Width and/or Length. 
"Width and/or Length" means the actual water dimension taken from wall to wall at the maximum operating water level. 
(Prior code § 9901.1 (part).)  
CHAPTER 17.12 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.12.010 - Administrative Authority and Assistants Defined. 
Whenever the term "Administrative Authority" is used in this Code it shall be construed to mean the Chief Building Inspector or his authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 9900.)  
17.12.020 - Department Having Jurisdiction. 
Unless otherwise provided for by law, the Office of the Administrative Authority shall be part of the Building Inspection Department. 
(Prior code § 9900.1.)  
17.12.030 - Duties of the Administrative Authority. 
The Administrative Authority shall maintain public office hours necessary to efficiently administer the provisions of this Code and amendments thereto and shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Require submission of, examine and check plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or diagrams where necessary to show clearly the character, kind and extent of swimming pool work covered by applications for a permit, and upon approval thereof shall issue the permit applied therefor; 
B.  Collect all fees for permits issued as provided by this Code, issue receipts therefor in duplicate, the duplicate copy of which shall be maintained as a record of his office; 
C.  Administer and enforce the provisions of this Code in a manner consistent with the intent thereof, and inspect all swimming pool work authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of this Code or amendments thereto, approving or condemning the work in whole or in part as conditions require; 
D.  Issue upon request a certificate of approval for any work approved by him; 
E.  Condemn and reject all work done or materials used or being used which do not in all respects comply with the provisions of this Code and amendments thereto; 
F.  Order changes in workmanship, materials or both, essential to obtain compliance with all provisions of this Code; 
G.  Investigate any construction or work regulated by this Code and issue such notices and orders as provided in Section 17.12.050 of this Code; 
H.  Keep a record of all essential transactions in his office; 
I.  Transfer all fees collected by him to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds; 
J.  Maintain an official register of all persons, firms or corporation lawfully entitled to carry on or engage in the business of swimming pool installations. 
(Prior code § 9900.2.)  
17.12.040 - Dangerous Construction Discontinuance. 
Whenever brought to the attention of the department having jurisdiction that any construction or work regulated by this Code is hazardous, dangerous, unsafe or a menace to life , health or property or otherwise in violation of this Code , the department may request en investigation by the Administrative Authority who, upon determining such information to be fact, shall order my person, firs or corporation, using or maintaining any such condition, or is responsible for the use or maintenance thereof, to discontinue the use of or maintenance thereof, or to repair, alter or change sane as he say consider necessary for the proper protection of life, health or property. Every such order shall be in writing addressed to the owner, agent or person responsible for the premises on which such condition exists, end shall specify the date or tie when such order shall be complied with, which shall allow a reasonable period in which such order can be come plied with by the person, firs or corporation receiving such order, but shall never exceed the maximum period for which such construction can be safely used or maintained in the judgment of the Administrative Authority. 
Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9900.4.)  
17.12.050 - Authority to Stop Work. 
Whenever any construction regulated by this Code is being, or has been done contrary to the requirements of this Code, the Administrative Authority may order all work stopped, and order the removal or correction on which the violation has occurred. Every such Order shall be in writing, stating the nature of the violation and fixing a time limit for compliance. No person shall do any work on any portion of the equipment regulated by this Code after a stop order has been issued, except in conformance with directions of the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9900.5.)  
CHAPTER 17.16 - INSPECTIONS 
 
17.16.010 - All Work to be Inspected. 
All swimming pool installations or alterations thereto including equipment, piping and appliances related thereto shall be inspected by the Administrative Authority to insure compliance with all the requirements of the Code prior to covering or concealment of the work. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(a).)  
17.16.020 - Notification. 
It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit, to notify the Administrative Authority, that the work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given no less than 24 hours before the work is to be inspected. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(b).)  
17.16.030 - Required Inspection. 
A.  The following inspections shall be made and approval given for each of the following: 
1.  Forms, excavation and steel inspection; 
2.  Rough plumbing, including test on lines; 
3.  Electrical bonding of the pool equipment and reinforcement as required; 
4.  Electrical conduit and wiring installation prior to covering and including the change of electric service if required; 
5.  Electrical and plumbing final inspection and approval; 
6.  Equipment foundation; 
7.  Gas inspections, if required; 
8.  Approved fence and gate completely installed with approved closers and latches, if required; 
9.  Enclosure for heaters, boilers and electrical equipment if required; 
10.  All flues in place and complete. 
B.  When in the opinion of the Administrative Authority the nature of the site or the proposed construction is such that it appears that continuous inspection during the placing of the structure is desirable, then the Administrative Authority shall have the right to require such continuous inspection by the responsible registered engineer who shall thereafter submit a letter certifying as to the proper execution of the work. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(c).)  
17.16.040 - Inspection Prior to Plastering and Filling Required. 
It shall be required that all swimming pools shall be in a completed state, having received all inspections and approvals as required, prior to plastering and filling of the pool with water. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(d).)  
17.16.050 - Final Inspection. 
All swimming pool installations must be completed, the pool shall be completely filled with water and in operation before final inspection. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(e).)  
17.16.060 - Failure to Call for Inspection—Violation. 
Failure to call for the proper inspections and securing approval for each inspection will be considered a separate violation and continuing violation for each inspection for each craft. 
(Prior code § 9900.10(f).)  
CHAPTER 17.20 - PERMITS 
 
17.20.010 - Required. 
No swimming pool installation, alteration or repair work shall be commenced until a permit to do such work has first been obtained from the Administrative Authority. 
Exception. No permit shall be required for the repair or replacement of any pump, filter, heater or other component part, piping, valves, or pool structure on which repair or replacement costs less than $20.00 for labor and material, upon the approval of the building official. 
(Prior code § 9900.7.)  
17.20.020 - Application. 
A.  Any person legally entitled (under the State Contractor's License Law) to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. 
B.  The Administrative Authority may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary and as prescribed in Chapter 17.24 of this Code. 
C.  Application for permits for new construction shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, and in sufficient detail, including the following: 
1.  Plot plan site grades, dimensioned and drawn to a scale not less than 1/8 inch per foot, and showing at least the following: 
a.  Property lines, easements and rights-of-way of record, and overhead utilities adjacent to or over the property, 
b.  Existing structures, fencing, retaining walls and other relevant characteristics, 
c.  Proposed pool shape, dimensioned and located to show setbacks, side yards and clearance from existing structures, 
d.  Proposed mechanical equipment pad, dimensioned and located as to setbacks and side yards, 
e.  Indicate all deck equipment items, if included, 
f.  Proposed deckwork configuration showing its anticipated drainage, 
g.  Anticipated overall drainage of the pool site, 
h.  Proposed facing; 
2.  Structural plan, showing at least the following: 
a.  Type of construction, gunite, poured concrete, prefabricated or other, 
b.  Pool dimensions, depth and adequate cross sections drawn to scale, 
c.  Reinforcing steel schedule and detail, 
d.  A statement concerning the anticipated nature of the soil under and around the pool structure. A soil condition report shall be submitted where required by the Administrative Authority, 
e.  Interior finish details, 
f.  Pool edge details, 
g.  Computations , street diagrams and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans; 
3.  Mechanical plan, showing at least the following: 
a.  Volume, system flow rate in gallons per minute, and turnover in hours, 
b.  Type and size of filtration system and means of waste disposal, 
c.  Type and size of pool heater if included, including method of venting and provisions for combustion air, 
d.  Pool piping layout with all sizes shown and types material to be used, and showing the location of the main outlet, surface skimmers and inlets, 
e.  The rates capacity of the pool pump in G.P.N. at design head with the size and type of motor indicated identified as self-priming or straight centrifugal, 
f.  Means of adding makeup water, 
g.  Size, length from source to heater, and routing of gas line, 
h.  Electrical connections, equipment switch locations and source of electrical power. 
The above requirements shall not void any requirements by any other department having jurisdiction. 
D.  All plans and documents submitted shall be on substantial paper and shall show the name and address of the party under whose supervision the documents were prepared. 
E.  If the Administrative Authority determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this Code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fee as fixed in Section 17.20.030. The Administrative Authority shall further require that permits be obtained by the parties responsible for all of the electrical, pool-plumbing related utility connections and heating work prior to issuance of the building permit for the pool structure. 
(Prior code § 9900.8.)  
17.20.030 - Fees—Schedule. 
A.  Every applicant for a permit to install, alter or repair a swimming pool system or part thereof, shall state in writing on the application form provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such information pertinent thereto as may be required. 
B.  Such applicant shall obtain a permit by paying a fee at the rate provided for each classification as set forth in a resolution adopted by the City Council. 
C.  Any person who commences any swimming pool work for which a permit is required by this Code, without first having obtained a permit therefor, shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work, provided however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the commencement of the work. In all such cases a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged. 
Permit fees for work regulated by this chapter shall be as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez. 
(Prior code § 9900.9; Ord. 898 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
17.20.040 - Expiration. 
Every permit issued by the Administrative Authority under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 60 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 60 days. Before such work can be recommended a new permit shall be first obtained. 
(Prior code § 9900.11.)  
17.20.050 - Correction of Errors. 
The issuance of a permit, based upon submitted plans and specifications shall not prevent the Administrative Authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications, or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder, when in violation of the Code, or any other pertinent ordinance, or from revoking any approval when issued in error. 
(Prior code § 9900.12.)  
17.20.060 - Permittee's Responsibilities. 
Applicant for the pool building permit shall be considered to be the prime contractor and shall be responsible for all work required by this Code. 
(Prior code § 9900.13.)  
CHAPTER 17.24 - PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
17.24.010 - Required When. 
The Administrative Authority may require the submission of plans, specifications, drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary, prior to the commencement of, and at any time during the progress of, any work regulated by this Code. 
(Prior code § 9900.6(a).)  
17.24.020 - Professional Requirements. 
All design, construction and workmanship shall be in conformity with accepted engineering practices and shall be of such character as to secure the results sought to be obtained by this Code. The Administrative Authority shall require that plans, specifications and drawings be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer of the appropriate discipline, i.e., for the pool structure, a registered civil or structural engineer, and for the mechanical system, a registered civil or mechanical engineer. 
(Prior code § 9900.6(b).)  
17.24.030 - Manufacturer's Standard Structural and Mechanical Details Uses—Certification Required. 
When the permittee desires to use standard structural and mechanical details, it shall be his responsibility to obtain and furnish a letter from the responsible registered engineer(s) certifying that the structural and mechanical designs are suitable for the conditions actually encountered on the site. 
(Prior code § 9900.6(c).)  
17.24.040 - Manufacturer's Standard Structural and Mechanical Details Use—Portable Pools. 
When the permittee desires, he may use manufacturer's standard structural and mechanical details for portable pool erection on the surface of the ground. 
(Prior code § 9900.6(d).)  
CHAPTER 17.28 - REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS 
 
17.28.010 - Approval Required When. 
On existing premises on which swimming pool installations are to be altered, repaired or renovated, deviations from the provisions of this Code are permitted, provided such deviations are found to be necessary and are first approved by the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9900.15.)  
CHAPTER 17.32 - MECHANICAL SYSTEM 
 
17.32.010 - Generally. 
Unless otherwise specified in this Code, all piping, equipment and materials used in the plumbing system shall conform to the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the Western Plumbing Officials Association. 
(Prior code § 9902.)  
17.32.020 - Approval. 
All materials, piping, valves, equipment or appliances entering into the construction of swimming pools or portions thereof, shall be of a type complying with the Code or of a type approved by an approved testing agency to an approved standard, and acceptable to the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9902.1.)  
17.32.030 - Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction. 
A.  The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, method of construction, appliance, or equipment, provided any such alternate has been first approved and its use authorized by the Administrative Authority. 
B.  When there is insufficient evidence to substantiate claims for alternates, the Administrative Authority may require tests, as proof of compliance, to be made by an approved testing agency at the expense of the applicant. 
(Prior code § 9902.2.)  
17.32.040 - Prints Pool Design Criteria. 
A.  Approved Equipment Required. Every private swimming pool shall be equipped with approved equipment consisting of a filter, pump and component parts. 
B.  Turnover Time. The system shall be designed to provide complete turnover of the pool contents in 12 hours or less. 
(Prior code § 9902.3.)  
17.32.050 - Circulation Piping—Design Velocity—Table 3-1. 
Pool circulation piping shall be sized so that the water velocity will not exceed the values given in Table 3-1 for the design rate. 
Table 3-1 
Maximum Velocity of flow In Feet Per Second 
Type of Pipe 	Fresh Water 	Saline Water 
		
Copper 	8 feet per second 	Not Permitted 
P.V.C. 	10 feet per second 	10 feet per second 
Wrought Iron 	10 feet per second 	4 feet per second 
Cast Iron 	10 feet per second 	4 feet per second 
90-10 cupro nickel 	10 feet per second 	10 feet per second 
Brass pipe 	8 feet per second 	5 feet per second 
Galvanized Steel 	10 feet per second 	Not Permitted 
 
(Prior code § 9902.4(1).)  
17.32.060 - Circulation Piping—Material. 
Pool circulation piping shall be of the following approved material: 
A.  Copper: Type L or K underground (Type M permissible aboveground); 
B.  Polyvinyl chloride: NSF Schedule 40 Type I or II; 
Exception: When PVC is used for pool piping, 10 feet of copper or other approved material must be installed on the downstream side of any water-heating equipment, and a check valve must be installed adjacent to the heating equipment on the upstream side prior to the connection of PVC. 
	C. Wrought iron 	* ASA 	B36.2 	1958 
				
	D. Cast iron 	* AWWA 	C102 	1953 
					
	E. 90-10 cupro nickel 	ASTM 	B111 	1962 	
					
	F. Brass (red) 	ASA 	H27.1 	1958 	
					
	G. Galvanized steel 	* AISI 	SAE 	1020 	
					
	* Shall be protected against corrosion as provided for gas piping in Sections 17.32.270 through 17.32.370. 	
					
	;hn0;(Prior code § 9902.4(2).) 	
  
17.32.070 - Circulation Piping—Dissimilar Metals. 
Where metals not normally considered compatible on the electromotive scale are joined, such point of joining shall be located above grade and a dielectric coupling shall be employed. 
(Prior code § 9902.4(3).)  
17.32.080 - Circulation Piping—Installation Standards. 
All piping materials shall be installed in strict accord with the manufacturer's installation standards. 
(Prior code § 9902.4(4).)  
17.32.090 - Valves. 
A.  Approved full-way valves shall be installed where appropriate to insure proper functioning of the filtration and piping system. 
B.  Where the pool pump and filter are located below the maximum water level, valves shall be installed on the discharge and suction lines. 
C.  All valves shall be located where they will be readily and easily accessible for maintenance and removal. Valves located under concrete slabs shall be set in a pit having at least a dimension of 10 pipe diameters, with a minimum of at least 12 inches, and fitted with a suitable cover. 
D.  Valves up to and including 2 inches in size shall be brass, stainless steel or equal. Sizes over 2 inches may have cast iron, brass, stainless steel or equal bodies. Each gate valve shall be a full-way type with working parts of corrosion resistant metal. 
E.  Combination valves may be installed when approved by the Administrative Authority. 
F.  Check or full-way valves shall be installed on the circulating pump suction piping when: 
1.  Non-self-priming pumps i.e., straight centrifugal) are located above the pool water level; 
2.  Self-priming pumps are located in excess of 2 feet above the water level. 
G.  Where check valves are installed they shall be of the swing check pattern. 
(Prior code § 9902.5.)  
17.32.100 - Tests. 
All pool piping shall be inspected and approved before being covered or concealed. It shall be tested and proved tight to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority, under a static water or air pressure test of not less than 30 pounds per square inch. 
Exception: Circulating pumps need not be tested as required in this section. 
Gas piping shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 9902.6.)  
17.32.110 - Pool fittings—Generally. 
Pool fittings shall be of such type and design as to be appropriate for the specific application as set out in Sections 17.32.120 through 7.32.160. 
(Prior code § 9902.7 (part).)  
17.32.120 - Pool Fittings—Surface Skimmers. 
Approved surface skimmers are required and shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Skimmers shall be installed on the basis of one per 800 square feet of surface area, or fraction thereof, and shall be designed for a flow rate of at least 25 G.P.M. per skimmer. 
(Prior code § 9902.7(1).)  
17.32.130 - Pool Fitting—Main Outlet. 
An approved main outlet shall be provided at the deepest point in every pool for emptying and/or circulation of the water in the pool. For other than portable pools this outlet shall be installed by means of en approved prefabricated assembly which incorporates a removable grate or antivortex plate and which also provides for a hydrostatic relief tube or system, to effectively protect the pool structure. 
(Prior code § 9902.7(2).)  
17.32.140 - Pool Fittings—Inlet Fittings. 
Approved manufactured inlet fittings for the return of recirculated pool water shall be provided on the basis of at least one per 14,400 gallons of pool capacity. Such inlet fittings shall be of such design and construction as to insure an adequate seal to the pool structure and shall incorporate a convenient means of sealing for pressure testing of the pool circulation piping. Inlets shall be located so as to aid in establishing flow patterns within the pool which are beneficial to effective skimming of the pool surface and mixing of the pool contents. Where more than one inlet is required, the shortest distance between any two required inlets shall be at least 20 feet. 
(Prior code § 9902.7(3).)  
17.32.150 - Pool Fittings—Vacuum Fittings. 
Approved manufactured vacuum fittings, where provided, shall be located in a convenient position below the minimum operating water level. 
(Prior code § 9902.7(4).)  
17.32.160 - Pool Fittings—Gutter Fittings. 
Approved manufactured gutter fittings, where provided, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Prior code § 9902.7(5).)  
17.32.170 - Circulating Pump. 
A.  Pool circulating pumps shall be approved and shall be equipped on the inlet side with an approved type hair and lint strainer. 
B.  Pumps shall have a design capacity at the following heads: 
1.  Pressure diatomaceous earth: At least 60 feet; 
2.  Vacuum diatomaceous earth: 20 inches vacuum on the suction side and 45 feet total head; 
3.  Sand and gravel: At least 45 feet. Pump impellers, shafts, wear rings and other working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Pumps in sizes up to and including 2 horsepower shall have pump cases of corrosion-resistant materials. Pumps in sizes over 2 horsepower may have cast iron pump cases. 
C.  Corrosion-resistant materials: The following is a list of presently accepted corrosion-resistant materials. 
1.  Approved copper alloys (including bronze and brass); 
2.  AINSI type 300 series stainless steel; 
3.  Monel; 
4.  Approved synthetic (certain plastics, fiberglass, etc.) materials. 
(Prior code § 9902.8.)  
17.32.180 - Filters—Diatomite Type. 
Diatomite-type filters shall be approved for operation under either pressure or vacuum. The design capacity shall not exceed 2 gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area for pressure and/or vacuum filters. A 2 ½ gallon per minute per square foot rate is permissible when body feed is used. 
(Prior code § 9902.9(1).)  
17.32.190 - Filters—Sand. 
Rapid sand filters (flow up to 5 G.P.M. per square foot) shall be constructed in accordance with approved standards. Where high rate sand filters (flow in excess of 5 G.P.M. per square foot) are used, they shall be approved. The circulation system and backwash piping shall be adequate for proper backwashing of the filter and shall provide backwash flow rates of at least 12 G.P.M. per square foot for rapid sand filters or 15 G.P.M. per square foot for high rate sand filters. 
(Prior code § 9902.9(2).)  
17.32.200 - Filters—Operating Instructions Required—Required Equipment. 
A.  Every filter system shall be provided with operating instructions. 
B.  A filter system shall be equipped with the following: 
1.  An influent pressure gauge shall be provided; 
2.  An effluent pressure gauge shall be provided; 
3.  A valve to release the air at the top of each filter; 
4.  A backwash sight glass where the backwash discharge outlet to the receptor is not visible from the backwash control valve. 
Note: Sight glass shall be installed adjacent to the backwash control valve. 
(Prior code § 9902.9(3).)  
17.32.210 - Equipment Foundation and Enclosure. 
All mechanical equipment shall be set on a poured-in-place concrete base or slab. All mechanical equipment, unless approved for outdoor installation, shall be adequately protected against the weather or installed within a building. 
(Prior code § 9902.10.)  
17.32.220 - Accessibility and Clearances. 
Equipment shall be so installed as to provide ready accessibility for cleaning, operating, maintenance and servicing. 
(Prior code 9902.11.)  
17.32.230 - Waste Water Disposal—Generally. 
A.  No direct or indirect connection shall be made between any storm drain, sewer, drainage system, seepage pit, underground leaching pit or subsoil drainage line, and any line connected to a swimming pool unless approved by the Administrative Authority. 
B.  When the waste water from a swimming pool is to be disposed of through a public sewer, a 4-inch cast iron P trap shall be installed on the lower terminus of the building drain and the tail piece from the trap shall extend a minimum of 3 inches above finished grade and below finished flood grade. The connection between the filter waste discharge piping and the P trap shall be made by means of an indirect connection. 
C.  Plans and specifications for any deviation from the above manner of installation shall be first approved by the Administrative Authority before any portion of any such system is installed. 
D.  When waste water disposal is to seepage pit installation, it shall be installed in accordance with the approval granted by the health department. 
(Prior code § 9902.12(1).)  
17.32.240 - Waste Water Disposal—Separation Tank. 
A.  A separation tank may be used with diatomite systems, in lieu of the aforementioned means of waster water disposal when connected as a reclamation system. 
B.  A separation tank shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials for a design pressure of 75 psi. The tank shall be provided with quick removable cover, inlet and outlet connections, site glass, pressure gauge and air cock. Collector bag shall be of material resistant to moisture and chemicals customarily used in swimming pools and provided with back support for free water flow and to prevent rupture of separator bag. 
C.  When separation tanks are used they shall contain usable volume according to the following schedule: 
Actual Effective 
Filter Area 
(square feet) 	Usable Volume 
(cubic inches) 
10 	225 
15 	338 
20 	450 
25 	562 
30 	675 
35 	787 
40 	900 
45 	1012 
50 	1125 
60 	1350 
 
Above 60 square feet effective filter area, provide usable volume on the basis of 22.5 cubic inches per square foot of effective filter area. 
(Prior code § 9902.12(2).)  
17.32.250 - Water Supply. 
All pools shall be equipped with an approved type of filling system with backflow protection. No over-the-rim spout shall be accepted unless located under a diving board or properly guarded. 
(Prior code § 9902.13.)  
17.32.260 - Water Heating Equipment. 
Swimming pool water heating equipment shall conform to the design, construction and installation requirements as set forth in the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, shall bear the A.G.A. label, and shall include a consideration of combustion air, venting and gas supply requirements for water heaters and in addition, the following shall be required: 
A.  An approved permanent bypass or antisiphon device shall be installed to provide a positive means of retaining water in the heater when the pump is not in operation. 
B.  When the heater is installed in a pit, the pit shall be provided with approved drainage facilities. 
C.  All water heating equipment shall be installed with flanges or union connection adjacent to the heater. 
D.  When water heating equipment is installed in a closed system, i.e., has a valve between the appliance and the pool, a pressure relief valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the water heating equipment. For units up to and including 200,000 B.T.U./Hr. input the relief valve shall be A.G.A. rated and for inputs over 200,000 B.T.U./Hr., the valve shall be A.S.M.E. rated. 
E.  A check valve shall be located between the heater and the filter. 
(Prior code § 9902.14.)  
17.32.270 - Gas Piping—Workmanship. 
No gas piping shall be strained or bent and no appliance shall be supported by or develop any strain or stress on its supply piping. 
(Prior code § 9902.15(part).)  
17.32.280 - Gas Piping—Inspections—Notification. 
Upon completion of the installation, alteration or repair of any gas piping, and prior to the use thereof, the Administrative Authority shall be notified that such gas piping is ready for inspection. 
(Prior code § 9902.15(part).)  
17.32.290 - Gas Piping—Inspections—Rough and Final. 
The Administrative Authority shall make the following inspections and shall either approve that portion of the work as completed, or shall notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code: 
A.  Rough Piping Inspection. Rough piping inspection shall be made after all gas piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixture or appliance has been attached thereto. This inspection shall include a determination that the gas piping size, material and installation meet the requirements of this Code. 
This inspection shall include an air pressure test, at which time the gas piping shall stand a pressure of not less than 10 pounds per square inch gauge pressure, and shall hold this pressure for a length of time satisfactory to the Administrative Authority, but in no case for less than 15 minutes with no perceptible drop in pressure. For welded piping and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of 14 inches water column pressure, the test pressure shall be not less than 60 pounds per square inch and shall be continued for a length of time satisfactory to the Administrative Authority, but in no case for less than 30 minutes. These tests shall be made using air pressure only, and shall be made in the presence of the Administrative Authority. All necessary apparatus for conducting tests shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
B.  Final Piping Inspection. Final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and after all portions thereof, which are to be covered or concealed, are so concealed, and after any fixture, appliance or shutoff valve has been attached thereto. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.300 - Gas Piping—Inspections—Waived When. 
In cases where the work authorized by the permit consists of a minor installation of additional piping to piping already connected to a gas meter, the foregoing inspections may be waived at the discretion of the Administrative Authority. In this event, the Administrative Authority shall make such inspection as he deems advisable in order to assure himself that the work has been performed in accordance with the intent of this Code. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.310 - Gas Piping—Inspections—Certificate Issuance. 
If, upon final piping inspection, the installation is found to comply with the provisions of this Code, a certificate of inspection may be issued by the Administrative Authority. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.320 - Gas Piping—Material. 
A.  All pipe used for the installation, extension, alteration or repair of any gas piping shall be standard weight wrought iron or steel (galvanized or black), yellow brass (containing not more than 75 percent copper) or internally tinned or equivalently treated copper of iron pipe size. 
B.  All such pipe shall be either new, or shall previously have been used for no other purpose than conveying gas; it shall be in good condition and free from internal obstructions. Burred ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe. 
C.  All fittings used in connection with the above piping shall be of malleable iron or yellow brass (containing not more than 75 percent copper). 
D.  All valves and appurtenances used in connection with the above piping shall be of a type designed and approved for use with fuel gas. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.330 - Gas Piping—Installation. 
A.  All joints in the piping system, unless welded, shall be screwed joints, having approved standard threads. Such screwed joints shall be made up with approved pipe joint material, insoluble in the presence of fuel gas and applied to the male threads only. 
B.  No gas piping shall be installed in or on the ground under any building or structure, and all exposed gas piping shall be kept at least 6 inches above grade or structure. 
C.  Where water vapor is present in the fuel gas served, accessible drip pipes shall be provided at points where condensation will tend to collect. 
D.  Ferrous gas piping installed underground in exterior locations shall be protected from corrosion by approved coatings or wrapping materials, and all such horizontal piping shall have at least 12 inches of earth cover or other equivalent protection. Risers shall be wrapped to a point at least 6 inches above grade. 
E.  All gas pipe protective coatings shall be approved types, machine applied, and conform to recognized standards. Field wrapping shall provide equivalent protection and is restricted to those short sections and fittings necessarily stripped for threading or welding. Zinc coatings (galvanizing) shall not be deemed adequate protection for piping below ground. Ferrous metals in exposed exterior locations shall be protected from corrosion in a manner satisfactory to the Administrative Authority. 
F.  All gas piping shall be adequately supported by metal straps or hooks at intervals of not more than 6 feet for piping 1 inch or smaller and not more than 10 feet for larger piping. Gas piping installed below grade shall be effectively supported at all points on undisturbed or well compacted soil. Material used for backfill around the pipe shall be free of rocks, building materials, hot ashes and trash. 
G.  Where unions are necessary, right and left nipples and couplings shall be used. Ground-joint unions may be used in exposed fixtures, appliance or equipment connections and in exposed exterior locations. Bushings shall not be used in concealed locations. 
H.  Valves used in connection with gas piping shall be approved types having a full bore equivalent to the area of the piping served. 
I.  An accessible shut-off valve of a type set forth in subsection H of this section, shall be installed in the fuel supply piping outside of each appliance and ahead of the union connection thereto, and in addition to any valve on the appliance. Shut-off valves shall be within 3 feet of the appliance. Shut-off valves may be located immediately adjacent to and inside or under an appliance when placed in an accessible and protected location and then such appliance may be removed without removal of the valve. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.340 - Gas Piping—Liquefied Petroleum Gas—Storage, Facilities and Piping. 
In addition to the requirements of this Code for gas piping, the facilities and piping for use with liquefied petroleum gas shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall conform to approved standards. All such facilities and their locations shall be acceptable to the Administrative Authority and shall conform to State and local fire prevention regulations. 
B.  All liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall be so placed as to be at all times readily accessible for inspection, reading, testing and shutting off the gas supply. All service piping and main supply shut-off valves shall be outside of the building. All main supply valves shall be of an approved type and readily accessible. 
C.  Liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall not be located in any pit or basement, under show windows or interior stairways, in engine, boiler, heater or electric meter rooms. When not prohibited by another regulation, approved liquefied petroleum gas metering devices may be located in the open under exterior stairways. 
D.  Liquefied petroleum gas piping shall not serve any gas water heater located in a pit or basement where heavier than air gas might collect to form a flammable mixture. 
E.  Pipe joint compounds used on thread connections shall be insoluble in liquefied petroleum gas. 
F.  Every valve and appurtenance used on such piping shall be designed and approved for use with liquefied petroleum gas. 
G.  Discharge from relief valves shall be into the open air and shall be at least 5 feet away from any opening into a building. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.350 - Gas Piping—Leaks. 
A.  Leaks in gas piping shall be located by applying soapy water to the exterior of the piping. 
B.  Fire or acid shall not be used to locate or repair leeks, nor shall any substance other then air be introduced into the gas piping. 
C.  It is not permissible to repair defects in gas piping or fittings, but upon having been located, the defective pipe or fittings shall be removed and replaced with sound material. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.360 - Gas Piping—Required Gas Supply. 
A.  The following regulations as set forth in this section and in Section 17.32.370 shall be the standard for the installation of gas piping. All regulations and tables are based on the use of natural gas having a specific gravity of 0.65, supplied at approximately 8 inches water column pressure at the outlet of the meter. 
B.  The hourly volume of gas required at each piping outlet shall be taken as not less than the maximum hourly rating, as specified by the manufacturer of the appliance or appliances to be connected to each such outlet. 
C.  Where the manufacturer's rating of an appliance is given in British Thermal Units (B.T.U.) per hour, this rating shall be divided by the heating valve of the gas to be delivered in B.T.U. per cubic foot, to obtain the corresponding gas demand in cubic feet per hour. 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
17.32.370 - Gas Piping—Required Size—Table 3-11. 
A.  Where the maximum demand does not exceed 250 cubic feet per hour and the maximum length of piping between the meter and the most distant outlet is not over 250 feet, the size of each section and each outlet of any system of gas piping shall be determined by means of Table 3-11. Other systems within the range of Table 3-11 may be sized from that table or by means of the methods set forth in subsection C of this section. 
B.  To determine the size of each section of pipe in any system within the range of Table 3-11, proceed as follows: 
1.  Measure the length of the pipe from the gas meter location to the most remote outlet on the system; 
2.  In Table 3-11 select the column showing that distance, or the next longer distance, if the table does not give the exact length; 
3.  Use this vertical column to locate all gas demand figures for this particular system of gas piping; 
4.  Starting at the most remote outlet, find in the vertical column just selected, the gas demand for that outlet. If the exact figure of demand is not shown, choose the next larger figure below in the column; 
5.  Opposite this demand figure, in the first column at the left in Table 3-11 will be found the correct size of pipe; 
6.  Proceed in a similar manner for each outlet and each section of pipe. For each section of pipe determine the total gas demand supplied for that section. 
C.  For conditions other than those covered by subsection A of this section, such as longer runs or greater gas demands, the size of each gas piping system shall be determined by standard engineering methods acceptable to the Administrative Authority and each such system shall be so designed that the total pressure drop between the meter or other point of supply and any outlet when full demand is being supplied to all outlets, will at no time exceed 0.5 inches water column pressure. 
D.  Where gas of a different specific gravity is to be delivered, or where the pressure may be higher than 14 inches or lower than 7 inches of water column, the design, pipe sizing, materials, location and use of such systems first shall be approved by the Administrative Authority and the gas utility supplying the gas. 
E.  The appliance connecting piping shall at no time have a diameter less than the inlet connection of the appliance as provided by the manufacturer and shall not exceed 2 feet in length. 
Table 3-11 
Distance 
Pipe Size 	10 feet 	20 feet 	30 feet 	40 feet 	50 feet 	60 feet 	70 feet 	80 feet 	90 feet 	100 feet 	125 feet 
											
½ inch 	170 	118 	95 	80 	71 	64 	60 	55 	52 	49 	44 
¾ inch 	360 	245 	198 	169 	150 	135 	123 	115 	108 	102 	44 
1 inch 	670 	430 	370 	318 	282 	255 	235 	220 	205 	192 	172 
1 ¼ inches 	1320 	930 	740 	640 	565 	510 	470 	440 	410 	390 	345 
1 ½ inches 	1990 	1370 	1100 	950 	830 	760 	700 	650 	610 	570 	510 
2 inches 	3880 	2680 	2150 	1840 	1610 	1480 	1350 	1250 	1180 	1100 	1000 
 
Pipe Size 	150 feet 	200 feet 	250 feet 	300 feet 	350 feet 	400 feet 	450 feet 	500 feet 	550 feet 	600 feet 	
											
½ inch 	40 	34 	30 	27 	25 	23 	22 	21 	20 	19 	
¾ inch 	83 	71 	63 	57 	52 	48 	45 	43 	41 	39 	
1 inch 	158 	132 	118 	108 	100 	92 	86 	81 	77 	74 	
1 ¼ inch 	315 	270 	238 	215 	200 	185 	172 	162 	155 	150 	
1 ½ inch 	460 	400 	350 	320 	295 	275 	255 	240 	230 	220 	
2 inches 	910 	780 	690 	625 	570 	535 	500 	470 	450 	430 	
 
(Prior code § 9902.15 (part).)  
CHAPTER 17.36 - ENCLOSURES 
 
17.36.010 - Required. 
All swimming pools within the jurisdiction of this Administrative Authority shall be fenced with an approved fence as provided in this title. 
(Prior code § 9904(A).)  
17.36.020 - Approved Fence Designated. 
An approved fence shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Every person in possession of land within the jurisdiction of this local Administrative Authority, either as an owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise, upon which land is situated a swimming pool of other out-of-doors body of water designed, constructed and used for swimming, dipping or immersion purposes by men, women or children, having a depth in excess of 18 inches or with a surface area exceeding 250 square feet, shall maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool or body is located, and completely surrounding such pool or body of water, a fence or wall not less than 4 feet, 6 inches high (measured outside the enclosure), with openings, holes or gaps therein no larger than 4 inches measured horizontally, except for doors or gates, provided however that a dwelling house or accessory building may be used as apart of the enclosure upon approval of the Building Official. 
B.  The maximum vertical clearance between grade and bottom of the fence/barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade the barrier may be at ground level. 
C.  Where the fence/barrier is made of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1 ¾ inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1 ¾ inches in width. 
D.  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 1 ¼ inch square unless the fences is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to 1 ¾ inches or less. the wire shall not be less than #9 gauge. 
E.  Where the barrier is made of diagonal members the maximum openings formed by the diagonal members shall be 1 ¾ inches or less. 
F.  Access gates shall comply with the same requirements as for fences/barriers and shall be equipped with a locking device. Pedestrian-access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall have a self-closing and latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self—latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, (a) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate, and (b) the gate and barrier shall have no openings greater than ½ inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. 
G.  Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds immediately after the door is opened, and be capable of being heard throughout the house during normal household activities. The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm system shall be equipped with a manual means, such as a touchpad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. 
Such deactivation shall last for no more than 15 seconds. The deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches above the threshold of the door. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices approved by the Building Official, shall be acceptable so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by the alarm system described above. 
H.  Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (a) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or (b) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements for fences/barriers. When the ladder or steps is secured, locked or removed, any openings created shall not allow the passage of a 4 inch diameter sphere. 
I.  Doors leading directly to indoor swimming pools shall comply with the requirements in G above and other applicable sections. 
(Ord. 1188 C.S. § III, 1992; Ord. 916 C.S. § 8, 1980: prior code § 9904 (part).)  
17.36.030 - Exception Discretionary with Administrative Authority. 
The Administrative Authority may grant an exception to the requirements of fencing a swimming pool when he finds there is a barrier existing on the premises by reason of vegetation, landscaping, or topography suitable to prevent children from straying into the pool. 
(Prior code § 9904 (part).)  
CHAPTER 17.40 - PENALTIES 
 
17.40.010 - Designated. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 5 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which violation of this Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided. 
B.  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(Prior code § 9900.16.) 
TITLE 17 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding swimming pool safety and sanitary regulations, see Health § Safety Code § 24100 et seq. 
Issued: 7/92  
TITLE 18 - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
CHAPTERS: 
Note:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 18.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
18.04.010 - Generally. 
As used in this title, unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases shall be as defined in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4600 (part).)  
18.04.020 - Approved. 
"Approved," when used in conjunction with any material, appliance or type of construction, means meeting the approval of the City Building Department: 
A.  As the result of investigations or tests conducted by a nationally recognized testing agency; or 
B.  By reason of accepted principles and standards established by national authorities, technical, health, or scientific organizations or agencies; or 
C.  By reason of a specific City ordinance. 
(Prior code § 4600(a).)  
18.04.030 - Awning. 
"Awning" means any shade structure of approved material installed, erected or used adjoining or adjacent to a mobile home with at least one end open at all times. Awning does not include a window awning. 
(Prior code § 4600(b).)  
18.04.040 - Building. 
"Building" as used in this title, means public toilets, public baths and laundry rooms or other structures, and a compartment containing a toilet or bath, or both, constructed for the exclusive use of an occupant of a mobile home site, or his invited guest. 
(Prior code § 4600(e).)  
18.04.050 - Building Department. 
"Building Department" means any authorized Building Official of the City of Martinez, or his subordinate. 
(Prior code § 4600(d).)  
18.04.060 - Carport. 
"Carport" means an awning or shade structure for an automobile on a mobile home site. 
(Prior code § 14600(e).)  
18.04.070 - City Engineer. 
"City Engineer" means the engineer designated by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4600(h).)  
18.04.080 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the City Planning Commission. 
(Prior code § 4600(i).)  
18.04.090 - Dependent Mobile Home. 
"Dependent Mobile Home" means a mobile home not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal. 
(Prior code § 4600 (j).)  
18.04.100 - Electrical Service. 
"Electrical service" as used in this title means installations made in strict accordance with the City of Martinez Electrical Code. 
(Prior code § 4600(k).)  
18.04.110 - Gas Distribution system. 
"Gas distribution system" means all of the gas supply piping within a mobile home park extending from the main public supply, or other source of supply to, but not including, the mobile home service system, and shall include branch service lines, devices and appurtenances thereto. 
(Prior code § 4600(1).)  
18.04.120 - Health Department. 
"Health Department" is the Health Officer of the City of Martinez and his appointed subordinates. 
(Prior code § 4600(m).)  
18.04.130 - Independent Mobile Home. 
"Independent Mobile Home" means a mobile home equipped with one water closet, a lavatory, a shower or bathtub, and a kitchen sink. 
(Prior code § 4600(n).)  
18.04.140 - Liquid Petroleum Gases. 
"Liquid petroleum gases" means cylinder systems for cooking, heating and refrigerating installations on highway mobile vehicles, and shall be in accordance with standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters as outlined in their pamphlet "Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases", NBFU No. 58. 
(Prior code § 4600(o).)  
18.04.150 - Manufactured Home. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § XI part, 1987: Ord. 818 C.S.§ 2, 1975; prior code § 4600(cc).)  
18.04.160 - Mobile Home Drain Connection—Hose Connection. 
"Mobile home drain connection" or "hose connection" means that removable extension, part of which shall be flexible, connecting the mobile home drainage system from the mobile home outlet to the trap inlet on the mobile home site. 
(Prior code § 4600(dd).)  
18.04.170 - Mobile Home Drainage System. 
"Mobile home drainage system" means that portion of drainage piping within or permanently attached to the mobile home including the venting system, the mobile home drain connection, and receiving the discharge from any fixture or water closet. 
(Prior code § 4600(ee).)  
18.04.180 - Mobile Home Park. 
"Mobile home park" as used in this title means any area or tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to two or more owners or users of mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 4600(ff).)  
18.04.190 - Mobile Home Service System. 
"Mobile home service system" means that portion of the water or gas piping within or permanently attached to the mobile home and shall include the service connection. 
(Prior code § 4600(gg).)  
18.04.200 - Mobile Home Site. 
"Mobile home site" means that portion of a mobile home park designated and designed for the occupancy of a mobile home, and includes any area that is set aside or used for automobile parking, carport, storage or awning. 
(Prior code § 4600(hh).)  
18.04.210 - Occupied Area. 
"Occupied area" means the total area of a mobile home site that is occupied by any mobile home, carport, awning or storage cabinet. 
(Prior code § 4600(pp).)  
18.04.220 - Park Drainage System. 
"Park drainage system" means the entire system of drainage piping used to convey sewage or other wastes from the mobile home drain connection at its connection to the mobile home site trap to a public sewer or private sewage disposal system. 
(Prior code § 4600(q).)  
18.04.230 - Park Water Main. 
"Park water main" means that portion of the water distributing system which extends from the street main water meter, or other source of supply to the branch service lines. 
(Prior code § 4600(r).)  
18.04.240 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, copartnership or association. 
(Prior code § 4600(s).)  
18.04.250 - Planning Department. 
"Planning Department" means the City of Martinez Planning Department and includes the City Planning Director of the City of Martinez, or his authorized representative. 
(Prior code § 4600(t).)  
18.04.260 - Plumbing. 
"Plumbing" as used in this title includes the installation of required fixtures for sanitation, health, convenience and safety. The required service line extensions and the connections to sanitary sewers, water mains or gas mains, to insure the safe and convenient usableness of the fixtures, all such installations and connections thereto, shall be made in strict accordance with the permit and inspections by the Martinez Building Inspection Department. 
(Ord. 818 C.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 4600(u).)  
18.04.270 - Public Street. 
"Public street" means any thoroughfare of the City of Martinez. 
(Prior code § 4600(v).)  
18.04.280 - Service Connection. 
"Service connection" means that portion of the water distributing system which extends from the termination of the park branch service line to the inlet fitting at the mobile home. 
(Prior code § 4600(w).)  
18.04.290 - Service Road. 
"Service road" means any passageway inside a mobile home park intended for the use of automobiles and/or transporting mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 4600(x).)  
18.04.300 - Sewer Lateral. 
"Sewer lateral" means that portion of the park drainage system extending to a mobile home site and includes the "P" trap. 
(Prior code § 4600(y).)  
18.04.310 - Structure. 
"Structure" means that which is built, or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed, or parts joined together in some definite manner. "Structure" does not include a manufactured home without a permanent foundation, placed on a site for less than 180 days. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § XI part, 1987. Prior code § 4600(aa).)  
18.04.320 - Toilet. 
"Toilet" includes water closet. 
(Prior code § 4600(bb).)  
18.04.330 - Unfit for Human Habitation or Occupancy. 
"Unfit for human habitation or occupancy", as applied to mobile homes, or other structures, means any mobile home or structure which is dangerous to human life or detrimental to health through either lack of maintenance or repair generally, or because of unsafe or improper construction or installation, and includes, but is not limited to, mobile homes or structures in which any of the following exist: Exterior walls, supporting structures, doors, windows, floors, roofs, appliances or equipment are so deteriorated, broken or damaged as to be hazardous to the occupants, or the walls, roof, floor, doors or windows are in such condition as not to adequately protect the occupants from the elements. 
(Prior code § 4600(ii).)  
18.04.340 - Utilities. 
"Utilities" as used in this title means adequate facilities necessary to the health, welfare and convenience of persons occupying a mobile home park, and shall include water distributing system, sanitary sewer system, gas distributing system, electrical distributing system, communications distributing system, television and radio antennas, and park drainage system. 
(Prior code § 4600(jj).)  
18.04.350 - Water Distributing System. 
"Water distributing system" means all of the water supply piping within a mobile home park extending from the main public supply, or other source of supply to, but not including the mobile home service system, and shall include branch service lines, fixtures, devices and appurtenances thereto. 
(Prior code § 4600(kk).)  
18.04.360 - Windbreak. 
"Windbreak" means any protective fence, wall, structure or shelter from the wind which exceeds 42 inches in height. 
(Prior code § 4600(11).)  
18.04.370 - Window Awning. 
"Window awning" means any awning which does not project more than 30 inches from the body of the mobile home and which does not extend more than 6 inches on either side of the window it is designed to serve. 
(Prior code § 4600(mm).)  
CHAPTER 18.08 - UNIFORM CODES 
 
18.08.010 - Application of Health and Safety Code. 
The provisions of 18000 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the State pertaining to mobile home parks shall be deemed to be a part of this title. Should there be any conflict between this title and the Health and Safety Code, the provisions of the Health and Safety Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. 818 C.S. § 3, 1975; prior code § 4601.)  
18.08.020 - Application of Uniform Building Code. 
All buildings or structures shall be constructed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code adopted by the City. 
(Prior code § 4602.)  
18.08.030 - Application of Plumbing Code. 
All plumbing and sanitation facilities shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the plumbing code adopted by the City. 
(Prior code § 4603.)  
18.08.040 - Application of Electrical Code and State Safety Code. 
All electrical installations shall be in conformance with the State Safety Code and the City Electrical Code. 
(Prior code § 4604.)  
18.08.050 - Application of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
All installations shall be subject to the provisions set forth in Sections 15.04.190 and 15.04.195 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1091 C.S. § 1 XI part, 1987.)  
CHAPTER 18.12 - APPROVED ALTERNATES 
 
18.12.010 - Alternates Permitted When Approved. 
The provisions of this title are not intended to prevent the use of any material, appliance, installation, device, arrangement, or method of construction not specifically prescribed herein, provided such alternate has been approved. 
(Prior code § 4605(a).)  
18.12.020 - Approval Criteria. 
The City Building Inspector may approve any such alternate if he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and the material, appliances, installation, device, arrangement, method or work offered, is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this title in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability, safety, and for the protection of life and health. 
(Prior code § 4605(b).)  
18.12.030 - Evidence or Proof May be Required. 
The City Building Inspector may require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use of any such alternate. 
(Prior code § 4605(c).)  
18.12.040 - Tests Required When. 
Wherever there is evidence that any material, appliance installation, device, arrangement or method of construction, does not conform to the requirements of this title, or in order to substantiate claims for an alternate, the City Building Inspector may require tests by an approved agency as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the mobile home park operator or mobile home owner. 
(Prior code § 4605(d).)  
CHAPTER 18.16 - PERMITS 
 
18.16.010 - Application for Use Permit—Required—Fee. 
To establish a mobile home park, an application for a use permit must be made to the City Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Planning Commission sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application as prescribed in chapter 22.40 of this Code. The application fee shall be in lieu of any use permit fee required generally by other provisions of the ordinances of the City. 
(Prior code § 4606 (part).)  
18.16.020 - Application for Use Permit—Plot Plan Required—Required Information. 
A plot plan as set forth below shall be submitted with the application. The plot plan must have received prior approval of the City Health Officer. The plot plan shall be reviewed by the City Planning Commission in accordance with the use permit procedure set forth in Chapter 22.40 of this Code. Application for any mobile home park within the City shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of applicant and all persons to be directly connected if the permit is granted; 
B.  The residence and business address of the applicant. This is to include all members of a firm, or all officers of a corporation applying for a permit; 
C.  The applicant to state on the application whether he is owner or lessee of the property and state present use of the land; 
D.  Application shall give legal description of the property proposed for the mobile home park. If deed restrictions exist on property, so state; 
E.  State the source of water supply. If private well, state alternate source of supply; 
F.  Applicant shall show adjacent land uses; 
G.  The applicant shall give such additional information as may be required by the various departments of the City. 
(Prior code § 4606 (part).)  
18.16.030 - Application for Use Permit—Plot Plan Copies and Scale—Other Drawings. 
Six copies of the plot plan, at a scale no greater than one inch equals 100 feet, and giving scaled dimensions and showing exterior boundaries of the property for the proposed mobile home park, and such other drawings that may be necessary to show the following, shall be submitted at time of application for a use permit: 
A.  All mobile home sites with dimensions of such spaces; 
B.  All public streets in the vicinity of such proposed mobile home parks; 
C.  The location, width and type construction of all mobile home park roadways; 
D.  Unpaved areas which are to be landscaped; 
E.  Locations of all mobile home park buildings; 
F.  Type building construction, elevations and/or perspective drawings; 
G.  Fire hydrants, locations and size of outlet connections; 
H.  Laundry and drying yard area and facilities; 
I.  Fences and other improvements which the City may require; 
J.  Proposed method for site drainage. 
(Prior code § 4606 (part).)  
18.16.040 - Operating Without Valid License or Permit Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain, upon any property owned or controlled by him, a mobile home park in the City unless a valid permit or license is issued in accordance with the provisions of this title. Permits so issued may be revoked for violation of the provisions of this title, after notice and hearing. 
(Prior code § 4606 (part).)  
18.16.050 - Inspection of Grounds—Permit Issuance by Building Inspector. 
Within ten days after the application, descriptions, plans and specifications, and required fee, if any, are filed and paid, an inspector of the City Building Department shall inspect the grounds upon which the applicant proposed to do the work for which he seeks a permit. The City Building Inspector shall issue a written permit to the Planning Commission and the applicant, provided that the description and plans and specifications filed indicate that the work proposed will meet the requirements of this title and are in accordance with the permit issued by the Planning Commission. 
(Prior code § 4609.)  
18.16.060 - Posting. 
Permits for construction, installation and operation shall be posted in a conspicuous place. 
(Prior code § 4611.)  
18.16.070 - Expiration. 
All permits as required in this title for installation, construction or reconstruction of a mobile home park shall expire 12 months from the date of the issuance thereof in those cases where the construction, installation or reconstruction has not been completed within the period; provided, however, that the City Building Inspector may extend the expiration date of the permit for a reasonable time. 
(Prior code § 4612.)  
CHAPTER 18.20 - PERMIT SUSPENSION AND RESTORATION 
 
18.20.010 - Suspension—Generally. 
In the event that any person holding a permit issued by the City Building Inspector under the provisions of this title, violates any of the provisions of the permit, the permit may be subject to suspension as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4613.)  
18.20.020 - Suspension—Notice—Contents. 
The City Building Inspector shall issue and serve upon the permittee a notice setting forth in what respect the provisions of the permit and/or of this title have been violated, and shall notify him that unless these provisions have been complied with within 30 days after the date of notice, the permit shall be subject to suspension. 
(Prior code § 4614.)  
18.20.030 - Suspension—Notice—Service. 
The notice shall be served by posting at least one copy in a conspicuous place on the premises described in the permit, and by sending another copy by registered mail, postage prepaid, return requested, to the person to whom the permit was issued at the address therein given. 
(Prior code § 4615.)  
18.20.040 - Suspension—When. 
If the requirements of the notice have not been complied with on or before the expiration of thirty (30) days after the mailing and posting of the notice, the City Building Inspector may suspend the permit. 
(Prior code § 4616.)  
18.20.050 - Restoration. 
Upon compliance by the permittee with the provisions of this title and of the notice, and submission of proof thereof to the City Building Inspector, the City Building Inspector shall reinstate the permit. 
(Prior code § 4617.)  
18.20.060 - Hearing—Notice. 
A.  Any permittee receiving a suspension notice may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before a representative of the City Building Inspector designated by the City Engineer to hold such hearing. The permittee shall file in the office of the City Building Inspector a written petition requesting such a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days of the date of mailing of such notice. 
B.  Upon receipt of such petition, the City Building Inspector shall set a time and a place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause, if any, why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
C.  Such hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which such petition was filed; provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the City Building Inspector may postpone the date of such hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 10-day period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
D.  After such hearing, the City Building Inspector shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions of the title have been complied with. 
(Prior code § 4619.)  
CHAPTER 18.24 - SITE AND RECREATION AREAS 
 
18.24.010 - Minimum Site Area For Mobile Home Parks. 
The minimum site for a mobile home park shall be 15 acres, all of which shall be developed as a single unit. 
(Prior code § 4620.)  
18.24.020 - Recreation Area. 
It shall be required that a basic area of 2,500 square feet plus a minimum area of 200 square feet for each mobile home space beyond the first ten spaces, be set aside for recreation purposes; of this area one recreational building, 3,500 square feet for each mobile home site park shall be provided. 
(Prior code § 4621.)  
CHAPTER 18.28 - GRADING 
 
18.28.010 - Specifications Generally. 
Any property proposed for use as a mobile home park shall be adequately graded and drained by means of surface or underground structures to prevent accumulation of standing water or consequent muddy conditions. 
(Prior code § 4622.)  
CHAPTER 18.32 - SITE REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.32.010 - Minimum Site Area. 
The minimum mobile home site area shall be not less than 2,400 square feet. The corners of each site shall be clearly and permanently marked. 
(Prior code § 4635(a).)  
18.32.020 - Minimum Site Width. 
The minimum width of a mobile home site shall be not less than 36 feet for conventional mobile homes and not less than 46 feet for expandable mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 4635(b).)  
18.32.030 - Front Setback. 
A minimum front setback of 5 feet shall be established from any service road to the front line of any mobile home or structure. 
(Prior code § 4635(c).)  
18.32.040 - Rear Setback. 
A minimum setback of 5 feet shall be established from any mobile home to the rear mobile home site line. No fence or storage cabinet higher than 6 feet may be erected or projected into the rear yard. The area occupied by a storage cabinet shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
(Prior code § 4635(d).)  
18.32.050 - Side Yard. 
The minimum side yard shall be 3 feet. A minimum side setback of 5 feet will be established from any service road to any mobile home or structure. 
(Prior code § 4635(e).)  
18.32.060 - Distance From Park Boundary. 
Each mobile home site along the exterior line of a mobile home park shall be so designated that any part of any mobile home shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the exterior boundary of the park and a minimum of 15 feet from any public street or alley. 
(Prior code § 4635(f).)  
18.32.070 - Distance From Other Structures. 
No mobile home shall be closer than 10 feet to any building or another mobile home. 
(Prior code § 4635(g).)  
18.32.080 - Patio Area. 
It shall be required that a paved patio be constructed on each mobile home site. The patio shall be a minimum of 4 inches of Portland cement concrete which shall be a 5 sack mix with a psi of 2500 in 27 days with adequate cross-gradient for surface drainage. The patio shall be located only on the entry side adjacent to and paralleling the longer dimension of the mobile home pad. The patio area shall be a minimum of 8 ½ feet in width and 40 feet in length. If required, the patio may be covered by means of a free-standing canopy adequately designed and constructed to standards as specified in the Uniform Building Code. 
(Prior code 4635(h).)  
18.32.090 - Parking Space. 
A minimum auto parking space of 9 feet by 40 feet shall be required on each mobile home site. No portion of this required area may project into any required front or side yards. Mobile home site drives shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide. 
(Prior code § 4635(i).)  
CHAPTER 18.36 - UTILITIES 
 
18.36.010 - Location. 
All facilities heretofore referred to in this title as "utilities" shall be installed underground in accordance with standards of the public utility involved with the concurrence of the City Engineer and/or Building Department. Compliance with this section shall be the responsibility of the permittee and he shall make all necessary arrangements with the public utility involved or the City, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 4623.)  
CHAPTER 18.40 - ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES 
 
18.40.010 - Authorized Structures. 
No structure except those authorized by this title shall be erected, constructed, placed, maintained or occupied on any mobile home site. 
(Prior code § 4639.)  
18.40.020 - Distance Between Structures. 
No structure nor portion or projection thereof including an approved awning shall be located closer than 10 feet from any mobile home on an adjacent mobile home site; provided, however, that a windbreak or fence not in excess of 6 feet may be located on lot lines provided it is at least 5 feet from a mobile home. 
(Prior code § 4640.)  
18.40.030 - Limitations on Location of Structures. 
To prevent obstruction of natural light and ventilation, no awning, building or windbreak or combination thereof shall be erected, placed or maintained on more than one side or one end of any mobile home. 
(Prior code § 4641.)  
18.40.040 - Carport. 
A free-standing awning or shade structure serving exclusively as a carport may be erected, placed or maintained on the entry side of a mobile home provided the carport is entirely open on at least two sides. The carport shall be located not less than 8 ½ feet from any mobile home. 
(Prior code § 4642.)  
18.40.050 - Awning Construction. 
A.  Awnings shall be made of metal or of other approved material; provided, however, that neither canvas nor similar fabric material may be used unless it is approved by the City Fire Department. 
B.  Framework for awnings shall be of standard metal pipe not less than ½ inch diameter. Uprights of framework may be of any approved material of equal or greater strength. Metal or other rigid awnings shall have supporting framework of similar or other approved materials, provided, however, that the weight of the awning is adequately supported. All joints of metal pipe framework shall be securely fastened with standard screw-pipe or pipe-connected fittings. Welded joints may be used. Awnings shall be free-standing, except that one side may be attached to an approved awning track on the trailer coach. 
C.  Awnings shall have at least one side entirely open at all times. 
D.  Awning location and spacing, except window awnings, shall be subject to the requirements as provided in Section 18.40.020 of this title. 
(Prior code § 4648.)  
18.40.060 - Windbreak Construction. 
A.  A windbreak shall be designed, erected and maintained as a free-standing structure. No portion of a windbreak shall be attached to or become a part of any mobile home. 
B.  Windbreaks in excess of 72 inches in height shall be designed to withstand vertical live and dead loads imposed upon them and to withstand a horizontal force from any direction of 15 pounds per square foot wind pressure on the vertical projection of the exposed surface of the structure. 
C.  A windbreak shall be erected and maintained so that neither of the ends nor any other portion shall be returned to form an enclosure or cabana. Only approved windbreaks shall support a roof or awning. 
(Prior code § 4649.)  
CHAPTER 18.44 - LANDSCAPING AND FENCING 
 
18.44.010 - Fences. 
No fence higher than 18 inches shall be located within 10 feet of any front mobile home site line. 
(Prior code § 4629.)  
18.44.020 - Landscaping. 
A.  All areas of a mobile home park not occupied by paved roadways or pathways, patios and other park facilities shall be landscaped. 
B.  Tree Screen. A belt of approved trees shall be established and maintained between the mobile home park and all adjoining properties. These trees shall be planted in such proximity to each other that they will form a natural screen around the mobile home park. 
C.  Shade Trees. There shall be the equivalent of at least one tree of an approved type, a minimum of 6 feet in height, for each mobile home site. 
(Prior code § 4630.)  
CHAPTER 18.48 - STORAGE AREA 
 
18.48.010 - Specifications. 
Storage spaces shall be provided for parking dependent mobile homes, smaller trailers and boats. Such spaces shall be provided at the rate of one space for each ten mobile home sites. The storage area shall be screened on at least one side with a solid type fence or wall not less than 6 feet in height. In addition, the 5 feet on the side of the fence or wall facing the mobile home sites shall be landscaped with plant materials and permanently maintained to screen the storage area. 
(Prior code § 4628.)  
CHAPTER 18.52 - PARKING 
 
18.52.010 - Auto Parking Standards. 
No parking shall be permitted in any required driveway or service road. (Prior cods § 4626.)  
18.52.020 - Off-Driveway Parking. 
All parking, required or otherwise, shall be located in such a manner that the designated parking spaces shall not be closer than 3 feet to any service road. Guest parking shall be provided in parking bays off the park service roads at the rate of one space for each eight mobile home sites. The spaces in the parking bays shall be no less than 9 feet wide by 19 feet. 
(Prior code § 4627.)  
CHAPTER 18.56 - SERVICE ROADS 
 
18.56.010 - In Mobile Home Parks. 
The entrance park roadway at the connection with a public street shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and fully paved in accordance with specifications set forth in section 18.56.020. In addition, at least a 4-inch rolled curb and gutter shall be constructed. Each mobile home site shall front upon a paved service road of not less than 25 feet in width. All driveways shall have clear and unobstructed access to a service road. 
(Prior code § 4624.)  
18.56.020 - Design. 
A.  By reason of varying bearing values of native subsoils in different localities within the boundaries of the City, the City Engineer may in each instance specify the design requirements for service roads within each particular mobile home park. The basic minimum specification for service roads within a mobile home park shall be a base course composed of 4 inches of approved crusher-run rock, which shall be thoroughly compacted by means of 10-ton tandem rollers. 
B.  The required paving shall consist of 1 ½ inches of asphaltic concrete (black top) developed to a smooth finish by mechanical rollers. Should the developer of the mobile home park, for aesthetic or other valid reasons, choose to substitute three course rock (armor-coat) paving instead of blacktop paving, the operation shall be conducted in accordance with the specifications furnished by the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4625.)  
CHAPTER 18.60 - OCCUPANTS AND OCCUPANCY 
 
18.60.010 - Unlawful Occupancy. 
It is unlawful for any person in a mobile home park to use or cause or permit to be used for occupancy: 
A.  Any mobile home from which any tire or wheel has been removed therefrom, except for the purpose of making temporary repairs or placing it in dead storage; 
B.  Any mobile home to which are attached any rigid water, gas or sewer pipes; provided, however, that metal tubing not to exceed ½-inch inside diameter may be used for water and that approved flexible metal tubing not less than ¾-inch inside diameter nor more than 15 feet in length may be used for a gas connector from the branch service riser to the service connector; 
C.  Any mobile home which is permanently attached with under-pinning or foundation to the ground; 
D.  Any mobile home which does not conform to the requirements of the California State Vehicle Code governing the use of mobile homes on public highways; 
E.  Any mobile home which does not carry a current yearly license issued by any state or foreign vehicle department; 
F.  Any mobile home in an unsanitary condition; 
G.  Any mobile home which is structurally unsound and does not protect its occupants against the elements. 
(Prior code § 4636.)  
18.60.020 - Unlawful Use. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, occupy or maintain any mobile home upon any area or tract of land without the written permission of the owner or person legally in charge of the land. 
(Prior code § 4637.)  
18.60.030 - Unlawful Rent. 
It is unlawful for any person to rent or hold out for rent any mobile home in a mobile home park which is owned by or in the possession or control of the owner or operator of the mobile home park or his agent. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall also be deemed to be rental for the space it occupies. 
(Prior code § 4638.)  
18.60.040 - Register of Occupants. 
A.  It shall be the duty of each licensee and permittee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the mobile home park. The register shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of each mobile home occupant; 
2.  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and the motor vehicle by which it is towed; 
3.  The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and motor vehicle; 
4.  The state, territory or county issuing such licenses; 
5.  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home; 
6.  Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent mobile home. 
B.  The owners and managers of the mobile home park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of 3 years following the date of departure of the registrant from the mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 4653.)  
CHAPTER 18.64 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
18.64.010 - Illumination. 
Mobile home parks shall have installed and kept in operation from sunset to sunrise sufficient artificial light to clearly illuminate every building containing public toilets and showers and all pathways leading to such public toilets and showers. Illumination shall also be furnished for all service roads within the park. Illumination of service roads shall receive approval of the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4631.)  
18.64.020 - Public Telephone. 
Telephone service housed in rainproof booths shall be installed for the convenience of occupants of mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 4634.)  
18.64.030 - Prohibited Obstruction. 
No obstruction of any kind shall be erected, placed or maintained on or about the mobile home site that would impede the movement of a mobile home from a site to a driveway or prevent inspection of plumbing and electrical facilities and related mobile home equipment. 
(Prior code § 4645.)  
18.64.040 - Plot Plan in Park. 
The owner or operator of every mobile home park containing mobile homes shall maintain in a conspicuous location a copy of any approved plot of the mobile home park. The plot plan shall show in detail the site layouts, and the location of mobile homes, and each site shall be designated by number or by other means of identification. 
(Prior code § 4646.)  
18.64.050 - Animals. 
Domestic pets shall not be permitted to run at large in any mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 4647.)  
18.64.060 - Additional Regulations. 
A.  A mobile home site in a mobile home park shall not be occupied as a living quarter unless a single mobile home is parked on the site. 
B.  There shall not be located on each mobile home site more than two automobiles and one mobile home, one patio, one windbreak and an approved storage cabinet. There shall not be more mobile homes in a mobile home park than there are approved mobile home sites. 
C.  Dependent trailer coaches shall not be occupied in any mobile home park in the City. 
D.  Independent mobile homes shall not be parked in other than those sites which have approved plumbing facilities for parking such mobile homes. 
E.  All toilet compartments and compartments containing bath facilities shall be kept free from obnoxious odors, mosquitoes, flies, etc. 
F.  The public toilets shall be maintained and accessible to tenants at all times. 
G.  All toilets and bathing facilities shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants of the mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 4650.)  
CHAPTER 18.68 - MAINTENANCE 
 
18.68.010 - Generally. 
A.  All devices or safeguards required by this title shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, operator or lessee of the mobile home park or his designated agent shall be responsible for their maintenance. 
B.  The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall be responsible for securing the maintenance of all structures and their sites. 
C.  Every structure shall be maintained in an approved, safe and sanitary condition and in a state of approved repair. 
D.  All devices, installations and safeguards required by this title shall be maintained in approved working order. 
E.  No structure shall be so erected, placed or maintained as to obstruct a required opening in an awning, a required open space on a site, or prevent inspection of electrical or sanitary facilities of mobile home equipment. Storage cabinets approved by the Building Inspector may be used on a mobile home site. 
(Prior code § 4644.)  
18.68.020 - Responsibility for Connections. 
When it is evident that there exists, or may exist, a violation of service facilities rules and regulations, the owner, operator, lessee, person in charge, of the park or any other person causing a violation shall cause to be corrected immediately or disconnect the service connection and mobile home drain connection from the respective park branch service lines and sewer lateral. 
(Prior code § 4643.)  
18.68.030 - Supervision. 
The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized manager or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, operable and sanitary condition. The manager or caretaker shall be answerable with the licensee or permittee, for violation of any provision of this title. 
(Prior code § 4654.)  
CHAPTER 18.72 - FIRE PROTECTION 
 
18.72.010 - Specifications. 
Mobile home parks shall install permanent fire hydrants in sufficient quantity and of a standard conforming with the requirements of the Contra Costa County Consolidated Fire District. All buildings located within mobile home parks which may be used for public assembly or recreation shall be equipped with City-approved fire extinguishers or other fire extinguishing apparatus. 
(Ord. 818 C.S. § 4, 1975; prior code § 4633.)  
CHAPTER 18.76 - LIQUID PETROLEUM GASES 
 
18.76.010 - Compliance With Rules and Regulations Required. 
All appliances, containers, shut-off valves, pipe and fittings, and the location of all containers for liquefied petroleum gases must be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the Industrial Accident Commission of the State. 
(Prior code § 4652(a).)  
18.76.020 - Cylinder Location. 
In no case shall a cylinder be located within a building enclosed on four sides nor within a mobile home, nor within 5 feet of a source of ignition, nor below ground level, nor with the outlet less than 5 feet away from any building or mobile home opening which is below such outlet. 
(Prior code § 4652(b).)  
18.76.030 - Discharge From Safety Valves. 
Discharges from safety valves shall be such as to prevent any impingement upon the vessel holding the petroleum gas and shall be at a point not less than 5 feet horizontally from any building or mobile home opening which is below such outlet. 
(Prior code § 4652(c).)  
18.76.040 - Maximum Volumetric Capacity Permitted. 
The maximum size volumetric capacity permitted on a single mobile home site shall be 25 gallons in one tank. 
(Prior code § 4652(d).)  
18.76.050 - Larger Capacities to Comply With Gas Service Establishment Provisions. 
Any petroleum gas equipment and vessels with larger capacity must conform to the City's regulations covering petroleum gas service establishments. 
(Prior code § 4652(e).)  
18.76.060 - Flammable Material Location. 
Readily ignitable materials shall not be permitted within 10 feet of any cylinder, regulator or vaporizer. 
(Prior code § 4652(f).)  
18.76.070 - Charging Cylinders Within Ten Feet Prohibited. 
A cylinder may not be charged within 10 feet of any mobile home in a mobile home park. 
(Prior code § 4652(g).)  
CHAPTER 18.80 - SANITATION 
 
18.80.010 - Garbage and Rubbish Disposal and General Sanitation. 
A.  Adequate garbage cans and garbage collection service shall be provided within the mobile home park. 
B.  All garbage and waste shall be removed from the mobile home park in accordance with the applicable provisions of the City as found in Chapter 8.16 of this code. 
C.  All rubbish shall be removed from the park without creating a nuisance and in conformance with local smog control laws. 
D.  No waste water or material from sinks, plumbing fixtures or waste lines shall be deposited upon the surface of the ground. All must be connected to the park sanitary sewer system. 
(Prior code § 4651.)  
18.80.020 - Sanitation Facilities—Generally. 
Each mobile home park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities and car washing facilities as required, and more particularly described in the State's Division of Housing Trailer Park Act. 
(Prior code § 4632.)  
CHAPTER 18.84 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
18.84.010 - Authority of Officers. 
A.  The officers or agents of the City Building Inspector and the County Health Officer shall have the authority of peace officers as may be necessary to secure enforcement of this title. 
B.  The officers or agents of the City Building Inspector or the County Health Officers may: 
1.  Enter public or private property to determine whether there exists any mobile home park to which this title applies; 
2.  Enter and inspect all mobile home parks wherever situated, and inspect all accommodations, equipment or paraphernalia used in connection therewith, including the right to examine any registers of occupants maintained therein in order to secure the enforcement of the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 4655.)  
18.84.020 - Unfit Structure Deemed Nuisance—Notice for Correction or Abatement. 
Any structure that has become unfit for human habitation or occupancy as defined is a nuisance. The City Building Inspector after so determining shall notify the owner or operator of a mobile home park when such structure is found to be unfit for human occupancy. Such notice shall set forth the conditions that render the structure unfit for occupancy and shall order the correction or abatement thereof either by demolition or repair within 30 days or such additional time as is reasonable. 
(Prior code § 4656.)  
18.84.030 - Legal Actions. 
If any building or structure is constructed, altered, converted, used or maintained in violation of any provision of this title or of any order or notice issued by the City Building Inspector or the County Health Officer pursuant to this title, or if a nuisance exists in any mobile home park or in any structure or upon the mobile home site on which it is situated, the City Building Inspector or the County Health Officer may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or nuisance. 
(Prior code § 4657.)  
18.84.040 - Abatement Procedure. 
In any action or proceeding to abate a nuisance in a mobile home park, proof of the following facts is sufficient for a judgment or order for the abatement of the operation of the mobile home park: 
A.  Previous conviction of the owner or operator of the mobile home park of a violation of this title which constitutes a nuisance; 
B.  Failure on the part of the owner or operator to correct the violation after the conviction; 
C.  The violation is the basis for the proceeding. 
(Prior code § 4658.)  
18.84.050 - Permit Revocation. 
The Health Department may revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 4659.) 
TITLE 18 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding mobile homes, see Health § Safety Code § 18000, et seq.; for statutory provisions regarding local police powers, see Health § Safety Code § 18300. 
2.  For provisions regarding illumination of service roads, see § 18.64.010. 
3.  For provisions regarding illumination of sanitation facilities, see § 18.64.010. 
Issued: 5/90  
TITLE 20 - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 20.04 - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 
 
20.04.010 - Purpose. 
In accordance with Section 21000 et seq. of the Public Resources Code of the State, the purpose of this title is to ensure that major consideration is given to preventing environmental damage as a consequence of activities of the City. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986: prior code § 10,400.)  
20.04.020 - State Guidelines. 
State CEQA Guidelines adopted pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21083 as amended from time to time are hereby incorporated in this Code by reference as if set forth in full herein. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.030 - Administration. 
The Planning and Building Director shall administer the provisions of this title. The Director shall carry out all delegated duties as specified in Section 15025(a) of the State CEQA Guidelines. The Director shall also have the authority to decide, in conjunction with the Planning Commission, which course to follow when the CEQA Guidelines allow discretion, and there exists no other state or city law controlling said discretion, such as in holding a separate public hearing on a Draft Environmental Impact Report (EIR), or holding a public scoping session before beginning to prepare a Draft EIR. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.040 - Certification of Final EIR. 
The Planning Commission shall review and decide whether each Final EIR is adequate and complies with CEQA. A Commission decision to certify a Final EIR shall be appealable to the City Council by any interested party by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten days of the Commission decision on the EIR, which decision may be taken at an earlier date than the decision on the project itself. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.050 - Review of Final EIR or Negative Declaration. 
As to all development projects, permits or other planning submittals over which the Planning Commission has final approval authority (barring an appeal to the City Council), the Planning Commission shall review and consider the certified Final EIR or approve a negative declaration prior to approving the development project, permit or planning submittal. Under such circumstances, the Planning Commission shall make the findings required by Sections 15091 and 15093 of the CEQA regulations, if applicable. 
Where the Planning Commission is required to make a recommendation on a project or any portion of a project (e.g. where other project approvals such as Design Review or Tentative Subdivision Map are approved contingent on Council approval of rezoning, general plan amendment, etc.) to the City Council, the Planning Commission shall review and consider the certified Final EIR, or negative declaration in draft or final form and submit its recommended findings and decision on the project to the City Council. 
In those instances where the City Council has final approval authority over the granting or denying of a development project, a permit application, a planning submittal, or a public project, the City Council shall review and consider the certified Final EIR or approve a negative declaration prior to approving the project, permit or planning submittal. In such circumstances, the City Council shall make the findings required by Sections 15091 and 15093 of the CEQA regulations, if applicable. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.060 - Ministerial Projects. 
The following are defined as projects over which the City has only ministerial authority, and which are therefore not subject to CEQA or environmental review under this Title: all Police Department licensing and all activities listed in Section 15268(b) of the State CEQA Guidelines 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.070 - Categorical Exemptions. 
Projects normally exempt under Classes 3, 4, 5 and 11 of the State CEQA Guidelines shall not be exempt if located in a visually significant area as shown on the "Visual Environment" or if located in a seismic or geologic hazard area as shown on the "Seismic and Geologic Hazard" map, both maps being contained in the Open Space and Conservation element of the City General Plan. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. § II (part), 1986.)  
20.04.080 - Review by Council. 
Any member of the Council shall have the authority to request the Council to review any decision of the Planning Commission under this title by either making such request orally at the first Council meeting following the Commission meeting at which such decision was made, or by filing a written request with the City Clerk, provided that the oral or written request is made prior to the expiration of the time during which an appeal can be made. When such review is requested by any member of the Council, the decision shall be considered as appealed. 
(Ord. 1083 C.S. II (part), 1986. Ord. 987 C.S. 1983.)  
20.04.090 - Time Limits. 
When the City is Lead Agency, an EIR shall be completed and certified within one year from the date on which the application is accepted as complete. The Planning & Building Director may extend the above specified time limit applicable to EIR's, for a reasonable period of time, in the event that compelling circumstances justify additional time and the applicant consents to the extension. Such consent shall be written, signed by the applicant, and recite the compelling reasons for the extension. If a time extension has been granted, the City shall approve or disapprove the project within 90 days after certification of the EIR. 
(Ord. 1107 C.S. § I, 1987) 
TITLE 20 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For state provisions on environmental quality, see Pub. Res. Code § 21000 et seq.; for buildings and construction, see Title 15; for zoning provisions see Title 22. 
Issued: 5/90  
TITLE 21 - SUBDIVISIONS 
CHAPTERS: 
NOTE:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this Title.  
CHAPTER 21.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
21.02.010 - Purposes. 
This Title is adopted to regulate the subdivision of land and to require the provision of certain prescribed improvements and payment of in-lieu fees which are needed as a consequence of the subdivision of land, and in order that the following purposes shall be achieved to: 
A.  Implement the General Plan of the City, hereinafter referred to as the General Plan, adopted by the City Council as the long range, general comprehensive guide to the physical development of the City; 
B.  Provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purpose for which they are to be used; 
C.  Provide streets of adequate capacity with appropriate improvements for the anticipated traffic which will utilize them, and to ensure that streets are designed so as to minimize safety hazards to vehicles and pedestrians; 
D.  Provide sidewalks and pedestrian ways where needed for the safety and convenience of pedestrians; 
E.  Preserve the natural assets of the City and to create new beauty through skilled subdivision design; 
F.  Provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, street lighting, fire protection and other utilities and services needed to protect and promote the public health, safety and convenience; 
G.  Plan and provide for parks, recreation and other types of community facilities where needed to serve new developments; 
H.  Ensure that the costs of providing rights-of-way and improvements for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and utilities needed to serve new developments, are borne by the subdivider rather than by the property owners of the City at large; 
I.  To ensure that, insofar as possible, land is subdivided in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4500.)  
21.02.020 - General Plan. 
A subdivision map shall conform with the principles and standards of the General Plan and all its elements. In the absence of a precise plan line, a major street or secondary street shall conform approximately with the alignment shown on the General Plan. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I, (part) 1987: prior code § 4501.)  
21.02.030 - Precise Plans and Official Plan Lines. 
A subdivision map shall conform with the precise plans for streets, community facilities sites and other projects, adopted by the City Council. A subdivision map shall conform with official plan lines of the widening of streets and for other projects. 
(Prior code § 4502.)  
21.02.040 - Conformity With Zoning Provisions. 
A subdivision map shall conform with the zoning provisions of the City, as found in Title 22 of this code, hereinafter simply referred to as the zoning provisions, with respect to use of land, lot size and dimensions, space for off-street parking and off-street loading areas and other applicable regulations. 
(Prior code § 4503.)  
21.02.050 - State Subdivision Map Act Applicability. 
The provisions of this Title are supplemental to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the State, hereinafter referred to as the Subdivision Map Act, and all terms used herein which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act shall have the same meaning as ascribed thereto in the Act, and as the Act may hereafter be amended. 
(Prior code § 4504.)  
21.02.060 - Advisory Agency Designated. 
The Planning Commission of the City, hereinafter referred to as the City Planning Commission, is designated as the advisory agency referred to in the Subdivision Map Act and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions, and the Commission shall have such additional powers and duties with respect to subdivisions, the maps thereof, and the procedure relating thereto as are prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act and by this Title. For review and approval of parcel maps, the advisory agency shall be the Board of Adjustments as defined in Title 22. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4505.)  
CHAPTER 21.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
21.04.010 - Generally. 
All words in the present tense shall include the future tense. All words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and all words in the plural number shall include the singular number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
(Prior code § 4506(a).)  
21.04.020 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Prior code § 4506(c).)  
21.04.022 - Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
"Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the flood plain within the City that would be inundated by the base flood. 
(Ord. 876 C.S. § 1 (part), 1978.)  
21.04.023 - Arterial Street. 
"Arterial Street" means a street designated for through traffic movement of heavy volumes of traffic between areas of the City between the City and neighboring cities, or as an approach to a highway or freeway. Arterial streets may be subject to control of access to abutting properties. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.04.027 - Bikeways. 
"Bikeway" means a portion of a street, right-of-way, or a separate improved right-of-way designated for use by bicycles. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.04.030 - Block. 
"Block" means a parcel of subdivided land bounded by streets or by streets and rights-of-way, railroads, other public sites, unsubdivided lands, drainage channels or watercourses. 
(Prior code § 4506(d).)  
21.04.035 - Collector Street. 
"Collector Street" means a street designated for traffic movement between major arterials and local street, with direct access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.04.040 - Cul-De-Sac. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a street which connects with another street only at one end and has a turnaround at the other end. 
(Prior code § 4506(5).)  
21.04.060 - Frontage Street. 
"Frontage street" means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to a freeway or major street, and which provides access to abutting properties while relieving them of the effects of heavy volumes of fast through traffic. 
(Prior code § 4506(g).)  
21.04.070 - Hillside. 
"Hillside" means land having an average cross slope of twenty (20) percent or greater determined by measurement of the average slope perpendicular to the street line between the rear lot lines and the center of the street before grading. A block frontage shall be deemed a hillside if the slope of 30 percent or more of its length equals or exceeds 20 percent. 
(Prior code § 4506(h).)  
21.04.075 - Local Street. 
"Local Street" means a street designated for direct access to abutting land and for local traffic movement. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.04.080 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of subdivided land under one ownership used or susceptible to being used in accord with the regulations of this Title and in accord with the zoning provisions. 
(Prior code § 4506(i).)  
21.04.090 - Lot, Double Frontage. 
"Double frontage lot" means an interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Prior code § 4506(j).)  
21.04.100 - Lot, Key. 
"Key lot" means the first interior lot to the rear or a reversed corner lot. 
(Prior code § 4506(k).)  
21.04.110 - Lot, Reversed Corner. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear. 
(Prior code § 4506(l).)  
21.04.114 - Lot Line Adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" means a shift or rotation of an existing lot line between two or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existing is not thereby created. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § I, 1990, Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior Ord. 909 C.S. § 1, 1979.)  
21.04.140 - Nonaccess Strip. 
"Nonaccess strip" means a strip of land separating private property and a street right-of-way which is intended to prevent access to abutting property from the street. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4506(o).)  
21.04.144 - Parcel Map. 
"Parcel map" means a map showing a division of land of four or less parcels as required by this Title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 2, 1979.)  
21.04.150 - Pedestrian Way. 
"Pedestrian way" means a public way designed for use by pedestrians which is not intended for use by automobile vehicles and which is not located within a street right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 4506(p).)  
21.04.160 - Planting Strip. 
"Planting strip" means a strip between the sidewalk and property line, within a street right-of-way, which is intended to be planted with trees or otherwise landscaped. 
(Prior code § 4506(q).)  
21.04.170 - Preliminary Map. 
"Preliminary map" means a map prepared in accord with the provisions of Chapter 21.40 of this Title, showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it, for the purpose of review with respect to the conformity of the map with the provisions of this Title and other applicable ordinances and possible improvements in the design of the subdivision plan. 
(Prior code § 4504(r).)  
21.04.180 - Reversion to Acreage Map. 
"Reversion to acreage map" means a map prepared in accord with the provisions of Chapter 21.50 of this Title for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage. 
(Prior code § 4506(s).)  
21.04.200 - Sidewalk. 
"Sidewalk" means a way designed for use by pedestrians which is located within a street right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 4506(u).)  
21.04.210 - Shall. 
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
(Prior code § 4506(b).)  
21.04.218 - Utilities Easement. 
"Utilities easement" means an easement over a portion of a parcel reserved for the installation of utilities. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.04.220 - Utilities Strip. 
"Utilities strip" means a strip between the curb and the property line within a street right-of-way which is intended for the installation of utilities. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code 4506(v).)  
21.04.230 - Wording. 
Where the wording "shall agree", "enter into an agreement" and "shall report" is used within this Title, it means in writing. 
(Prior code § 4506(w).)  
CHAPTER 21.06 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
21.06.010 - Penalties. 
Any offer to sell, contract to sell, or sale of a subdivision or any part thereof before a final map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this Title has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder is a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, partnership or corporation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City or any other political subdivision, or person, or firm, partnership or corporation may otherwise be entitled; and the City or any other political subdivision, or person, firm, partnership or corporation may file a suit in the Superior Court of Contra Costa County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of this Title. 
(Prior code § 4559.)  
21.06.020 - Duties of City Engineer. 
It shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer to notify the City Attorney of any violation of this Title and to sign any necessary complaints. 
(Prior code § 4560.)  
21.06.030 - Voidable Conveyances. 
Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell made contrary to the provisions of this Title, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy, within one year after the dates of execution of the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his assignee, heir, or devisee. 
(Prior code § 4561.)  
CHAPTER 21.08 - STREETS, ALLEYS AND WALKWAYS 
 
21.08.010 - Street Rights-of-Way and Improvements. 
Street rights-of-way and improvements shall conform with the minimum standards prescribed in Table 1. Any variance to the minimum standard is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(a).)  
21.08.020 - Curbs and Gutters. 
Standard concrete curbs shall be required in accordance with standards approved by the City Engineer, and rolled curbs and gutters shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(b).)  
21.08.030 - Utilities Strips. 
A utilities strip shall be provided between the curb and property line in accord with the standards prescribed in Table 1, unless a utility easement is provided. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(c).)  
21.08.040 - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be provided in accord with the standards prescribed in Table 1. 
(Prior code § 4507(d).)  
21.08.050 - Non-Access Strips. 
A non-access strip shall be provided if required by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(e).)  
21.08.060 - Curves and Tangents. 
Curved streets shall have center line radii and tangent lengths of not less than the minimum standards prescribed in Table 1. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(f).)  
21.08.070 - Grades. 
Street grades shall conform to the standards prescribed in Table 1, unless an exception is granted by the City Planning Commission under Section 21.52.040 of this Title. 
(Prior code § 4507(g).)  
21.08.080 - Corners. 
At street intersections, corners shall be rounded at the property line by a radius of not less than 20 feet. 
(Prior code § 4507(h).)  
21.08.090 - Street Intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as near right angles as practicable. 
(Prior code § 4507(i).)  
21.08.100 - Alignment of Streets. 
Streets located on opposite sides of an intersecting street shall have their center lines directly opposite each other where physically possible; otherwise the center lines shall be separated by not less than 150 feet. 
(Prior code § 4507(j).)  
21.08.110 - Continuations of Existing Streets. 
Subdivision streets which constitute continuations of streets in contiguous territory shall be aligned so that their center lines coincide. In cases where straight continuations are not physically possible, or where better subdivision design results, center lines shall be continued by curves. 
(Prior code § 4507(k).)  
21.08.120 - Streets in Subdivisions Adjoining Acreage. 
Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets which may be extended in the event of the subdivision of the adjoining land shall be provided through to the boundary line of the tract; a 1-foot non-access strip at the stub end of each such street shall be offered for dedication to the City. The developer shall provide adequate right-of-way and construct a temporary circular turnaround at the end of the street where required by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(1).)  
21.08.130 - Cul-De-Sacs. 
Cul-de-sacs shall be not more than 600 feet in length, or 16 lots whichever is greater, and shall terminate with a circular turnaround with a curb radius of not less than 40 feet. Cul-de-sac length shall be measured to the nearest fully-improved through street, and shall include any other cul-de-sacs branching from that common point. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code 4507(m).)  
21.08.140 - Frontage Streets. 
A frontage street separated from a freeway or a major street by a non-access strip may be required for access to a contiguous subdivision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code 4507(n).)  
21.08.150 - Planting Strips. 
A planting strip may be required between the sidewalk and property line in accordance with standards prescribed in Table 1. If required by the City Planning Commission, the subdivider shall plant trees in the planting strips or otherwise landscape them. Varieties, sizes and locations of trees and plant materials shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(o).)  
21.08.160 - Street Names. 
A street which is a continuation of an existing street shall bear the name of the existing street. In order to avoid duplication, names of new streets and requests for name changes shall be subject to the approval of the City Planning Commission. Each new subdivision shall have at least one new street named after a former mayor of Martinez, starting with the first mayor. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4507(p).)  
21.08.170 - Alleys. 
A.  Alleys 30 feet in width may be required at the rear of lots in commercial and industrial zoning districts. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential, multiple dwelling, and professional and administrative office zoning districts; 
B.  Where two alleys intersect, the corners shall be rounded at the property line by a radius of not less than 20 feet; 
C.  Alleys shall be graded and paved to their full width. 
(Prior code § 4508.)  
21.08.180 - Pedestrian Ways. 
A.  Pedestrian ways not more than 20 feet in width may be required through the middle of blocks which are more than 1,200 feet in length, and to connect cul-de-sacs or to provide access to playgrounds, parks, schools, shopping centers or similar community facilities; 
B.  Required pedestrian ways shall be graded and paved to a width of not less than 10 feet. 
(Prior code § 4509.)  
21.08.190 - Bikeways. 
Bikeway shall be provided in accordance with the City Trails Plan and Circulation Element, and when needed for adequate circulation for the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.08.200 - Table I-Minimum Street Right-of-Way and Improvements Standards. 
	Arterial Sts. 	Collector Sts. 	Local Sts. 	Hillside Sts.**** 
				
Traffic Lanes 	4—12' 	2-12' 	2—10' 	2—10' 
Parking Lanes 	2—8' 	2—8' 	2—8' 	1—8' 
Median strip 	1-16' 	—- 	—- 	—- 
Curb-to-curb width 	80' 	40' 	36' 	28' 
Utilities strip 	2-3' 	2—3' 	2—3' 	2—2' 
Planting strip* 	2—3' 	2—3' 	2—3' 	1—4' 
Sidewalk** 	2—4' 	2—4' 	2—4' 	1—4' 
Right—of—way (1) 	100' 	60' 	56' 	40' 
 (2) 	94' 	54' 	50' 	40' 
Radius of curvature (minimum) 	550' 	300' 	150' 	130' 
Grade (maximum) 	10% 	10% 	15% 	15%*** 
 (minimum) 	0.5% 	0.5% 	0.5% 	0.5% 
Curb height 	6? 	6? 	6? 	6? 
 
* When the subdivider agrees to plant trees on the property, as approved by City Planning Commission, a planting strip will not be required and "Right-of-Way(2)? shall apply. 
** An exception to required sidewalks on lots with a minimum of 75-foot frontage and a minimum site area of 10,000 square feet may be granted by the Planning Commission under Section 21.52.040 of this Title. 
*** Slope of streets shall not exceed 15 percent except by special permission of the City Planning Commission pursuant to Section 21.52.040 of this Title. 
**** Hillside street standards shall require on-street parking prohibitions on one side of the street for 28' curb to curb width. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.08.210 - Traffic Fees. 
A traffic mitigation fee may be required as a condition of approval in an amount, of a nature and with those terms and conditions as specified by City Council resolution. (1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
CHAPTER 21.10 - LOTS AND BLOCKS 
 
21.10.010 - Lots. 
A.  The size and shape of lots shall be appropriate for the locality in which the subdivision is situated, the topography of the land and the proposed use. 
B.  Lot configuration shall conform to all requirements of Title 22 such as lot area, width, depth and street frontage and intended use. 
C.  Double frontage lots shall not be permitted except where necessary to prevent residential development from fronting on a freeway, a major street or a secondary street, or where necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions. 
D.  Reverse corner lots and key lots shall not be permitted except where necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions. 
E.  The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to the street upon which the lot fronts, as far as practicable. 
F.  No lot shall be divided by a boundary line of the City, a school district, a sanitary district or any other taxing district. 
G.  In a subdivision in which the lots may be resubdivided at some future time, the location of lot lines and other details of layout shall be such that resubdivisions may readily take place without violating the requirements of this Title or the zoning provisions and without interfering with the orderly extension of adjacent streets. 
H.  All lots shall be adequately drained and sloped in such a manner that surface water is conducted to streets, underground drains or drainage channels approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4510.)  
21.10.020 - Blocks. 
A.  Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length except where necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions. Long blocks normally shall be provided adjacent to major and secondary streets in order to reduce the number of intersections. 
B.  The depth of blocks shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots, the depth of which lots shall be not more than three times the width, except where necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions. 
(Prior code § 4511.)  
CHAPTER 21.12 - WATERCOURSES 
 
21.12.010 - Dedication. 
In the event that the subdivision is traversed by any watercourses, channels, streams or creeks, the subdivider may be required to dedicate to the City easements for storm drainage or conservation purposes conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses, channels, streams or creeks, and may be required to dedicate such additional easements for structures or channel changes or both to adequately dispose of surface and storm waters. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4512.)  
CHAPTER 21.14 - RAILROAD AND GRADE CROSSINGS 
 
21.14.010 - Railroads. 
Where a subdivision adjoins a railroad right-of-way and the General Plan, or the zoning provisions designate the property for industrial use, the streets nearest to and running in the same general direction as the railroad shall be as nearly parallel thereto as practicable and at a sufficient distance therefrom to provide suitable depths for industrial sites between the streets and the railroad. 
(Prior code § 4513(a).)  
21.14.020 - Railroad Grade Crossing. 
Where a subdivision adjoins a railroad and the street layout involves a railroad grade crossing, the possibility of a grade separation or other treatment shall be considered by the City Planning Commission, and the plan of the subdivision may be required to conform to prescribed conditions in anticipation of a grade separation or other treatment. 
(Prior code § 4513(b).)  
CHAPTER 21.16 - DRAINAGE 
 
21.16.010 - Required. 
The subdivider shall collect all storm waters entering and generated within the site and convey such waters to approved drainage facilities. The subdivider shall provide structures, storm sewers and drainage channels necessary for adequate drainage of surface and storm waters, beyond the boundary of the subdivision. Disposal of surface and storm waters including means for the disposal of surface and storm waters into wells or into leaching lines of individual sanitary sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4514(a).)  
21.16.020 - Facilities Design to be in Accord With City Specifications. 
The design of drainage facilities shall be in accord with City specifications and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to the commencement of construction. Drainage facilities required to be installed shall be of sufficient size to convey anticipated ultimate runoff resulting from ultimate development of the watershed area. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4514(b).)  
21.16.030 - Drainage Fee. 
A drainage fee may be required as a condition of approval in an amount, of a nature and with conditions and terms as specified by City Council resolution or Drainage District ordinance. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
CHAPTER 21.18 - WATER AND SEWERS 
 
21.18.010 - Sanitary Sewers. 
The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer facilities connecting with a sanitary district sewage disposal system to serve each lot, in accord with plans approved by the City Engineer. The sanitary sewerage facilities connecting with the City shall be installed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4515.)  
21.18.020 - Water Supply. 
The subdivider shall install adequate water mains connecting with the City water supply system which can serve each lot, in accord with plans approved by the City Engineer. The water mains shall be installed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4516.)  
CHAPTER 21.20 - FIRE HYDRANTS 
 
21.20.010 - Location and Installation. 
The subdivider shall install fire hydrants in conformity with City specifications and the standards established by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. The location of fire hydrants shall be determined by the Chief of the Contra Costa County Consolidated Fire Protection District and approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; Ord. 819 C.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 4517.)  
CHAPTER 21.22 - UTILITY EASEMENTS 
 
21.22.010 - Required When. 
Except where alleys are provided, utility easements may be required along property lines, and electric power, and telephone distribution lines may be required to be located in such easements. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4518.)  
CHAPTER 21.24 - ACCESS LIMITATION 
 
21.24.010 - Dedication of Non-Access Strips. 
Where the side or rear lines of any lots abut on a freeway, major street or secondary street, the City may require that the subdivider dedicate to the City non-access strips to preclude access to and from such lots across the side line of the freeway, major street or secondary street. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4519.)  
CHAPTER 21.26 - RESERVE STRIPS 
 
21.26.010 - Dedication Required. 
Reserve strips controlling access to and from streets, alleys or pedestrian ways shall not be permitted unless such reserve strips are offered for dedication to the City. 
(Prior code § 4520.)  
CHAPTER 21.28 - STREET SIGNS AND LIGHTS 
 
21.28.010 - Street Signs. 
The subdivider shall furnish and install at the location prescribed by the City Engineer one street sign at each intersection with a sign for each intersecting street lettered on both sides conforming with City specifications. 
(Prior code § 4521.)  
21.28.020 - Street Lights. 
The subdivider shall provide a street lighting system. Street lighting shall conform with City specifications. The locations of street lights shall be prescribed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4522.)  
21.28.030 - Traffic Control Devices. 
The subdivider shall provide and install traffic control devices as may be required by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1986.)  
CHAPTER 21.30 - COMMUNITY FACILITIES SITES 
 
21.30.010 - Reservation by Subdivider. 
Where precise plans for community facilities within a subdivision have been developed and approved by the City Council, each community facility site shall be designated as a single lot on a subdivision map. Community facilities sites shall include recreation areas, parks, school sites, public building sites and other public areas. The subdivider shall reserve the community facilities sites for sale to the public agency involved as per the current provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4523.)  
CHAPTER 21.32 - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS 
 
21.32.010 - Specifications Generally. 
When property is designated on the General Plan or by the zoning provisions for commercial use, the plan of the subdivision shall be appropriate for such use. Streets shall be designed to handle the anticipated traffic that will utilize them. Insofar as possible, streets shall be laid out so that there will be direct access to the commercial area from arterial and collector streets without utilizing local streets or traversing residential areas. Lot areas and dimensions shall conform with the requirements of zoning provisions and shall be adequate to accommodate the yard spaces, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities required by the zoning provisions and such additional spaces and other service facilities as are needed for the type of use and development contemplated. Property shall not be designated for commercial use on a subdivision map unless the property is designated for commercial or industrial use on the General Plan and the zoning provisions. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4525.)  
CHAPTER 21.36 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
 
21.36.010 - Permitted When. 
Where in accord with the zoning provisions, a use permit has been granted authorizing a planned unit development on the land or a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided, the plan of the subdivision shall be appropriate for the planned unit development. Exceptions to the subdivision regulations which are necessary to make the planned unit development practicable may be authorized by the City Planning Commission in accord with the provisions of Chapter 21.52 of this Title. 
(Prior code § 4526.)  
CHAPTER 21.38 - HAZARDOUS AREAS 
 
21.38.010 - Generally. 
Areas subject to inundation, slides, or other hazards shall not be subdivided unless corrective measures are taken in accord with good engineering standards. 
(Ord. 1218 C.S. § 8, 1995; Ord. 876 C.S. § 2 (part), 1978; Ord. 739 C.S. § 1 (part), 1971; prior code § 4527 (part).)  
21.38.050 - Utility Construction to Minimize Drainage. 
The location, elevation and construction all public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets shall be in such a manner as to minimize or eliminate damage by flooding. 
(Ord. 876 C.S. § 2 (part), 1978: Ord. 739 C.S. § 1 (4), 1971; prior code § 4527(4).)  
21.38.060 - Adequate Drainage Required. 
The developer shall provide for adequate drainage so as to reduce the community's exposure to flood hazards with respect to adjacent and downstream properties. 
(Ord. 876 C.S. § 2 (part), 1978: Ord. 739 C.S. § 1 (5), 1971; prior code § 4527(5).)  
21.38.070 - Cumulative Effect of Development on Flooding. 
The cumulative affect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. The subdivider shall provide the necessary engineering calculations of the cumulative effect for the proposed development. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 876 C.S. § 2 (part), 1978: Ord. 739 C.S. § 1 (6), 1971; prior code § 4527(6).)  
CHAPTER 21.39 - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 
 
21.39.010 - Certificate of Compliance. 
Determination of compliance: Any person owning real property within the City of Martinez or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request a determination as to whether such real property complies with the provisions of this Title and the Subdivision Map Act in the following manner: 
A.  Anyone wishing to receive such a determination shall submit such information as required by the Community Development Director along with such fees as are established by resolutions of the City Council to the Community Development Department. 
B.  The City Engineer shall review and make a determination as to whether such real property complies with the provisions of this Title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.020 - Property Must Comply With Government Code Section 66499.34. 
A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any real property which has been approved for development pursuant to Government Code section 66499.34. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.030 - Filing of Certificate. 
Upon making such a determination, the City Engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County Recorder. The certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall provide the information specified in Government Code section 66499.35(f). 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.040 - Conditional Approval. 
If the City Engineer determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this code or the Subdivision Map Act, the City Engineer may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose only those conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired his interest in the property, and which had been established at such time by ordinance. The City Engineer may also impose such conditions as would be applicable to a current division of the property if it is determined that the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or the City subdivision ordinance and created a parcel(s) in violation of the Map Act or this Title by a grant of real property. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the City Engineer shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County Recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for a certificate pursuant to this Chapter, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.050 - Other Documents Which Constitute Certificates of Compliance. 
A recorded final map, parcel map, official map, or an approved certificate of exception shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.060 - Official Map Pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.52(b). 
An official map prepared pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 66499.52 shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein and may be filed for record, whether or not the parcels are contiguous, so long as the parcels are within the same section or, with the approval of the City Engineer, within contiguous sections of land. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.070 - Certifying Multiple Parcels. 
Local agencies may process applications for certificates of compliance or conditional certificates of compliance concurrently and may record a single certificate of compliance or a single conditional certificate of compliance for multiple parcels. Where a single certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance is certifying multiple parcels, each as to compliance with the provisions of this division and with local ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, the single certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall clearly identify, and distinguish between, the descriptions of each such parcel. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.080 - Fee. 
A processing and appeal fee as established by City Council shall be charged to the applicant for processing and, if applicable, appealing the certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
21.39.090 - Appeal of Compliance Determination. 
A.  The applicant for a certificate of compliance may appeal the determination made by the City Engineer to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days after the City Engineer delivers the City Engineer's proposed certificate to the applicant. The City Engineer shall not record the certificate during said ten (10) day period. If no written appeal, with appropriate fee, is received by the City Clerk within said appeal period, it shall be conclusively deemed that the applicant has waived his/her/its appeal rights and consents to the recordation of the proposed certificate. Immediately after the appeal period has passed without an appeal being timely filed, the City Engineer shall record the certificate. 
B.  Upon appeal, the City Council shall hear the matter de novo, and the City Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 1248 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
CHAPTER 21.40 - PRELIMINARY REVIEW 
 
21.40.020 - Form. 
The preliminary map shall be clearly and legibly drawn to an appropriate engineering scale. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4529.)  
21.40.030 - Required Information on Map Designated. 
The preliminary map shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the record owners of the property to be subdivided, and name and address of the subdivider if the owner is not the subdivider; 
B.  Name and address of the person who prepared the map; 
C.  Date of preparation; 
D.  North point; 
E.  Scale; 
F.  Boundaries of the proposed subdivision; 
G.  Locations of streets, alleys and pedestrian ways within the proposed subdivision; 
H.  Names and locations of streets and alleys adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
I.  Suggested locations of street extensions and street connections in surrounding unsubdivided properties; 
J.  Approximate grades of all streets or parts of streets exceeding six percent; 
K.  Lot lines; 
L.  Locations of proposed community facilities sites; 
M.  Locations of watercourses; 
N.  Locations of permanent physical features affecting the design of the proposed subdivision; 
O.  Intended use of the lots; 
P.  Approximate contour lines if necessary to illustrate the influence of topographic conditions on the design of the subdivision. An aerial photograph or a topographic model of the property may be submitted in lieu of indicating contour lines on the preliminary map; 
Q.  Slope density calculations as per Section 22.12.170. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4530.)  
21.40.040 - Design Conference. 
Within twenty (20) days of the day of submission of the preliminary map, the City Planning and Building Director shall submit the map for review to the Development Review Committee, made up of representatives of the Planning Division, Building Division, Engineering Division, Water Division, and Police Department. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4531.)  
21.40.050 - Report of Development Review Commitee. 
The City Planning and Building Director shall furnish to the subdivider a written report of the recommendations of the Development Review Committee. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4532.)  
CHAPTER 21.42 - TENTATIVE MAP 
 
21.42.010 - Filing—Number of Copies. 
The subdivider shall file with the City the necessary copies as required by the Planning and Building Director. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4533(a).)  
21.42.020 - Filing—Fee. 
At the time of filing the tentative map, the subdivider shall pay a filing fee set by resolution of the City Council. If a revision of the tentative map or a tentative map including additional land is filed, the subdivider may be required to pay an additional filing fee set by resolution of the Council. 
(Prior code § 4533(b).)  
21.42.030 - Filing—Time. 
A.  The tentative map shall be filed with the City Planning and Building Director prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and lots and before grading or construction work is begun within the proposed subdivision. 
B.  The time of filing a tentative map shall be construed to be the time when the map is accepted by the City Planning and Building Director and as specified in the California Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4533(c).)  
21.42.050 - Form. 
The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn to an appropriate engineering scale and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. 
(Ord 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4534.)  
21.42.060 - Required Information on Map Designated. 
A tentative map shall contain the following information: 
A.  The tract name; 
B.  Name and address of the record owner of the property to be subdivided, and name and address of the subdivider if the owner is not the subdivider; 
C.  Name and address of the person who prepared the map; 
D.  Date of preparation; 
E.  North point; 
F.  Scale; 
G.  A key map showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding subdivisions and streets located within ¼ mile radius of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision; 
H.  Boundary lines; 
I.  Locations and widths of all streets within the proposed subdivision; 
J.  Names, locations and widths of streets and private roads adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
K.  Locations and widths of alleys; 
L.  Approximate grades of all streets. Profiles may be required where the topography may present a problem; 
M.  Approximate radii of street curves; 
N.  Locations and widths of pedestrian ways within the proposed subdivision; 
O.  Typical cross section of streets, alleys and pedestrian ways; 
P.  Lot lines and approximate dimensions; 
Q.  Lot numbers; 
R.  Locations and approximate dimensions of proposed community facilities sites; 
S.  Limitations on rights of access to and from streets, lots and other parcels of land, and locations and widths of nonaccess strips and reserve strips; 
T.  Location of existing utilities together with widths and locations of all existing and proposed public and private easements; 
U.  Locations and widths of watercourses and areas subject to inundation from floods; 
V.  Locations of structures, canals, pipelines, railroads and other physical features; 
W.  Locations of boundary lines of the City, school district, sanitary districts and any other taxing districts; 
X.  Contours shall be shown drawn to intervals prescribed by the City Planning and Building Director, and meeting requirements for slope-density calculations. Contours shall be extended into adjoining properties a sufficient distance to show relationships to adjoining properties and feasibility of proposed street extensions. 
Y.  Other information as may be required by the Planning and Building Director. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987; prior code § 4535.)  
21.42.070 - Statements to Accompany Map. 
The tentative map shall show thereon or be accompanied by the following statements: 
A.  Legal description of the property; 
B.  Existing use or uses of the property including the location of all existing structures to remain on the property; 
C.  Purposes of all existing and proposed easements and all building and use restrictions pertaining to such easements; 
D.  Proposed uses of the property, including a statement of the relative proportions of the total area of the subdivision proposed to be devoted to each use; 
E.  Source of water supply; 
F.  Method of sewage disposal; 
G.  Provisions for drainage and flood control; 
H.  Types of street improvements and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install; 
I.  Description of street tree planting plan and other landscaping plans; 
J.  Statement of other improvements to be made or installed; 
K.  Statement of the time when improvements are proposed to be made or installed; 
L.  Tract or deed restrictions, if any; 
M.  Description and location of public and private community facilities, including parks, playgrounds, schools, shopping centers and other facilities, which would serve the proposed subdivision; 
N.  Description of the proposed subdivision, including the number of lots, average and minimum sizes of lots, type of development and any other information which would be useful to the City Planning Commission in reviewing the tentative map; 
O.  A preliminary soils report and geotechnical investigation. In areas of unstable soils the Planning & Building Director may require that this report be reviewed at the applicant's expense by the City's soils and geotechnical consultant prior to accepting the subdivision application as complete. Otherwise, this review shall be required prior to submission of improvement plans for the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4536.)  
21.42.080 - Planning and Building Director Action. 
The City Planning and Building Director shall set a date for consideration of the tentative map, which date shall be within regulations of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1103, C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4537(a).)  
21.42.090 - Planning Commission Action. 
A.  The City Planning Commission shall take action on the Tentative Map within the time elements set within the Subdivision Map Act. The Commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. 
B.  The action of the Commission shall be based on conformity of the tentative map with the Subdivision Map Act, with this Title, with the zoning provisions, with the general plan and with precise plans and official plan lines adopted by the City Council, and on the quality of the design of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § 1 (part), 1987: prior code 4537(b).)  
21.42.100 - Appeal to City Council—Hearing. 
Within ten (10) days of the date of the City Planning Commission's action, the subdivider, of any interested party may appeal to the City Council for review of the action. An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Commission shall transmit to the City Clerk the report of the City Planning Director and the reports received from other public and private agencies to which the map was transmitted. The City Clerk shall give notice to the subdivider and/or the appellant of the date when the action of the City Planning Commission will be reviewed by the City Council. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of an appeal, the Council shall review the action of the Commission and shall hold a public hearing there on, in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The Council shall act on the appeal within ten (10) days after the close of the hearing. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 1009 C.S. § 1, 1984: prior code § 4537(c).)  
21.42.101 - Review by Council. 
Any member of the Council shall have the authority to request the Council to review any decision of the Board of Adjustments (Board of Appeals or the Planning Commission) by either making such request orally at the first Council meeting following the Commission meeting at which such decision was made, or by filing a written request with the City Clerk provided that such oral or written request is made prior to the expiration of the time during which an appeal can be made. When such review is requested by any member of the Council, the decision shall be considered as appealed. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I, (part), 1987: Ord. 987 C.S., 1983.)  
21.42.110 - Term. 
A.  Except as provided below, a tentative map shall expire 24 months after its approval or conditional approval. The City Planning Commission may, in its discretion, extend the time at which the tentative map expires for a period or periods not exceeding a total of 36 months. Applications for extensions must be filed no later than 45 days prior to the expiration of the tentative map. Upon such application, the tentative map shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. Failure to record a final map prior to the expiration of the tentative map (including any extensions thereof) shall terminate all proceedings. Before a final map may thereafter be recorded or any lots sold, a new tentative map shall be filed in accord with the provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. 966 C.S., 1982: prior code § 4538.) 
B.  The period of time specified in subsection A herein (including any extensions thereof) shall be suspended for the duration of any applicable development moratorium (as defined in Government Code § 66452.5, subdivision (f)) imposed after approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, and shall continue upon termination of the moratorium for the same period of time as was left to run on the tentative map at the time that the moratorium was imposed; provided, however, that if the remaining time is less than 120 days, the tentative map shall be valid for 120 days following termination of the moratorium. 
C.  A tentative map with respect to property subject to a development agreement (as defined in Government Code § 65864 (et seq.) may be extended and shall expire only as provided in the agreement. 
D.  Notwithstanding anything in subsection A herein to the contrary, the City Planning Commission shall not extend the time for expiration of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  Due to changes to the general plan any applicable specific plan, or the Municipal Code, the tentative map is no longer in conformance with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, or the Municipal Code; and/or 
2.  Due to changed circumstances, the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements would cause substantial environmental damage; the site is no longer physically suitable for the proposed development; and/or an extension would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
3.  That any condition of the tentative map approval has not been complied with at the time the application for map extension has been submitted or at the time that the decision to grant or deny the application to extend the map is made, if said condition was required to be satisfied by said date(s.) 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Planning Commission may approve an extension in which it finds that due to changed circumstances, the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements would cause substantial environmental damage if an environmental impact report was prepared for the tentative map or a subsequent EIR is required under CEQA Guidelines § 15162 is prepared for the map extension application which analyzes the changed circumstances and a finding was/is made that the impacts can be mitigated through the imposition of conditions or specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the project alternatives or applicable mitigation measures identified in the environmental impact report. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Planning Commission may approve an extension for which the findings in subdivision D(l) and (2) could otherwise be made as long as the subdivider agrees with the imposition of conditions on the extension of the tentative map which, because of the effect of such conditions, preclude the making of all of said findings; provided, however, that no such conditions need to be imposed to address the findings in subdivision D(2) if the immediately preceding paragraph applies. 
E.  The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any action of the Planning Commission on the extension application to the City Council in accordance with § 21.42.100, except that any such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after the action by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1194 C.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 1191 C.S. § 1, 1992.)  
CHAPTER 21.43 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAP 
 
21.43.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is enacted for the purpose of providing administrative procedures for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act as they relate to vesting tentative maps. To accomplish this purpose, the adoption of this Chapter is determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this Chapter the provisions of Title 21 of the Martinez Municipal Code shall apply to the processing of Vesting Tentative Maps. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part) 1987.)  
21.43.020 - Definitions. 
When used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Vesting Tentative Map" shall mean a tentative map for a subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" or "Vesting Tentative Parcel Map" and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in Chapter 21.04 of this Title are applicable. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.43.030 - Applications. 
A.  Until January 1, 1988, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply only to residential developments. 
B.  Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or Title 21 of the Martinez Municipal Code requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead. 
C.  This Chapter provides an alternative procedure for the filing of maps for residential subdivisions. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall limit a subdivider's right to file a regular tentative and/or tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part) 1987.)  
21.43.040 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, Title 21 or Title 22 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part) 1987.)  
21.43.050 - Filing and Processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as maps filed under Chapters 21.40, 21.42, and 21.50 of the Title except as herein provided: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" or "Vesting Tentative Parcel Map". 
B.  Applications for vesting tentative maps shall be accompanied by and shall not be complete without the following additional approvals, data, reports and material. 
1.  Comprehensive development plan including development areas, street layouts, a comprehensive grading plan for the entire site, and a preliminary landscape plan including such elements as fences, pathways, exterior lighting, signs and other features visible to the public; 
2.  Preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations, indicating materials and colors or the buildings; 
3.  Slope Density analysis as required in Sections 22.12.130 through 22.12.180 if the proposal involves a residential project; 
4.  Preliminary soils report; 
5.  Other features the Planning Commission may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.43.060 - Fees. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same time extensions established by this Title for tentative maps and tentative parcel maps. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.43.070 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same time extensions established by this Title for tentative maps and tentative parcel maps. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.43.080 - Development Rights—Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding (A) alone, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety. 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal statutes, regulations or case law. 
C.  Notwithstanding (A) alone, an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the City from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits (even those secured after recordation of the final map) necessary for the development and authorized by the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 21.43.080 A. If the ordinances, policies, or standards described in Section 21.43.080 A. are changed subsequent to the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider, or his or her assignee, at any time prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map pursuant to subdivisions (g) and (h) of Section 66452.6 of the California Government Code, may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map to secure a vested right to proceed with the changed ordinances, policies, or standards. An application shall clearly specify the changed ordinances, policies, or standards for which the amendment is sought. 
D.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final or parcel map is approved, the development rights conferred under Section 21.43.080 A. shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of twelve months (hereinafter called "initial time period"). Where multiple final maps are recorded on various designated approved phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the time limit shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  Before any final map which is part of a phased project (within the meaning of Government Code Sections 66456.1 and 66452.6(g)) may be considered for approval, it must be filed within the time period, or any extensions thereof, provided for in Government Code Section 66452.6(a). 
3.  The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a completed application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed. 
4.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension of the initial time period at any time before the initial time period expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial within fifteen days. A decision to grant or deny an application or extension shall be within the sole discretion of the advisory agency. 
5.  If the subdivider submits a completed application for a building permit during the initial time period or during any approved extension, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.43.090 - Miscellaneous Provisions. 
A.  Applications for vesting tentative maps may be processed concurrently with any necessary rezoning. 
B.  In addition to conditions otherwise allowed by statute, ordinance, plan, or the City's police power, vesting tentative maps may also be subject to a condition which identifies the nature, type and extent of public infrastructure or services which will be needed to serve the proposed subdivision and surrounding area and which requires that the precise amount of that subdivider's contribution toward those types of infrastructure and services to be calculated by the applicable City department and paid at the time that occupancy permit is issued. 
C.  If the subdivider seeks to modify a vesting tentative or final map, such modification may be granted at the discretion of the advisory agency which approved the map, only after public notice and hearing. If the advisory agency approves the requested modification or any portion thereof, the advisory agency may impose additional conditions on such maps. Any such modification shall not extend the life of the vesting tentative or final map or any rights created thereby. 
D.  Whenever a vesting map whose development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
(Ord. 1092 C.S. § I (part), 1987)  
CHAPTER 21.44 - FINAL MAP 
 
21.44.010 - Preparation Generally—Time Extension. 
Prior to the expiration of the tentative map (including any extensions thereof), the subdivider may cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a final map to be prepared in conformity with the tentative map as approved. 
(Ord. 1191 C.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4539(a).)  
21.44.020 - Tracings and Prints. 
The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer one complete set of original tracings and three complete sets of blue and white prints of the final map and such additional number of prints as the City Engineer shall require. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4539(b).)  
21.44.030 - Review—Fee. 
At the time of submitting the final map, the subdivider shall pay a review fee set by resolution of the City Council. If a revision of the final map is filed, the subdivider may be required to pay an additional review fee set by resolution of the Council. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4539(c).)  
21.44.050 - Form. 
A.  The final map shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and the Contra Costa County Recorder's Office. 
B.  The title sheet shall show the basis of bearings. The basis of bearings shall be that of Zone 3, California Plane Coordinate System, or other bases specifically approved for each final map by the City Engineer and the basis of bearings and equation of true north shall be shown. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4541.)  
21.44.070 - Information Required on Map Designated. 
A.  The tract number and the tract name, date of preparation, north point and scale shall appear on the final map. 
B.  The final map shall show the locations and names of streets and alleys; the center lines thereof; the lengths, tangents, radii and central angles or radial bearing of curves; the total width of the portion of the street being dedicated and the width of existing dedication, if any. 
C.  The final map shall show the locations and widths of pedestrian ways. 
D.  The final map shall show the locations and dimensions of community facilities' sites and the net acreage, to the nearest 1/10 of an acre, contained therein. 
E.  The final map shall show the center lines, widths and side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject and the date on which the easement was created. If the easement is not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers and other similar purposes shall be denoted by broken lines. Easements shall be clearly labeled and identified and if already of record, precise reference to the records given. A statement of all easements together with all building and use restrictions pertaining thereto, shall appear on the title sheet. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. 
F.  The final map shall show location and widths of drainage channels. 
G.  The final map shall show locations and widths of utility rights-of-way. 
H.  The final map shall show locations and widths of railroad rights-of-way. 
I.  The final map shall show limitations on rights of access to and from streets and lots and other parcels of land. 
J.  The final map shall show locations and widths of nonaccess strips and reserve strips. 
K.  The final map shall show locations, widths and names of streets, alleys and pedestrian ways adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
L.  The final map shall show locations of boundary lines of the City, school districts, sanitary districts and any other taxing districts. 
M.  The final map shall show the net dimensions of each lot. No ditto marks shall be used. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearings and length of each lot line. 
N.  The lots shall be numbered consecutively commencing with the number "1", with no omissions or duplications. 
O.  All dimensions shown on the final map shall be in feet and decimals of a foot. 
P.  The final map shall show the following surveying data: 
1.  The radius, tangent, arc and central angle of curves; 
2.  Suitable primary survey control points, including section corners and monuments existing outside of the proposed subdivision; 
3.  The location of all permanent monuments within the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Ties to and names of adjacent subdivisions; 
5.  Ties to any city boundary lines involved. 
(Prior code § 4542.)  
21.44.080 - Monuments. 
A.  The final map shall show clearly all stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground which were used as ties to determine the boundaries of the tract. The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be identified and ties shown. 
B.  In making the survey for the subdivision, the surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that the survey or any part thereof may be readily retraced. Such monuments shall generally be placed at the angle points on the exterior boundary lines of the tract, at the intersections of center lines of streets and at the beginnings and ends of survey on the center lines of streets. Monuments may be placed on offset lines. Stakes set at lot corners shall not be considered permanent monuments. The character, type and positions of all monuments shall be noted on the final map. 
C.  All permanent monuments shall be placed in accordance with the final map. The City Engineer shall, by field inspection, satisfy himself that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist and that their positions are as shown on the final map prior to acceptance of the subdivision improvements. 
(Prior code § 4543.)  
21.44.090 - Survey Requirements. 
A.  A complete and accurate survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a civil engineer or licensed surveyor in accord with the State Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision and of each block and lot shall close within a limit of error of 1 foot to 7,500 feet of perimeter. 
C.  Whenever the City Engineer has established the center line of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the survey and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. 
(Prior code § 4544.)  
21.44.100 - Certificates on Map. 
Those certificates required by the State Subdivision Map Act and the County Recorder shall appear on the Final Map. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4545.) 
The City may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with a final or parcel map, including but not limited to fee and improvement statements. The additional information shall be in the form of an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final or parcel map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest. This additional information will be in compliance with section 66434.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1183 C.S. § I, 1992)  
21.44.110 - Dedications. 
A.  Those parcels which are intended for the exclusive use of lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants shall be designated on the Final Map. 
B.  All parcels of land, streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, reserve strips, easements and other rights-of-way shown on the final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use at the time the final map is filed. 
C.  All rights of access to and from streets, lots and parcels of land shown on the final map intended to be surrendered shall be offered for dedication at the time the final map is filed. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4546.)  
21.44.120 - Improvements—Required When. 
The subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve in writing, all improvements required by Chapters 21.08 through 21.38 of this Title including all lands dedicated for streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other rights-of-way as a condition precedent to acceptance thereof and approval of the final map. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4547(a).)  
21.44.130 - Improvements—Conformance With Council Standards Required. 
Improvements shall conform with specifications of design, materials and construction standards adopted by the City. 
(Prior code § 4547(b).)  
21.44.140 - Improvements—Construction in Accord with City Engineer. 
Improvements shall be constructed in accord with plans approved by the City Engineer. Improvements shall be installed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4547 (c).)  
21.44.150 - Improvements—Grade. 
Improvements shall be installed to grades prescribed by the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 4547(d).)  
21.44.160 - Improvements—Inspection and Plan Check—Fees. 
The City Engineer shall have the right to enter upon the sites of improvements for the purpose of inspecting them, and shall be furnished with samples of materials as may be required for the making of tests to determine the acceptability of such materials. Upon filing the final map, the subdivider shall pay a fee set by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of inspection of the work, review and approving plans, and checking of the materials for the improvements during the entire period of construction. 
(Prior code § 4547(e).)  
21.44.170 - Improvements—Failure to Complete Prior to Map Approval—Agreement. 
If the improvements are not satisfactorily completed before the final map is approved, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby, in consideration of the acceptance by the City Council of the streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other rights-of-way offered for dedication, the subdivider agrees to complete the work within the time specified in the agreement. Such agreement shall be secured by a good and sufficient surety bond approved by the Council, or by the deposit of money or negotiable bonds, as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Prior code § 4547(f).)  
21.44.190 - Improvements—Reimbursement to Subdivider For Use When. 
Whenever this Title or the Subdivision Map Act requires a subdivider to construct improvements and such improvements are of benefit or value to other land than that located within the subdivision, the City Council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse him for the use of such improvements by others, and may impose and collect a charge from the owner of the land benefited for the use of such facilities. 
(Prior code § 4547(h).)  
21.44.200 - Improvements—Plans. 
A.  Improvement plans, prepared under the direction of a registered civil engineer licensed by the State, shall be submitted by the subdivider to the City Engineer. The approval of the improvement plans by the City Engineer shall be a condition of approval of the final map. At the time of approval, the originals or mylar photo copies shall be filed with the City Engineer. 
B.  Form of improvement plans: 
1.  The size of each sheet shall be 24 inches by 36 inches with a blank margin of 1 inch drawn completely around each sheet; 
2.  The tract name and number, if any; 
3.  Signature, name and address of the licensed registered Civil Engineer of the State, under whose direction the improvement plans were prepared; 
4.  Date of preparation; 
5.  North point; 
6.  Scale; 
7.  When three or more sheets are submitted, a key map shall be included on the first sheet; 
8.  A space shall be provided for the City Engineer's signature needed as a condition of approval of the plans; 
9.  Eight complete sets of the improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer, if required. 
C.  Information on improvement plans: 
1.  The plans and profiles of all improvements required by this Title as well as other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, over or under any improvements are required or proposed; 
2.  Improvement plans shall show the improvements required by Chapters 21.08 through 21.38 of this Title. Such improvements shall include grading and surfacing of streets, alleys and pedestrian ways; construction of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, culverts, water mains, sanitary sewers, retaining walls, bridges, storm drains and drainage channels, including means for the disposal of surface and storm waters beyond the boundary of the subdivision; installations of fire hydrants, street signs and street lights; planting of street trees and other landscaping; and provision of such other improvements as may be required; 
3.  A grading plan shall show by means of arrows and elevations, the method proposed for drainage of each individual lot. 
D.  Other information to accompany improvement plans: 
1.  A report, prepared by a soils engineer, which shall contain information pertaining to soils stability and design of all improvements in the subdivision and which shall be reviewed by the City's soil engineer at the subdivider's cost; 
2.  Any data, including profiles, contours, design calculation and other information which the City Engineer shall require for checking the adequacy of the proposed drainage system; 
3.  A certificate of approval of any proposed improvements of concern to a sanitary, water or flood control district within which all or part of the subdivision may be situated. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4548.) 
E.  Upon completion of the work, photo mylar as constructed record improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I, 1987.)  
21.44.210 - Review by City Engineer—Certification by Planning Commission Secretary. 
The City Engineer shall review the final map for conformity with the tentative map as approved. If the final map conforms with the tentative map as approved, the City Engineer shall report such conformity to the secretary of the Planning Commission who shall certify the original tracing of the final map in behalf of the Commission. If the final map does not conform with the tentative map as approved, the secretary of the Commission shall not certify the final map on behalf of the City Planning Commission until the Commission specifically authorizes him to do so. 
(Prior code § 4549(a).)  
21.44.220 - Determination of Compliance—Submittal of Work Sheets, Plans and Profiles. 
A.  The City Engineer shall examine a print of the final map and determine the sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgments, the correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and determine whether the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Title have been complied with. One copy of the map shall be returned to the subdivider with notations as to errors or omissions or a statement by the City Engineer that the map is correct. 
B.  The subdivider shall provide traverse sheets showing the closure of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and of any irregular blocks and lots. 
C.  Plans, profiles and specifications of proposed improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval at the time the prints of the final map are submitted for checking. Such plans and profiles shall show the full details of the proposed improvements, and the improvements shall comply with specifications and standards adopted by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4549(b).)  
21.44.230 - Certification by City Engineer. 
If the final map is found to be correct, the matters shown thereon are sufficient and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Title have been complied with, the City Engineer shall certify his approval on the original tracing of the map. 
(Prior code § 4549(c).)  
21.44.240 - Filing With Council For Approval—Offers of Dedication—Notice of Action. 
Concurrently with the approval of the final map, the City Council shall accept or reject all offers of dedication and, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other rights-of-way, shall require that the subdivider, at his option, either improve or agree to improve the streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage channels, easements and other rights-of-way in the subdivision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4549(d).)  
CHAPTER 21.46 - PARK DEDICATION 
 
21.46.010 - Purpose. 
This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California. The park and recreation facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of fee required by this Chapter are in accordance with the General Plan of the City of Martinez, and the adopted Park System Master Plan. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "subdivision" includes any residential development of two (2) or more dwelling units, "subdivider" includes the developer of any residential development, "parcel" includes any residential unit, "parcel map" or "final map" includes issuance of a building permit or grading permit for a residential development or two (2) or more dwellings units. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4701.)  
21.46.020 - Requirements. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential project approval not involving a subdivision map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the City, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this Chapter. Payment of in-lieu fees may be deferred until occupancy of residential units if the subdivider posts a bond or other surety acceptable to the City guaranteeing payment of the fees. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4703.)  
21.46.030 - Basic Standard. 
It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five (5) acres of property for each one thousand (1000) persons residing within the City be devoted to local park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4702.)  
21.46.040 - Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. 
Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the City of Martinez's General Plan, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula: 
Land = Average Number of Persons/DU x 	 1000 Population  
	Park Acreage Standard 
(5 acres) 
DU means residential dwelling unit 
 
The following table based on the above formula is to be followed: 
Requirement 
Unit 	Average Person 
Per Dwelling Unit 	Average 
Per Dwelling 
Multiple Dwelling Unit 	2.1 	448 sq. ft. 
Single Family (includes patio homes and townhouse) 	2.8 	598 sq. ft. 
 
NOTE: The figures of 2.6 persons per unit and 557 sq. ft. shall be used for all subdivisions for which application was made prior to May 16, 1986. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 1067 C.S. § I, 1986: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 840 § 2, 1976: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705(a).)  
21.46.050 - Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication. 
A.  General Formula. If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the City of Martinez's General Plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in Section 21.46.040 and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.46.070, the fee to be used for a local park which will serve the residents of the area being subdivided. 
B.  Fees in Lieu of Land—50 Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains 50 parcels or less, the subdivider may be required to only pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in Section 21.46.040 and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.46.070. 
C.  Use of Money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land or, if the Martinez Planning Commission deems that there is sufficient land available for the subdivision, for improving of such land for park and recreational purposes. The money shall be committed within five (5) years after payment of the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the money is not committed, it shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision. 
(Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705(b).)  
21.46.060 - Criteria for Requiring both Dedication and Fee. 
In subdivisions of over 50 lots, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu of dedication in accordance with the following: 
A.  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided as proposed in the General Plan as the site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes; and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.46.070 hereof shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 21.46.080. 
B.  When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the City and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to Section 21.46.010 shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 21.46.070. The fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § (part), 1972; prior code § 4705(d).)  
21.46.070 - Amount of Fee in Lieu of Parkland Dedication. 
When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication, the amount of the fee shall be based, on the average estimated fair market value of the land being purchased in the City for single family and multi-family residential development. This value shall be established yearly by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 1067 C.S. § II, 1986: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § l (part), 1972; prior code 4705(e).)  
21.46.080 - Subdivisions not within General Plan. 
When the proposed subdivision lies within an area not then within, but to be included within the City's General Plan, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreational principles and standards of the City's General Plan and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705.)  
21.46.090 - Determination of Land or Fee. 
Land dedication, or payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
A.  The principles and standards for community and neighborhood park facilities found in the City's General Plan; 
B.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
C.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
D.  Feasibility of dedication; 
E.  Compatibility of dedication With the City of Martinez's General Plan; and 
F.  Availability of previously acquired park property. 
(Ord. 985, C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705(g).)  
21.46.100 - Credit for Improvements to Dedicated Open Space. 
If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this Chapter. The credit shall be determined by the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705.)  
21.46.105 - Partial Credit for Private Space. 
Where private area for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed development and such area is to be privately owned and maintained by the future owner(s) of the development, partial credit may be given by the planning agency not to exceed fifty percent against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the planning agency finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the standards set forth below are met: 
A.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private areas; and, 
B.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the area is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, covenants, or restrictions; and, 
C.  That the use of the private area is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be amended or eliminated without the consent of the County, or its successor; and, 
D.  That the proposed private area is reasonably adaptable for use for park or recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and, 
E.  That facilities proposed for the area are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan; and, 
F.  That the area for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres and provides a minimum of four of the local park basic elements listed below, or other recreational improvements that will meet the specific recreation park needs of the future residents of the area: 
Criteria List 	Acres 
(A)  Children's play apparatus area 	.50-.75 
(B)  Landscape park-like and quiet area 	.50-1.00 
(C)  Family picnic area 	.25-.75 
(D)  Game court area 	.25-.75 
(E)  Turf playfield 	1.00-3.00 
(F)  Swim pool (42 ft. × 75 ft. with adjacent deck and lawn area)  	.25-.50 
(G)  Recreation center building 	.15-.25 
(H)  Recreation community gardening 	.10-.25 
 
(Ord. 1067 C.S. § III, 1986.)  
21.46.110 - Procedure. 
Prior to the approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map, the Martinez Planning Commission shall determine, after a report and recommendations from the Planning & Building Director and Parks and Recreation Commission, pursuant to Sections 21.46.090, 21.46.100 and 21.46.110 whether land is to be dedicated or in lieu fees are to be paid by the subdivider or any combination of land and fees. The determinations by the Martinez Planning Commission shall include the following: 
A.  The amount of land required; or 
B.  That a fee be charged in lieu of land; or 
C.  That land and a fee be required; and/or 
D.  That a stated amount of credit be given to the subdivider, if applicable. 
At the time of the filing of the final or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the City. 
Open Space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4705.)  
21.46.120 - Review and Appeals. 
Recommendations of the Martinez Planning Commission shall be appealable as set forth in Section 21.42.100. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 985 C.S. § 2 (part), 1983: Ord. 749 C.S. § 1 (part), 1972; prior code § 4706.)  
CHAPTER 21.48 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE MAP 
 
21.48.010 - Title. 
A map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall be conspicuously designated with the Title "The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage." 
(Prior code § 4550.)  
21.48.020 - Procedure. 
Procedure shall be as specified in the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
CHAPTER 21.50 - PARCEL MAPS 
 
21.50.010 - Tentative Map. 
The tentative map process of Chapter 21.42 of this Title, and the parcel map process shall apply to all subdivisions in which a final map is not otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act except for Lot Line Adjustments. Tentative parcel maps shall be acted on by the Board of Adjustments, appealable to the Planning Commission within ten days of the decision. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 909 C.S. § 2, 1979: Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.020 - Waiver of Parcel Map. 
A parcel map shall not be required when the Planning Commission determines that the proposed division of land meets all City requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and sufficient record and survey data is available to accurately determine the location of the parcel. A legal description of the property to be divided shall be submitted with the tentative map. When a parcel map is not required, but the dedication for the purposes of street widening is necessary, such dedication shall be made by a separate instrument prior to approval of the tentative map by the Planning Commission. 
Upon waiving the parcel map requirement the City Engineer shall cause to be filed with the County Recorder a "Certificate of Compliance" for the land to be divided. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.030 - Form. 
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions this section, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
A.  The general form and layout of the map, including size and type of lettering, drafting, and location and acknowledgements, shall be as determined by the City Engineer. 
B.  The exterior boundary of the land within the subdivision shall be designated by 1/16 of an inch solid black line. 
C.  Scale of the map shall be 1? = 20', 1? = 40', 1? = 50' unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer. 
D.  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths or thousandths of a foot. 
E.  If more than two sheets are necessary to show the entire subdivision, an index map shall be included on sheet two. 
F.  The parcel map number, city and county, scale and north point, name of the engineer, date and sheet number, shall be shown on each sheet if applicable. 
G.  A title sheet designated as sheet 1 of the parcel map shall be provided, except that where the size of a subdivision permits, in lieu of a separate title sheet, the information required to be shown thereon may be shown on the same sheet as the map of the subdivision. 
H.  Upon the recordation of the parcel map by County Recorder, the subdivider shall be responsible to provide the City Engineer with a reproducible on either tracing cloth or 3 mil polyester base film. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.040 - Survey Required. 
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, center lines of streets, alleys, and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1/10000 for field closures and 1/20000 for calculated closures. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.050 - Additional Data. 
The parcel map shall substantially conform to the tentative map as approved, or conditionally approved, by the Planning Commission, and shall contain, or be accompanied by, such additional information as may be required by the City Engineer, including: 
A.  All required survey data and information. 
B.  All lots and parcels intended for sale or lease, or reserved for private purposes with dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined with each parcel identified by number. 
C.  The location and width of streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and other easements and portions thereof dedicated or offered for dedication to the City, including the recording references on easements that are existing of record. 
D.  All limitations on rights of access to and from the streets from lots and other parcels of land. 
E.  A guarantee of title or letter from a title company certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all acknowledgments thereto appeal and are correctly shown on the final map, both as to consents for making thereof and the affidavit of dedication. 
F.  If a field survey is made, the engineer or surveyor shall furnish the City Engineer boundary closure sheets. 
G.  Plans, specifications, and applicable permits for the construction and installation of improvements that have been approved by the City Engineer and on which security has been posted to guarantee the installation of said improvements. 
H.  Any city or district boundary line crossing or contiguous to the subdivision shall be clearly designated to determine its relative location to all parcels and lots. 
I.  Adjacent subdivisions or ownerships of record. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.060 - Certificate of Acceptance. 
Offers of dedication may be made either by separate document or by dedication on the parcel map. If made on the parcel map, the following certificate shall appear on the parcel map: 
"The City does hereby accept on behalf of the public all parcels of land as offered for dedication for public use in conformity with terms of the offer of dedication. 
	_____
	City Manager" 
 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.065 - Planning Certificate. 
Each parcel map shall have a certificate for the Planning & Building Director to sign, certifying that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and its conditions. If the parcel map does not conform, the Director shall not sign the certificate, and the parcel map shall not be approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.50.070 - Fees and Deposits. 
All persons submitting maps as required by this Chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the City's resolution establishing fees and charges for final maps and construction drawings. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.080 - Preliminary Submittal. 
The subdivider shall submit three sets of prints of the parcel map to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by two copies of the worksheets, plans and profiles required for final maps by Section 21.44.220 Preliminary Submittal, and as modified herein. 
The City Engineer may waive any of the requirements upon finding that the location and nature of the proposed subdivision is such as not to necessitate the construction of public improvements. 
Any additional information or documents required shall be as specified with the conditions of approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.090 - Return for Correction. 
Upon completing preliminary checks, the City Engineer shall note the required corrections on the preliminary prints, reports, and data and return one set to the subdivider's engineer for revision. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.100 - Resubmittal. 
The subdivider's engineer shall submit two sets of the revised map, reports and data to the City Engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer marked "Approved as Submitted", "Approved when Corrected as Noted", or "Revise and Resubmit". 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.110 - Approval by City Engineer. 
Upon receipt of an approved print, the subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter and corrected to its final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this Chapter to execute the certificates on the map, to the City Engineer. The City Engineer, upon signing the City Engineer's certificate, shall transmit the original to the City Clerk or authorized agent. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.50.120 - Filing With County Recorder. 
The City Clerk or authorized agent shall file the approved parcel map with the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 896 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
CHAPTER 21.52 - EXCEPTIONS 
 
21.52.010 - Authorized When. 
Exceptions and conditional exceptions to the regulations prescribed in Chapters 21.08 through 21.38 of this Title may be authorized by the City Planning Commission. 
(Prior code § 4553.)  
21.52.020 - Application. 
Application for an exception shall be made to the City Planning Commission on a form prescribed by the Commission. The subdivider shall state fully the grounds of the application, the facts relied upon and any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of an exception prescribed in Section 21.52.040 of this Chapter. The application shall be filed with the City Engineer along with the tentative map. At the time of filing the application, the subdivider shall agree in writing to an extension of the time limit for action on the tentative map by the City Planning Commission at the option of the Commission. 
(Prior code § 4554.)  
21.52.030 - Referrals. 
The City Engineer shall transmit copies of the application to the Planning Commission and to the City Council. Prior to the date set for consideration of the tentative map, the City Engineer shall submit to the Commission a written report of his recommendation regarding the proposed exception. Failure to submit such a report shall be deemed approval of the application for an exception. 
(Prior code § 4555.)  
21.52.040 - Planning Commission Action. 
The City Planning Commission shall consider the application for an exception at the same meeting at which it considers the tentative map. An exception may be granted unqualifiedly or may be granted subject to prescribed conditions, provided that the Commission makes the following findings that: 
A.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
B.  The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the subdivider; 
C.  The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the property is situated; 
D.  The granting of the exception is in accord with the purposes prescribed in Section 21.02.010 of this Title; 
E.  The granting of the exception is in accord with the objectives, principles and standards of the General Plan. 
(Prior code § 4556.)  
21.52.050 - Appeal to City Council—Hearing. 
Within ten days of the date of the City Planning Commission's action on an application for an exception, the subdivider may appeal to the City Council for review of the action. An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission. The appeal shall be considered under the procedure of Section 21.42.100. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4557.)  
21.52.060 - Review by City Council. 
Section 21.42.101 also applies to any decision on an exception. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: prior code § 4558.)  
CHAPTER 21.53 - PARCEL MERGERS 
 
21.53.010 - Authority. 
1.  This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 1.5, Sections 66451.10 through 66451.21 inclusive and Chapter 6, Article 1., Section 66499.20 ¾, of Division 2, of the Government Code of the State of California, and the procedures set forth below are those specified in said Government Code sections as those sections exist upon the adoption of the ordinance creating this Chapter. In the event said Government Code sections are amended to provide for procedures or criteria different than those specified hereinafter, such changes are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 945 C.S. § 1, (part), 1981; Ord. 1038 C.S. 1985: Ord. 1056 C.S. § 1, 1985.)  
21.53.020 - When Lots May Be Merged. 
1.  Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land may be merged by the City Council when held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size, under the applicable zoning designation in effect at the time of mailing of a notice of intent to determine status, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
B.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger. 
2.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
3.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
4.  Does not meet slope stability standards. 
5.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
6.  Its development would create health or safety hazards. 
7.  Is inconsistent with the applicable General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
2.  For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. 
3.  The merger of contiguous parcels may not be accomplished under the provisions of this Chapter if one of the following conditions exists: 
A.  On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is enforceably restricted open-space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation code. 
B.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is timberland as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 51100, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 51201. 
C.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the local agency. 
D.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of a future commercial mineral extradition site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the local agency. 
E.  Within the coastal zone, as defined in Section 30103 of the Public Resources Code, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land has, prior to July 1, 1981, been identified or designated as being of insufficient size to support residential development and where the identification or designation has either (i) been included in the land use plan portion of a local coastal program prepared and adopted pursuant to the California Coastal Act of 1976 (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code), or (ii) prior to the adoption of a land use plan, been made by formal action of the California Coastal Act of 1976 in a coastal development permit decision or in an approved land use plan work program or an approved issue identification on which the preparation of a land use plan pursuant to the provision of the California Coastal Act is based. 
4.  For purposes of paragraphs (c) and (d) of Subsection 3, "mineral resource extraction" means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel, or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. 
(Ord. 1132 C.S. § I, 1989; Ord. 945 C.S. § 1, (part), 1981; Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.030 - Recordation of Notice. 
A merger of parcels becomes effective when the City Council causes to be filed for record with the recorder of the county in which the real property is located, a notice merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. 
(Ord. 945 C.S. § 1, (part), 1981; Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.040 - Notice of Intent to Determine Status. 
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the City Manager and/or his/her designee, shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the recorder of the county in which the real property is located on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
(Ord. 1112 C.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985; Ord. 945 § 1, (part), 1981.)  
21.53.050 - Request for Hearing on Determination of Status. 
At any time within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the City Clerk a request for a hearing on determination of status. 
(Ord. 945 C.S. § 1, (part), 1981; Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.060 - Hearing; Time; Date; and Place. 
Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status, the City Council shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing to be conducted by the City Council and shall be conducted not less than 30 days following the City's receipt of the property owner's request therefor, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City Council and the property owner. 
(Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.070 - Hearing; Evidence; Determination of Status. 
At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in the merger ordinance. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A determination of merger shall be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Section 21.53.030. 
(Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.080 - Failure to Request Hearing; Determination of Merger. 
If, within the 30 day period specified in Section 21.53.050, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with Section 21.53.070, the City Council may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 21.53.030 no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by Section 21.53.060. 
(Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.090 - Determination Not to Merge; Release of Notice of Intent to Determine Status; Recordation; Clearance Letter. 
If in accordance with Section 21.53.070, or 21.53.080, the City Council determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Section 21.53.030 a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to Section 21.53.040, and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. 
(Ord. 1038 C.S., 1985.)  
21.53.100 - Merger Requested by Property Owner. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66499.20 ¾ of the Government Code of the State of California, upon request of the legal owner(s) of contiguous parcels, the City Engineer or authorized representative may approve the merger of such parcels. Such request shall be in writing and signed by all owners of record of such parcels. All signatures shall be notarized by a duly licensed Notary Public. The request shall be accompanied by such data and documents as required by the City Engineer. 
B.  Upon approval, a "Notice of Merger" shall be filed by the City with the County Recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the City Engineer. 
C.  In approving such merger, the City Engineer or authorized representative may impose reasonable conditions. The reasonableness of such conditions may be appealed within fifteen (15) days of written notice of the conditions of the Planning Commission whose decision shall be final and unappealable. 
D.  A fee shall be charged the applicant for processing such merger in an amount set from time to time by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1056 C.S. § 3, 1985.)  
CHAPTER 21.54 - REGULATIONS FOR NEW MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
21.54.010 - Purpose. 
A.  To establish requirements and procedures to be followed for review and approval of new condominium, townhouse, apartment, and other multiple residential developments. 
B.  To establish criteria for new condominium developments by requiring conformance to the City's Building Code and other development standards set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  To ensure that the developer of the project provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage and parking space, usable open space and other amenities. 
D.  To provide for planning, unforeseen change, and compliance with the City's General Plan and Housing Element. 
E.  To provide a procedure whereby potential buyers of new condominium units will be properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure for purchase. 
F.  To ensure that the developer uses contemporary and environmentally sensitive concepts of site planning and architectural design in the construction of a new condominium project and to ensure that the project, once completed, maintains its integrity, not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner but to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for the owner long into the future. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.020 - General Provisions. 
A.  Conformity with the General Plan - The development of new condominiums shall conform with the principles and standards of the General Plan. 
B.  The design, improvement and construction of any condominium project shall conform to and be in accordance with the most currently adopted requirements of all building and fire codes, zoning provisions and all other applicable local ordinances and regulations, and shall in addition conform to and be in accordance with the following standards in effect at the time of filing of the tentative map: 
1.  Housing Code 
2.  Unsafe structure code 
3.  Building security ordinance 
4.  Fire Code 
C.  New condominium developments include townhouse projects and all residential development projects which contain other than single-family detached units. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.030 - Buyer Protection Provisions. 
Prior to incurring any obligation to purchase any new condominium unit, all potential buyers shall be provided with an informational document containing the following: (informational document shall be in a form approved by the Planning and Building Director). 
A.  A listing of the services and facilities to be furnished to individual owners and a statement of all fees and other conditions applicable to the use of such services and facilities. 
B.  A statement of the estimated annual operating and maintenance costs for all common facilities and services for the next three years as prepared or reviewed by a professional management firm familiar with operating and maintaining costs of similar property in the area. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § l (part), 1979.)  
21.54.040 - Application Requirements. 
New condominium developments shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations prescribed by the State Subdivision Map Act. The applicant shall provide the City with 35 copies of the Tentative Map accompanied by a sufficient number of site development plans to be determined by the Planning and Building Director. In addition to exhibits, as required by Sec. 21.42.060 of the Martinez Municipal Code, the plans shall also show in detail: 
A.  Location of each common area; 
B.  Location of each private open space; 
C.  Locations and dimensions of parking garages and carports including individual parking stalls on the site; 
D.  Location and dimension of exterior storage space for each individual unit; 
E.  Landscaping Plan. 
Additional submittals shall include: 
F.  Preliminary Grading Plan; 
G.  Elevations of proposed units; 
H.  A draft copy of a declaration of CC&R's which will apply and which shall include an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping together with an estimate of the initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance; a description of a provision for maintenance of vehicular access areas within the project; and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. 
I.  Other information which, in the opinion of the Planning and Building Director, will assist in determining whether the proposed project is consistent with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.050 - Design and Construction Standards. 
A.  Each shall meet the sound transmission control requirements of the most recently adopted version of the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Each unit shall be provided with smoke detectors conforming to Uniform Building Code standards. 
C.  Each unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. 
D.  Utility easements shall be provided for each dwelling with an access agreement for entry to repair and maintain same. Individual shutoff valves and disconnects shall be provided for each unit. 
E.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit and shall be located within reasonably close proximity of the units they serve. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each four units for visitor parking and shall be uniformly distributed throughout the development. Accommodations for on-site RV parking shall be made at a ratio of 100 sq. ft. per dwelling unit unless on-site RV parking is otherwise prohibited by the CC&R's. 
F.  At least 200 cubic feet of enclosed weatherproof lockable storage space shall be provided for each unit and shall bear a reasonable relationship to each unit. This storage space shall be in addition to that ordinarily contained within each unit. 
G.  A minimum of 200 sq. ft. of appurtenant usable private area shall be provided contiguous with each unit. 
H.  Common Open Space shall be provided in amounts designated by Sec. 22.12.25 of the Martinez Municipal Zoning Code. Such open space shall be over and above required setbacks and parking facilities and additional to required private open space. 
I.  New condominium developments shall meet stable energy conservation standards. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.060 - Landscape Maintenance Agreement. 
The owner of the project shall enter into a landscape maintenance agreement before recordation of the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.070 - Park Dedication Fees. 
New condominium development shall be subject to payment of park dedication fees at the rate in effect at the time of issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.080 - Requirements for Design Review Approval. 
Design Review shall be required as set forth by the Design Review Ordinance and shall be based on overall site development which involves all proposed building elevations, proposed grading, areas of both common and private open space, areas of private storage, parking and landscaping and how each relates to the development standards of the ordinance and this site. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
21.54.090 - Conditions. 
The City may impose any conditions it deems necessary in order to ensure that the proposal will conform with the requirements of this Chapter, other municipal code provisions, the general plan and the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987: Ord. 901 C.S. § 1(part), 1979.)  
21.54.100 - Findings Justifying Denial. 
Pursuant to Sec 66427.1 of the Government Code, the Planning Commission shall deny approval of a tentative map for a new condominium project if the following findings are made: 
A.  That the proposal is incompatible and inconsistent with the objectives, policies, elements and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
B.  That the project will not create an acceptable balance between and provide reasonable relationships among the structures and their units, private yard areas, usable open spaces, parking areas and recreational facilities. 
C.  That the proposal is inconsistent with the purposes of this Chapter. 
D.  That the proposal is inconsistent with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. 901 C.S. § 1 (part), 1979.)  
CHAPTER 21.56 - REGULATIONS FOR THE CONVERSION OF RENTAL UNITS TO CONDOMINIUMS 
 
21.56.001 - Purpose. 
A.  To establish requirements and procedures to be followed for the review and approval or disapproval of the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to residential condominiums; 
B.  To mitigate the effect of such conversions on tenants of rental housing as much as possible by providing a procedure for adequate notice of conversion as well as adequate time and assistance to relocate as necessary; 
C.  To establish criteria for condominium conversion projects by requiring conformance to the City's building code and other development standards set forth in this Chapter; 
D.  To ensure that the developer of the project provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage and parking space, usable open space and other amenities; 
E.  To provide for planning, unforeseen change, and compliance with the City's General Plan and Housing Element; 
F.  To ensure that the developer is attentive to the performance characteristics of the structure and mitigates such problems as vibration and noise transmission which may be apparent to the buyer without living in the unit; 
G.  To provide a procedure whereby potential buyers of converted units will be properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure for purchase; 
H.  To ensure that the conversion maintains its integrity, not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner but to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for the owner long into the future. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.002 - General Provisions. 
A.  Conformity with the General Plan - The conversion of rental units to condominium shall conform with the principles and standards of the General Plan. 
B.  This design or improvement of any existing structure or structures proposed to be converted to condominiums shall conform to and be in accordance with the most currently adopted requirements of all building and fire codes, zoning provisions and all other applicable local ordinances and regulations, and shall in addition conform to and be in accordance with the following standards in effect at the time of filing of the tentative map: 
1.  Housing Code; 
2.  Unsafe Structures Code; 
3.  Building Security Ordinance; 
4.  Fire Code. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.003 - Buyer Protection Provisions. 
Prior to incurring any obligation to purchase any converted unit, all potential buyers shall be provided with an informational document containing the following: (informational document shall be in a form approved by the Planning and Building Director.) 
A.  A listing of the services and facilities to be furnished to individual owners and a statement of all fees and other conditions applicable to the use of such services and facilities. 
B.  A statement of the estimated annual operating and maintenance costs for all common facilities and services for the next three years, as prepared or reviewed by a professional management firm familiar with operating and maintaining costs of similar property in the area. 
C.  A statement indicating the availability of CC&R's for the project for review by buyer. 
D.  A statement granting each buyer a one year warranty on all appliances in each unit and granting to the homeowners association a one year warranty on all structures in the project and all electrical, heating, air conditioning, plumbing, ventilation equipment, roofing and elevators. 
E.  A statement of proposed improvements and repairs to be made by the subdivider. 
F.  A copy of the Building Inspectors pre-conversion inspection. 
G.  A copy of the pest control report. 
H.  A copy of the acoustical engineer's analysis determining the soundproof standards of all common walls and ceiling separations. 
I.  A statement of any other information that the Planning and Building Director reasonably determines should be furnished to a prospective purchaser to enable him to make an informed decision regarding the purchase of a unit in that project. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.004 - Tenant Protection and Assistance Provisions. 
For the protection of tenants in buildings proposed to be converted to a condominium, all such proposed conversions shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  Notification. 
1.  Each tenant shall receive a "Notice of Intention to Convert" at least 180 days prior to filing an application and tentative subdivision map with the City. The notice shall indicate to each tenant that: 
a.  The owners of the building are considering converting each rental unit to a condominium; 
b.  If the application to convert each unit to a condominium is approved by the City each unit may be subject to future sale; and 
c.  Per City ordinance, all tenants must be notified of any intention to convert at least 180 days before the application is filed. Additionally, the notice shall include a step-by-step time frame outlining the entire conversion process from the date of initial notification of intent to convert, to the date of required vacation or purchase of the respective unit. Proof or evidence of delivery of such notice to each tenant, including a copy of that notice shall be filed with the City Planning Department within thirty (30) days after tenant notification. 
2.  If, within the initial 180-day notification period, a change in occupancy occurs which results in the presence of a tenant who has not received the 180 day notice, the applicant shall file with the Planning Department an agreement signed by that tenant waiving the 180-day notice requirement. The waiver shall contain a step-by-step time frame outlining the entire conversion process. 
3.  Each tenant shall be notified in writing of the public hearing in which the tentative map will be considered at least ten (10) days prior to that hearing. The developer shall be responsible for making said notice and shall file a copy of the notice with the Planning Department. 
B.  Right of First Refusal. 
Provided he is not then in default under his lease or rental arrangement, each tenant occupying a unit to be converted shall be given the right, for a period of sixty (60) days after the issuance of the Final Public Report or commencement of sales (whichever is later) to purchase his unit on terms equal to or more favorable than the terms on which such unit to be offered to the public. The developer shall file evidence with the Planning Department that each tenant has been notified of this right and that said notice was delivered to the tenant at the time described by Sec. 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. If any tenant chooses to waive his right to first refusal of the unit he occupies, a waiver, signed by that tenant shall be filed with the Planning Department. 
C.  Moving Expenses. 
The applicant, shall bear relocation expenses for each non-purchasing tenant a rate of 1 ½ times the monthly rental rate. This clause will be invoked only for cases when non-purchasing tenants are requested by the subdivider to vacate respective units that have been sold. 
D.  Copies of all correspondence between the subdivider and the tenants shall be filed with the Planning Department. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.005 - Application Requirements. 
The conversion of multiple family rental housing into condominiums shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations prescribed by the State Subdivision Map Act. The applicant shall provide the City with 35 copies of the Tentative Map accompanied by a sufficient number of site development plans to be determined by the Planning and Building Director. In addition to exhibits, as required by Sec. 21.42.060 of the Martinez Municipal Code, the plans shall also show in detail: 
A.  Location of each common area; 
B.  Location of each private open space; 
C.  Locations and dimensions of parking garages and carports including individual parking stalls on the site; 
D.  Location and dimension of exterior storage space for each individual unit; 
E.  Landscaping Plan; 
F.  Tenant Information 
1.  Names of current tenants and the length of time they have rented the unit; 
2.  Rental history of each unit for the preceding three years; 
3.  Current rental rate for each unit; 
4.  Any proposed program of relocation assistance by the applicant including the applicant's proposed payment of moving expenses incurred by the present tenants; 
5.  The applicant shall have provided proof to the City that each tenant is advised of the intention of the applicant to subdivide the existing apartment complex into condominium units at least 120 days in advance of the date of the filing of the tentative subdivision map. If, within 180 days a change in occupancy occurs resulting in the presence of a tenant who has not received the 180-day notice, the applicant shall file with the Planning Department an agreement signed by that tenant that he waives the 180-day notice requirement. 
G.  Physical Elements Report. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a report by an acoustical engineer which determines the STC rating for all common walls and ceiling separations in each unit. Where walls or ceiling separations cannot meet the minimum soundproof standards as required by the most recently adopted version of the Uniform Building Code, the applicant shall make necessary improvements prior to the filing of the final map or enter into an agreement in recordable form providing that no sale of any unit shall take place until such necessary improvements are made. 
2.  The applicant shall submit to a detailed preconversion inspection to be performed by the City Building Inspector. The inspection report shall identify all areas where minimum code compliance is not achieved per most recently adopted version of the UCB. 
3.  The applicant shall also submit to a preconversion analysis of all structures by a licensed structural pest control operation relating to the presence of wood-destroying pests or other organisms. A copy of this analysis shall be submitted to the City Planning Department prior to consideration of the tentative subdivision map. 
H.  A draft copy of a declaration of CC&R's which will apply and which shall include an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping together with an estimate of the initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance; a description of a provision for maintenance of vehicular access areas within the project; and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. 
I.  Other information which, in the opinion of the Planning and Building Director, will assist in determining whether the proposed project is consistent with this Chapter. 
J.  The conversion of rental units to owner-occupied units is detrimental to the provision of local housing opportunities and, as long as a low vacancy rate exists, there should be a conversion moratorium. No conversions shall be approved when the vacancy rate within the City, as estimated by the State of California Department of Finance, is equal to or less than 5 percent. 
K.  Exception: New apartment rental development shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 21.56.005-J, provided that no public monies are used in the financing or subsidization of the new rental development. 
(Ord. 938 C.S. § 1, 1981: Ord. 937 C.S. § 1, 1981: Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.006 - Design and Construction Standards. 
A.  Each unit shall meet the sound transmission control requirements of the most recently adopted version of the UBC (Uniform Building Code). A written statement of compliance signed by a licensed acoustical engineer shall be submitted for a permanent record. 
B.  Each unit shall be provided with a draft stop at each wall with no openings where determined feasible by the Building Inspector. 
C.  Each unit shall be provided with smoke detectors conforming to UBC standards. 
D.  Each converted unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of water metering shall be developed prior to filing the final map and shall be incorporated into the CC&R's. 
E.  Utility easements shall be provided for each dwelling with an access agreement for entry to repair and maintain same. Individual shutoff valves and disconnects shall be provided for each unit. 
F.  Each unit shall provide 1 ½ off-street parking spaces (one covered). There is no visitor or RV parking requirement. 
G.  At least 150 cubic feet per unit of enclosed weatherproof and lockable storage space shall be provided in addition to that ordinarily contained within each unit. It may be either within or exterior to the unit. 
H.  A minimum of 100 sq. ft. of appurtenant usable private area shall be provided contiguous with each unit. 
I.  100 sq. ft. of open space shall be provided for each unit. Such open space shall be over and above the area provided by setback requirements and parking facilities and additional to required private open space. 
J.  Energy conservation requirements for conversions: 
1.  All doors and windows shall be weatherstripped or suitably insulated. 
2.  All stove fans shall be insulated to be made low infiltration. 
3.  In cases where appliances are replaced, appliances that are of low energy design shall be opted for. 
4.  Installation of R-19 insulation in all attics where not presently installed. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.007 - Landscape Maintenance Agreement. 
The owner of the project shall enter into a landscape maintenance agreement before recordation of the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.008 - Park Dedication Fees. 
Each unit shall be subject to full park dedication fees at the rate in effect at the time the final map is filed less park dedication fees previously paid to the City. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.009 - Requirements for Design Review Approval. 
Design Review shall be required of all projects proposed for conversion to condominiums. The Design Review approval shall be based on overall site development which involves all proposed or existing building elevations, proposed grading, areas of both common and private open space, areas of private storage, parking and landscaping and how each relates to the development standards of the ordinance and this site. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.100 - Conditions. 
The City may impose any conditions it deems necessary in order to ensure that the proposal will conform with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.105 - Exemption. 
The Downtown Martinez Core Area (described as the twelve city blocks lying north of Ward Street, east of Berrellesa Street, south of Escobar Street and west of Court Street), shall be exempt from the following sections related to regulations for the Conversion of Rental Units to Condominiums: 
A.  Section 21.56.004; and 
B.  Section 21.56.006 F, G, H, and I. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
21.56.130 - Appeal to City Council—Hearing. 
The procedure involved in the appeal of a City Planning Commission action is set forth in Sec. 21.42.100 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 902 C.S., 1979.)  
CHAPTER 21.60 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
 
21.60.010 - Application Required. 
A Lot Line Adjustment Application shall be filed with the Community Development Department for lot line adjustments between two or more adjacent parcels, where: 
A.  The land taken from one parcel would be added to an adjacent parcel; 
B.  A greater number of parcels than originally existing would not thereby be created; and 
C.  There would be no resulting violations of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990, Ord. 909 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.60.020 - Filing Fee. 
All persons submitting applications for lot line adjustment shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the City's resolution establishing fees and charges for subdivision maps and construction drawings. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990, Ord. 909 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.60.030 - Preparation and Form. 
A.  The general form and details of the application and accompanying information shall be as determined by the Community Development Director, but, at a minimum, shall include: 
1.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the Record Owners; the assessor's parcel numbers assigned to the parcels. 
2.  A diagram showing the boundaries of the lots, both existing and proposed, with sufficient information to locate the property, and 
3.  A diagram showing the location and names of all existing streets or other public right-of-way in or adjacent to the lots, and 
4.  A diagram showing the location of all existing buildings in the vicinity of the affected lot lines, and notations of structures be removed, and 
5.  A diagram showing important physical features, such as access and utility easements, railroad rights-of-way, political subdivision lines, rancho lines, and water courses, and 
6.  A diagram showing true north point, dimensional and graphic scale, and date, and 
7.  A diagram showing layout, numbers and dimensions of lots involved, and 
8.  A diagram showing location and width of all proposed easements for all utility purposes, and 
9.  A certificate signed by all owners agreeing to the filing of said application, and agreeing to comply with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance and State Map Act as they apply to the processing and approval of said application, and 
10.  Preliminary Title Report for all properties affected, and sufficient title information to show that the parcels were legally created, and 
11.  Such additional information as may be determined to be needed by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2 (part), 1990, Ord. 909 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.60.035 - Review of Applications. 
Lot line adjustment applications shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990, Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.60.040 - Term. 
A Lot Line Adjustment approval shall be valid for one year; and, if the deed is not a matter of public record within said time, the approval shall expire. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990, Ord. 909 C.S. § 3, 1979.)  
21.60.045 - Deed. 
An approved lot line adjustment shall be filed for public record by means of a deed containing the information specified in Section 21.60.030(A)(1) through (9) of this Chapter, to be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to recording. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990.)  
21.60.050 - Planning Certificate. 
Each Lot Line Adjustment deed shall have attached to it a certificate for the Community Development Director to sign, certifying that the deed meets all planning and zoning requirements. If the deed does not meet these requirements, the Director shall not sign the certificate, and the deed shall not be approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990, Ord. 1103 C.S. § I (part), 1987.)  
21.60.055 - Survey of Record Not Required. 
No record of survey shall be required for an approved lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. If the lot line adjustment constitutes a correction to a final or parcel map already recorded in the Office of County Recorder, said lot line adjustment may be effected by a certificate of correction in lieu of or in addition to a deed. Whether the lot line adjustment is memorialized and reflected in a deed or a certificate of correction, it will be the responsibility of the applicant to record same with the County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. 1154 C.S. § 2, 1990.) 
TITLE 21 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions regarding subdivisions, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 11000 et seq; for provisions regarding subdivision maps and the Subdivision Map Act, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 11500 et seq. 
2.  For flood damage control pertaining to buildings and other structures, see § 15.04.070. 
3.  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to require subdividers to dedicate land and/or pay fees in lieu of, for park and recreational purposes, see Bus. & Prof. Code § 11546. 
3/98  
TITLE 22 - ZONING 
CHAPTERS:.38.070b; 
 
22.37.090 - Adhering to Criteria and Standards and Denial of Permit. 
NOTES:  Footnotes are numbered throughout the text and are located at the end of this title.  
CHAPTER 22.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
22.02.010 - Objectives of Regulations. 
This Zoning Title is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the public, and for the following more particularly specified objectives: 
A.  To implement the objectives of the General Plan in all its elements, through the provision of a precise plan consistent with the General Plan, to guide, control and regulate the maintenance, change, growth and development of the City; 
B.  To foster a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among land uses; 
C.  To promote the stability of existing land uses which conform to the General Plan and to protect them from inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions; 
D.  To ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the purposes which are most appropriate and beneficial from the standpoint of the City as a whole; 
E.  To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of the land with structures; 
F.  To foster the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities; 
G.  To facilitate the appropriate location of community facilities and institutions; 
H.  To preserve the natural beauty of the City's site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.0.)  
22.02.020 - Nature of Regulations. 
This Title shall consist of a zoning map designating certain districts and a set of regulations controlling the uses of land, the density of population, the uses and locations of structures, the height and bulk of structures, the open spaces about structures, the areas and dimensions of sites, and requiring the provision of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities in the districts. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.1.)  
22.02.030 - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to minimum requirements. No provision of this Title is intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any other existing provisions of the ordinances of the City, except as is specifically repealed herein, provided that where this Title imposes a greater restriction on the use of land or structures, or the height or bulk of structures, or requires greater open spaces about structures, or greater areas or dimensions of sites than is imposed or required by any other existing provisions, this Title shall control. 
This Title is not intended to abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any deed restriction, covenant, easement or other agreement between parties provided that when this Title imposes a greater restriction on the use of land or structures or the height or bulk of structures, or requires greater open spaces about structures, or greater areas or dimensions of sites than is imposed or required by deed restriction, covenant, easement or other agreement, this Title shall control. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.2.)  
22.02.040 - Application. 
This Title shall apply to all property except public streets, railroad rights-of-way, towers and poles and underground facilities for providing gas, water, oil, electricity or telephone and telegraph service, whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations or organizations, by the United States of America or any of its agencies, by the State or any of its agencies or political subdivisions, by any city or county, including the City of Martinez, or any of its agencies, or by any authority or district organized under the laws of the State; provided further, that the route for all proposed transmission lines shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation prior to acquisition of rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.3.)  
CHAPTER 22.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
22.04.010 - Generally. 
For the purposes of this Title, certain words and terms used herein are defined as set out in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4 (part).)  
22.04.020 - Construction. 
All words in the present tense shall include the future tense. All words in the singular number shall include the plural number and all words in the plural number shall include the singular number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(1).)  
22.04.025 - Activities Devoted Primarily to the Sale or Exchange of Tobacco-Related Products. 
"Activities devoted primarily to the sale or exchange of tobacco-related products" are activities either devoting 20 percent of floor area or display area to, or deriving 75 percent or more of gross sales receipts from, the sale or exchange of tobacco-related products. 
(Ord. 1290 C.S. § 3 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.026 - Aggregate Side Yards. 
"Aggregate side yards" means the sum of the two side yards. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 1, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.027 - Agriculture - Large Scale. 
"Large scale agriculture" means general farming, wholesale horticulture, viticulture and floriculture, dairying, livestock production, fur farms, poultry raising, animal breeding, aviaries, apiaries, forestry and similar agricultural uses. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 2, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.028 - Agriculture - Small Scale. 
"Small scale agriculture" means crop and tree farming, horticulture and viticulture. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 3, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.030 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(4).)  
22.04.040 - Alter. 
"Alter" means to make a change which will prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(5).)  
22.04.041 - Animal Structures - Large. 
"Large animal structures" means accessory structures provided for the shelter or housing of livestock including, but not limited to, barns and stables. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 4, 12-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1359, § 4, adopted December 15, 2010, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former § 22.04.041 and adding a new § 22.04.041. Former § 22.04.041 defined the term "antique shops," and derived from Ord. 1284 C.S. of 2001.  
22.04.042 - Animal Structures—Small. 
"Small animal structures" means accessory structures provided for the shelter or housing of small animals including, but not limited to, chicken coops, rabbit hutches, and similar scale structures. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 5, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.045 - Antique Shops. 
"Antique shops" means establishments engaged in retail sales of objects of art or pieces of furniture, household implements and the like, which, because of age, rarity, and fabrication or the manufacture at a time much earlier than present, have acquired a collectors' quality and value. This definition does not include any objects or materials that are obsolete and have secondhand or salvage value only. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 6, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.050 - Apartment Hotel. 
"Apartment Hotel" means a combined multiple dwelling and hotel which maintains an interior lobby through which tenants must pass to gain access to dwelling units and hotel rooms, and in which not less than 50% of the accommodations are designed and used as dwelling units. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(6).)  
22.04.051 - Bail Bonds Shops. 
Establishments that provide security for the due appearance of an individual in order to obtain temporary release from imprisonment. 
(Ord. 1284 C.S. § 4 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.052 - Bar. 
"Bar" shall mean a business where alcoholic beverages, but not including beer and wine only, are sold for on-site consumption, with either no or limited food service which do not include a "bona-fide public eating place." "Bar" does not include a business where alcoholic beverages are served which business complies with all of the following: a) operates as "a bona-fide public eating place", b) possesses a license type issued by ABC which is issued only to establishments with a "bona-fide public eating place"; and c) provides meals, prepared on-site in a full commercial kitchen conforming to all current requirements of the Contra Costa County Health Services Department, the Municipal Code of the City of Martinez and the City Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 4, 2-5-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1377 C.S., §§ 4 and 5, adopted February 5, 2014, amended the Code by, in effect, renumbering former § 22.04.052 as a new § 22.04.054, and adding a new § 22.04.052.  
22.04.054 - Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
"Bed and Breakfast Inn" means a business operated as part of a dwelling in which lodging or lodging and meals are provided for compensation for more than 2 but not more than 6 persons other than members of the resident family, excluding a nursing home as defined in this Chapter, where the following conditions are met: 
A.  The business is conducted within a dwelling by an inhabitant thereof. 
B.  No signage is displayed other than a name plate not exceeding six (6) square feet in area. 
C.  No noisy or otherwise objectionable machinery or equipment is used in the conduct of the business. 
D.  No storage of equipment or supplies takes place outside of the dwelling. 
E.  Off-street parking is provided at the rate of 2 spaces plus 1 space for each guest room. 
F.  The conduct of the business does not create excessive pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 5, 2-5-2014; Ord. 1027 C.S. § 2, 1984.) 
Note— See editor's note, § 22.04.052.  
22.04.060 - Block. 
"Block" means the properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad rights-of-way, unsubdivided land or watercourse. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(7).)  
22.04.063 - Bona-fide Public Eating Place. 
"Bona-fide public eating place" shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 23038 and includes a place which regularly serves meals and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith. "Bona-fide public eating places" does not include establishments with only limited food service such as only sandwiches or salads or pre-prepared foods. 
(Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 6, 2-5-2014)  
22.04.070 - Breezeway. 
"Breezeway" means a structure for the principal purpose of connecting the main structure on a site with another main structure or an accessory structure on the same site. A breezeway shall not exceed 12 feet in height and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the sides of the structure shall be enclosed with any material other than that necessary for roof supports. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(8).)  
22.04.080 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof, support by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(9).)  
22.04.090 - Carport. 
"Carport" means an accessory structure or portion of a main structure having a roof but open on two or more sides and designed for the storage of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(10).)  
22.04.091 - Check Cashing Shops. 
Establishments with a primary purpose of cashing checks and making loans other than a financial institution such as a bank or credit union. 
(Ord. 1284 C.S. § 4 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.092 - Christmas Tree Farm. 
"Christmas tree farm" means the seasonal sale of trees grown on site. Customer selection and cutting of trees may be part of the sales process. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 7, 12-15-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1359, § 7, adopted December 15, 2010, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former § 22.04.092 and adding a new § 22.04.092. Former § 22.04.092 defined the term "commercial vehicle," and derived from Ord. 1342 C.S. of 2008.  
22.04.095 - Commercial Vehicle. 
"Commercial vehicle" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the California Vehicle Code as the same may be amended from time to time, except that commercial vehicle shall not include a pickup truck as defined in the California Vehicle Code as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 8, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.100 - Commissions, Officers, Boards. 
A.  "Board of Adjustments" and "Board" mean the Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Commission, as determined by the Planning & Building Director. 
B.  "Building Inspector" means the Building Inspector of the City of Martinez. 
C.  "City Engineer" means the City Engineer of the City of Martinez. 
D.  "City Planning Commission" and "Commission" mean the Planning Commission duly appointed by the City Council. 
E.  "Zoning Administrator" means the Planning and Building Director, or his designee. 
(Ord. 1041 C.S. § 1, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(3)(part).)  
22.04.110 - Common Open Space. 
"Common Open Space" means land area of the site not covered by buildings or structures which is accessible to all occupants or dwelling units within the development. It does not include proposed street rights-of-way, open parking areas, driveways, school sites, commercial areas and related facilities, or areas determined unsuitable by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(11).)  
22.04.112 - Day Care, General. 
"General day care" means a commercial business or institution that provides care for persons on a less than 24-hour basis. This classification is exclusive to those facilities licensed by the State, and includes nursery schools, preschools and day care centers for children or adults, but excludes smaller facilities such as family day care home. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 9, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.120 - Depth. 
"Depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(12).)  
22.04.125 - Disabled Person(s). 
"Disabled person(s)" means a person who has a medical, physical, or mental impairment or condition that substantially limits 1 or more major life activities, as those terms are defined in the California Government Code Section 12926, anyone who is regarded as having such a condition or anyone who has a record of having such a condition. It includes a person or persons, or an authorized representative of a disabled person. The term disabled persons does not include a person who is currently using illegal substances, unless he or she has a separate disability. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 4, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.130 - Dog Fancier. 
"Dog fancier" means a person owning or keeping four or more dogs over the age of six months: 
A.  As pets; 
B.  For showing in recognized dog shows, field trials or obedience trials; 
C.  For working or hunting; 
D.  For improving the variety of breed in temperament or conformation with a view to exhibition in shows or trials, or for use as working dogs in hunting. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(13).)  
22.04.140 - Dog Kennels, Commercial. 
"Commercial dog kennels" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where one or more dogs are kept or maintained for commercial purposes, including boarding, breeding and veterinary care, for the primary purpose of sale or service for profit. All dogs maintained in commercial dog kennels are to be confined on the premises under the owner's control, and shall be enclosed in a building during the hours of darkness. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(14).)  
22.04.150 - Dwelling. 
"Dwelling" means a one-family dwelling, multiple dwelling, lodging house or apartment hotel. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(15).)  
22.04.160 - Dwelling Unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means 1 or more rooms and a single kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. This includes mobile homes constructed after 1976 (certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974) and placed on permanent foundations. 
(Ord. 960 C.S., 1982: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,102.4(16).)  
22.04.165 - Fair Housing Laws. 
"Fair Housing Laws" means the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 United States Code Section 3601 et. seq.) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (California Government Code Section 12926 and 12955 et. seq.), including amendments there to. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 5, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.170 - Family. 
"Family" means an individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than 6 persons, not including servants, who need not be related by blood or marriage, living as a single housekeeping unit. The limitation of a family to 6 persons who need not be related by blood or marriage shall not be applied to a family, otherwise complying with this Chapter, with adoptive or foster children. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(17).)  
22.04.175 - Family Day Care Home. 
A facility located in a residential district which provides licensed family day care to 12 or fewer children including children who reside at the home. 
(Ord. 1055 C.S. § 2, 1985.)  
22.04.180 - Floor Area, Gross. 
"Gross floor area" means the total horizontal area in square feet on each floor within the exterior walls of a structure but not including the area of inner courts, shaft enclosures or exterior walls. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(18).)  
22.04.182 - Foster Family Home. 
"Foster family home" means any residential facility providing 24-hour care for six or fewer foster children that is owned, leased, or rented and is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed, or as defined and regulated by the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 10, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.190 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means the property line of a site abutting on a street, other than the sideline of a corner lot. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(19).)  
22.04.200 - Garage. 
"Garage" means an accessory structure or a portion of a main structure, enclosed on 3 or more sides, designed for the storage of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(20).)  
22.04.210 - Garage, Repair. 
"Repair garage" means a structure or part thereof where motor vehicles are repaired or painted. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(21).)  
22.04.220 - Garage, Storage. 
"Storage garage" means a structure or part thereof used for the storage, parking or servicing of motor vehicles but not for the repair thereof. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(22).)  
22.04.230 - Group Care and Rehabilitation Facilities. 
"Group care and rehabilitation facilities" means residential facilities which provide supervision, care and/or rehabilitation services to resident mentally disordered persons, resident persons who have suffered such problems or diseases as alcoholism, drug addiction, or the like or other handicapped resident persons. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(23).)  
22.04.240 - Home Occupation. 
A.  "Home occupation" means the conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a service or the conduct of a business, or the handcraft manufacture of products, but not including any of the following: 
1.  Appliance repair, other than repair of small household appliances; 
2.  Motorized garden tool repair such as, but not limited to, lawnmowers; 
3.  Massage parlor, as defined in Chapter 5.58 of this Code; 
4.  Pest control; 
5.  Vehicle production and services such as, but not limited to, the following: cleaning, dismantling, embellishment, installation, manufacture, repair or service, sale, lease or rental, and towing, excluding the dispatching of vehicles such as limousines, taxicabs, and ambulances; 
6.  Welding; 
7.  Any use which requires a hazardous materials permit from the Fire Department; 
8.  Medical marijuana dispensary, as provided in Chapter 22.41; 
9.  Any other use which does not comply with any of the conditions listed in subsection B of this Section. 
B.  All home occupations are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling by an inhabitant thereof and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling; 
2.  There shall be no external alteration of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted; 
3.  No sign shall be displayed other than a nameplate in which the home occupation is conducted; 
4.  No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed in the conduct of a home occupation, except that a doctor, dentist, osteopath or chiropractor may employ one assistant; 
5.  There shall be no noisy or otherwise objectionable machinery or equipment used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
6.  There shall be no storage, keeping or display of equipment, supplies or merchandise outside or in the vicinity of the dwelling. No goods, merchandise or products shall be sold or offered for sale inside of, outside of, or in the vicinity of, the dwelling. As used in this subsection, vicinity includes any private property located in the same street block as the dwelling; 
7.  The conduct of the home occupation shall not create excessive pedestrian, automobile or truck traffic in the vicinity or on the property of any other residence. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 6, 2000.)  
22.04.244 - Homeless Person(s). 
"Homeless person(s)" means an individual who lacks a fixed, regular and adequate nighttime residence; and/or an individual who has a primary nighttime residence that is: 
A.  A supervised, publically or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations, including but not limited to emergency shelters, congregate shelters and transitional housing; 
B.  An institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or 
C.  A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, regular sleeping accommodations for human beings. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 6, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.246 - Homeless Shelter, Emergency. 
"Homeless shelter, emergency" means a residential facility, other than a community care facility, operated by a provider which provides temporary accommodations to persons or families with low income. The term "temporary accommodations" means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed 180 days. For purpose of this definition, a "provider" shall mean a government agency or private non-profit organization which provides or contracts with recognized community organizations to provide emergency or temporary shelter, and which may also provide meals, counseling and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. Such a facility may have individual rooms, but is not developed with individual dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 7, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.248 - Homeless Shelter, Ongoing. 
"Homeless shelter, ongoing" means a program, operated by a religious or eleemosynary institution (with the intent of placing the homeless in permanent dwelling units within 90 days after first occupying the shelter) that provides overnight shelter, 2 meals a day and case management services for homeless persons, with no predetermined limitation to length of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 8, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.250 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a structure or portion thereof in which there are 16 or more individual guest rooms or suites, usually occupied on a transient basis, where lodging, with or without meals is provided for compensation, and in which more than 50% of the individual guest rooms and suites are without kitchens. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(25).)  
22.04.260 - Junkyard. 
"Junkyard" means a site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and the like excepting a site on which such uses are conducted within a completely enclosed structure and excepting motor vehicle wrecking yards as defined in this Chapter. An establishment for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or salvaging machinery in operable condition, and the processing of used or salvaged materials as part of a manufacturing operation shall not be deemed a junkyard. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(26).)  
22.04.264 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" shall mean an area used or designed to be used for the preparation of food and equipped with any one or all of the following: 
A.  A sink and/or other device for dishwashing; 
B.  A stove, microwave or other device for cooking or heating food; 
C.  A refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food; 
D.  Cabinets, shelves or counters for storage of equipment and utensils for food preparation. 
(Ord. 965 C.S. § 5, 1982.)  
22.04.270 - Lodging House. 
"Lodging house" means a dwelling in which lodging or lodgings and meals are provided for compensation for more than 6 but not more than 15 persons other than members of the resident family, excepting a nursing home as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(27).)  
22.04.280 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of subdivided land which is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(28).)  
22.04.290 - Lot, Corner. 
"Corner lot" means a site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines which have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(30).)  
22.04.300 - Lot, Corridor Access. 
"Corridor access lot" means a site with access to a street by means of a corridor having not less than 20 feet of frontage and a width less than the required site width but not less than 20 feet. The area of an access corridor shall not be included in determining site area. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(29).)  
22.04.310 - Lot, Double Frontage. 
"Double frontage lot" means an interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(31).)  
22.04.320 - Lot, Interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(32).)  
22.04.330 - Lot, Key. 
"Key lot" means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(33).)  
22.04.340 - Lot Line, Front. 
"Front lot line" means a line separating an interior lot from a street, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from a street. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(35).)  
22.04.350 - Lot, Reversed Corner. 
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to the rear. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(34).)  
22.04.355 - Lunch Wagon. 
A cart or motor vehicle from which beverages and ready-to-eat food items are sold. 
(Ord. 1245 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.04.360 - Major Thoroughfare. 
"Major thoroughfare" means a major street having two or more lanes for each direction of travel, designated as a thoroughfare on the circulation element of the General Plan. For the purposes of this title, this shall apply to all of Alhambra Avenue; Berrellesa Street; Escobar Street and Marina Vista from Berrellesa Street easterly; Pine Street from Jones Street northerly; and Pacheco Boulevard. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(36).)  
22.04.361 - Massage Parlors. 
Establishment engaged in the purpose of massage treatments by one or more therapists. This category does not include day spas. 
(Ord. 1284 C.S. § 4 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.362 - Mobile Storage Container. 
"Mobile storage container" means any enclosed or partially enclosed storage structure, including, but not limited to, cargo or shipping containers, "POD" units, and other pre-fabricated structures intended for the storage or transport of goods. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 2, 2008.)  
22.04.370 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a structure, or portion thereof, or a group of attached or detached structures containing individual guest rooms, suites or dwelling units, usually occupied on a transient basis and usually with a garage attached or parking space located in proximity to each unit, where lodging is provided for compensation. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(37).)  
22.04.380 - Motor Vehicle Wrecking Yard. 
"Motor vehicle wrecking yard" means a site, or portion of a site, on which the dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts is conducted. The presence on a site of three or more motor vehicles which have not been capable of operating under their own power for thirty (30) days or more or, in the case of vehicles not self-propelled, which have not been towable or from which parts have been removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a motor vehicle wrecking yard. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(38).)  
22.04.390 - Multiple Dwelling. 
"Multiple dwelling" means a structure containing more than 1 dwelling unit, designed for occupancy or occupied by more than 1 family and usually not occupied on a transient basis. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(39).)  
22.04.392 - Net Lot Area. 
"Net lot area" means total parcel area excluding street rights-of-way including but not limited to streets, alleys and access corridors, and creek setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 11, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.395 - Non-Taxable Merchandise. 
"Non-taxable merchandise" means products, commodities, or items the sale of which is not subject to California State sales tax. 
(Ord. 1296 C.S. § 1 (part), 2002.)  
22.04.400 - Nursery School. 
"Nursery school" means a school for 13 or more pre-elementary school age children (including those residing on the site), or use of a site, or portion of a site, for a group day care program. 
(Ord. 1055 C.S. § 1, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(40).)  
22.04.410 - Nursing Home. 
"Nursing home" means a structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescents, invalids and aged persons not including persons suffering from contagious or mental diseases, alcoholism or drug addiction, and in which surgery is not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals and sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home or a rest home shall be deemed a nursing home. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(41).)  
22.04.420 - Off-Street Loading Facilities. 
"Off-street loading facilities" means a site, or a portion of a site, devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(42).)  
22.04.430 - Off-Street Parking Facilities. 
"Off-street parking facilities" means a site, or portion of a site, devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(43).)  
22.04.440 - Outdoor Advertising Structure. 
"Outdoor advertising structure" means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, located on a site other than the site on which the advertised use is located or on which the advertised product is produced. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(44).)  
22.04.441 - Pawnshops. 
Establishment engaged in retail sales of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by personal property. 
(Ord. 1284 C.S. § 4 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.442 - Reasonable Accommodation. 
"Reasonable accommodation" means providing disabled persons flexibility or removal of constraints in the application of land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. It may include such things as yard area modifications for ramps, handrails or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened driveways, parking areas or walkways; building additions for accessibility; tree removal; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable Accommodation does not include an accommodation which would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City, or require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's land use and zoning program. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 10, 2-19-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1379 C.S., §§ 9 and 10, adopted February 19, 2014, amended the Code by renumbering former §§ 22.04.442—22.04.447 as new §§ 22.04.443—22.04.448, and adding a new § 22.04.442.  
22.04.443 - Recreational Vehicle. 
A.  "Recreational vehicle" means each of the following as defined in the California Vehicle Code, as the same may be amended from time to time: 
1.  All terrain vehicle; 
2.  Bus; 
3.  Camp trailer; 
4.  Camper; 
5.  Fifth-wheel travel trailer; 
6.  Golf cart; 
7.  House car; 
8.  Motor truck; 
9.  School bus; 
10.  Semitrailer; 
11.  Snowmobile; 
12.  Tow truck; 
13.  Trailer; 
14.  Trailer coach; 
15.  Trailer bus; 
16.  Truck tractor; 
17.  Utility trailer; 
18.  Youth bus. 
B.  Recreational vehicle also means any of the following: 
1.  Horse trailer; 
2.  Off-road motorcycle; 
3.  Boat; 
4.  Jet ski or other watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1342 C.S., § 3, 2008; Ord. 974 C.S., § 1, 1982.) 
Note— Former § 22.04.442. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.444 - Recreational Vehicle, Oversized. 
"Oversized recreational vehicle" means any recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 22.04.442, that exceeds either: (1) a height of 12 feet; or (2) a length of 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1342 C.S., § 4, 2008.) 
Note— Former § 22.04.443. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.445 - Residential Congregate Care Facility. 
"Residential congregate care facility" means a facility operated by a person with all required state and local agency approvals or licenses, where not more than six persons reside or receive care, not including the licensee or members of the licensee's family or persons employed as facility staff, or as defined and regulated by the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 12, 12-15-2010) 
Note— Former § 22.04.444. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.445.5 - Restaurant. 
"Restaurant" shall means an eating and drinking establishment, including, but not limited to, a bona-fide public eating place, sandwich shop, café, coffee shop, beer garden or wine bar, but not including a bar. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 7, 2-5-2014) 
Note— Former § 22.04.444.5. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.446 - Secondary Housing Unit. 
"Secondary housing unit" means an additional dwelling unit constructed or adapted within, onto, or apart from an existing, or built concurrently with, a single-family dwelling in any residential district. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1312 C.S., § II, 2004; Ord. 963 C.S., § 1, 1982.) 
Note— Former § 22.04.445. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.447. - Secondhand Stores. 
The retail sale of used appliances, clothing and miscellaneous household or personal items. This classification excludes antique shops primarily engaged in the sale of used furniture and accessories other than appliances. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1284 C.S., § 4 (part), 2001.) 
Note— Former § 22.04.446. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.448 - Sales Floor Area. 
"Sales floor area" means only interior building space devoted to the sale of merchandise, and does not include restrooms, office space, storage space, automobile service areas, or open-air garden sales space. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 9, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1296 C.S., § 2 (part), 2002.) 
Note— Former § 22.04.447. See editor's note, § 22.04.442.  
22.04.450 - Service Station. 
"Service station" means a place where gasoline or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil or grease for the operation of passenger vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into the vehicle, including lubrication on the site and the washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower or steam cleaning device is used. 
(Ord. 822, C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10.102.4(45).)  
22.04.460 - Shall. 
The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code, § 10,102.4(2).)  
22.04.470 - Site. 
"Site" means a parcel of land, subdivided or unsubdivided, occupied or to be occupied by a use or structure. 
(Ord. 822, C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code, § 10,102.4(46).)  
22.04.480 - Site Area. 
"Site area" means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,102.4(47).)  
22.04.482 - Small Animal Farming. 
"Small animal farming" means the raising of poultry, rabbits and other grain-fed rodents and birds. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 13, 12-15-2010)  
22.04.490 - Stable. 
"Stable" means a structure accessory to a dwelling, used or designed to be used to shelter horses, including a corral or paddock. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code, § 10,102.4(48).)  
22.04.500 - Street. 
"Street" means a thoroughfare, dedicated as such or acquired for public use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting land. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code, § 10,102.4(49).)  
22.04.510 - Street Intersection. 
"Street intersection" means the intersection of the right-of-way or side lines of the street at a corner, or the intersection of a straight line extension of such right-of-way or side lines thereof. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code, § 10,102.4(50).)  
22.04.520 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires a location on the ground, including a building but not including a fence or a wall used as a fence. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(51).)  
22.04.530 - Structure, Accessory. 
"Accessory structure" means an attached or detached subordinate structure, which is, subordinate in size and incidental to the use of the main structure or the main use of the land, and which is located on the same site with the main structure or use. Examples of attached accessory structures include, but are not limited to, unenclosed structures and unconditioned enclosed structures such as: decks that are 18 inches or more above grade, trellises, and patio covers/enclosures. Examples of detached accessory structures include, but are not limited to, those features permitted as attached accessory structures, as well as: garages, carports, storage sheds, greenhouses, gazebos, and secondary housing units. The size of an enclosed accessory structure is defined as the floor area within the structure. The size of an unclosed accessory structure, such as a carport, gazebo or deck, is defined as the structure's projected roof or deck area. In-ground swimming pools where no part of the pool and/or ancillary features is more than 18 inches above grade, are not defined as accessory structures for purposes of height, minimum yard and/or maximum coverage limitations. 
(Ord. 1335 C.S. § 1, 2007: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(52).)  
22.04.540 - Structure, Main. 
"Main structure" means a structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning on the principal use. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 1,102.4(53).)  
22.04.541 - Supportive Housing. 
"Supportive Housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260 and as per subdivision (b) of Section 50675.14 of the California Health and Safety Code, and that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 12, 2-19-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1379 C.S., §§ 11 and 12, adopted February 19, 2014, amended the Code by renumbering former § 22.04.541 as a new § 22.04.543, and adding a new § 22.04.541.  
22.04.543 - Tattoo Parlors. 
Establishments specializing in providing tattoos, body piercing or other similar service involving permanent coloring or adorning of skin or body parts. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 11, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1284 C.S., § 4 (part), 2001.) 
Editor's note— Former § 22.04.051. See editor's note, § 22.04.051.  
22.04.545 - Tobacco-Related Products. 
"Tobacco-related products" are any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco and dipping tobacco; cigarette papers; or any other instrument or paraphernalia that is designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco and products prepared from tobacco. 
(Ord. 1290 C.S., § 3 (part), 2001.)  
22.04.548 - Transit Stop. 
"Transit Stop" means a regularly scheduled bus stop, as posted in a transit agency's most current publication of routes and stops, including but not limited to Central Contra Costa Transit Authority's (CCCTA) "County Connection" bus service. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 13, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.549 - Transitional Housing. 
"Transitional Housing" and "Transitional Housing Development" means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than 6 months, per subdivision (h) of Section 50675.2 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 14, 2-19-2014)  
22.04.550 - Transmission Line. 
"Transmission line" means a system designed to impart direction to any energy, force, material or substance for the purpose of conveying said items from one location to another location without the lines' output content being reduced, in comparison to line input content, by direct distribution to consumers. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(54).)  
22.04.560 - Usable Open Space. 
"Usable open space" means outdoor area on ground, roof, balcony, deck or porch which is designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation, utility space, pedestrian access or landscaping. Such areas: 
A.  Shall not include off-street parking space or driveways; 
B.  Shall not include the required front yard nor the street side yard of any corner lot, except that any portion of such yard which is located beyond the first 16 feet may be included if it meets all other qualifications of usable open space; 
C.  Shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet in any direction and a minimum area of 200 square feet, provided: 
1.  Balconies may be included if they have a minimum dimension of 7 feet and a minimum area of 80 square feet; and 
2.  Roof, deck and/or porch areas may be included if they have a minimum dimension of 10 feet and a minimum area of 120 square feet and are designed to be accessible to and usable by the occupants of the building(s). 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(55).)  
22.04.570 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered or enlarged, or for which either a site or a structure is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(56).)  
22.04.580 - Width. 
"Width" means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(57).)  
22.04.585 - Wind Generator. 
"Wind generator" means the equipment used to convert wind energy into electrical power, including a rotor (e.g., propeller), support pole and/or wires, and all interconnection and auxiliary equipment. 
(Ord. 1323 C.S. § I, 2005.)  
22.04.590 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an open space on the same site as a structure unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, including a front yard, side yard, rear yard or space between structures. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(58).)  
22.04.600 - Yard, Front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which contains all areas between the front property line back to the wall(s) of the building which are parallel or generally face the front property line. The minimum required front yard is an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front property line and the minimum required setback distance, as required by the applicable zoning district standards. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 5, 2008: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(59).)  
22.04.610 - Yard, Rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and line parallel thereto on the site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(60).)  
22.04.620 - Yard, Side. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front property line of the site where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, to the rear property line of the site when no rear yard is required, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the side property line and a line parallel thereto on the site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.4(61).)  
22.04.630 - Yard, Street-Side Side. 
"Street-side side yard" means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear property line, the depth of which contains all areas between the side property line of a corner lot back to the wall(s) of the building which are parallel or generally face the side property line. The minimum required side yard on the street side of a corner lot is an area extending across the full length of the lot between the street side property line and the minimum required street-side yard setback distance, as required by the applicable zoning district standards. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 6, 2008.)  
CHAPTER 22.06 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
22.06.010 - Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission shall be established and have the duties and powers prescribed for it as provided in Section 2.24.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,101.0.)  
22.06.020 - Board of Adjustments. 
A.  The duties of the Board of Adjustments shall be performed by the Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Commission, as directed by the Planning and Building Director in accordance with current application levels. 
B.  The Board of Adjustments shall hear and decide upon all requests for the following actions when the preparation of an Environmental Impact Report has not been required: 
1.  Variances; 
2.  Sign permits; 
3.  Divisions of land into four or less parcels; 
4.  Such other matters as may be specifically assigned by ordinance, order or referred by the City Planning Commission or City Council. 
C.  The Zoning Administrator may render a decision on the request or may refer the matter to the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall not act on any proposal or request for which an Environmental Impact Report is required. 
(Ord. 1041 C.S. § 2, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior codes 10,101.1.)  
22.06.030 - Board of Appeals. 
The Board of Appeals shall be comprised of the voting members of the Planning Commission. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide all appeals from decisions of the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,101.2.)  
22.06.040 - Application. 
Applications for rezoning, zoning amendments, conditional use permits, variances, divisions of land, subdivisions, design review, sign permits or any other matter designated to come before the planning agency shall be made to the Planning Department. The Planning Department shall collect fees upon receipt of an application in an amount specified by resolution of the City Council. The application forms shall specify exhibits, documents and information required to be filed with the application. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,101.3.)  
22.06.050 - Review by Council or Commission, Appeals. 
Any member of the Council shall have the authority to request the Council to review any decision of the Board of Appeals or the Planning Commission by either making such request orally at a Council meeting following the Commission meeting at which such decision was made or by filing a written request with the City Clerk, provided that the oral or written request is made prior to the expiration of the time during which an appeal can be made. Any member of the Planning Commission shall have the same right to request review of a Zoning Administrator decision. When such review is requested, the decision shall be considered as appealed. However the person requesting the review shall have full participation rights in the second hearing. 
Appeals of administrative decisions by City Planning Director or City Building Official may be made to the Board of Adjustments. Appeals of decisions of the Board of Adjustments may be made to the Board of Appeals, or City Planning Commission. Appeals of decisions by the Board of Appeals or Planning Commission may be made to the City Council. Appeals shall be made within ten (10) calendar days of the date a decision was rendered and shall be made in the manner specified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1041 C.S. § 2, 1985: Ord. 987 C.S., 1983: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2(part), 1975; prior code § 10,101.4.)  
22.06.060 - Final Determination. 
In the absence of appeals, the decision of the City Planning Director City Building Official, Board of Adjustments, Board of Appeals and City Planning Commission shall be final. When appealed to the City Council the decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,101.5.)  
22.06.070 - Permits, Certificates and Licenses. 
All officials, departments and employees of the City vested with the authority or duty to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this Title and shall issue no permit, certificate or license which conflicts with the provisions of this Title. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Title shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,122.0.)  
22.06.080 - Duties of Building Inspector. 
The Building Inspector shall be the official responsible for the enforcement of this Title. In the discharge of this duty the Building Inspector shall have the right to enter on any site or to enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection, provided that the right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall any structure be entered in the absence of the owner or tenant without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The Building Inspector may serve notice requiring the removal of any structure or use in violation of this Title on the owner or his authorized agent, on a tenant, or on an architect, builder, contractor or other person who commits or participates in any violation. The Building Inspector may call upon the City Attorney to institute necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this Title and the City Attorney is authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. The Building Inspector may call upon the Chief of Police and his authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,122.1.)  
CHAPTER 22.08 - DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS 
 
22.08.010 - Specified. 
The districts established by this Title shall be designated as follows: 
R-1.5 Multifamily Residential District: 	1,500 square feet per dwelling unit 
R-2.5 Multifamily Residential District: 	2,500 square feet per dwelling unit 
R-3.5 Family Residential District: 	3,500 square feet per dwelling unit 
R-6.0 One Family Residential District: 	6,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-7.5 One Family Residential District: 	7,500 square feet minimum lot area 
R-10.0 One Family Residential District: 	10,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-15 One Family Residential District: 	15,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-20 One Family Residential District: 	20,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-40 One Family Residential District: 	40,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-65 One Family Residential District: 	65,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-80 One Family Residential District: 	80,000 square feet minimum lot area 
R-100 One Family Residential District: 	100,000 square feet minimum lot area 
RR One Family Rural Residential District: 	20,000 square feet minimum lot area (RR-20) to 100,000 square feet minimum lot area (RR-100) 
 
PA Professional and Administrative Office District 
NC Neighborhood Commercial District 
CC Central Commercial District 
TC Thoroughfare Commercial District 
SC Service Commercial District 
LI Light Industrial District 
HI Heavy Industrial District 
CI Controlled Industrial District 
"M" Mixed Use District: Two or more zoning districts may be combined and overlaid to form a mixed use district The designation shall be "M" followed by the appropriate zoning classifications, for example, "M—CC/R-1.5," an "R-1 5 Multifamily Residential District" overlaying a "CC-Central Commercial District," permitting all the uses of both zoning districts, but meeting the yard requirements and landscaping coverage and height restrictions of the more restrictive of the combined districts 
ECD Environmental Conservation District 
OS Open Space District 
GF Governmental Facilities District 
RF Recreational Facilities District 
U Undesignated District 
"P" Prezoned District: A special zoning designation used in conjunction with a specific zoning district designation (i.e., "R-7.5-P") indicates properties outside the corporate limits of the City which have been prezoned in accordance with the requirements of law; the zoning automatically changes to the base specific zoning (i.e., "R-7.5" in the case noted) upon annexation to the City. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,102.5.)  
CHAPTER 22.10 - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
 
22.10.010 - Designating Boundary Lines. 
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a district as shown on the zoning map, the following regulations shall control: 
A.  Where a boundary line is indicated as following a street or alley, it shall be construed as following the right-of-way line (i.e., the property line adjoining the street); 
B.  Where a boundary line follows or coincides approximately with a lot line or a property ownership line, it shall be construed as following the lot line or property ownership line; 
C.  White boundary line is not indicated as following a street or alley and does not follow or coincide approximately with a lot line or property ownership line, the boundary line shall be determined by the use of the scale designated on the zoning map; 
D.  Where further uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustments, upon written application or on its own motion, shall determine the location of the boundary in question, giving due consideration to the location indicated on the zoning map and the objectives of this Title and the purposes set forth in the district regulations. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,102.6.)  
CHAPTER 22.12 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
22.12.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.17.)  
22.12.020 - Purposes. 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title the R Residential Districts are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  Reserve appropriately located areas tar residential living in a variety of types of dwellings, at a reasonable range of population densities consistent with sound standards of public health and safety; 
B.  Ensure adequate light, air and privacy for each dwelling unit; 
C.  Provide adequate amounts of private open space in proximity to each dwelling unit; 
D.  Provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas; 
E.  Provide space for institutions which require a residential environment; 
F.  Minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the land around them; 
G.  Provide necessary space for off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate for off-street loading of trucks; 
H.  Protect residential properties from the hazards, noise and congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic; 
I.  Protect residential properties from noise, illumination, unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences; 
J.  Protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.0.)  
22.12.030 - RR Rural Residential District—Purpose. 
In addition to the purposes prescribed in Sections 22.02.010 and 22.12.020 of this Title, the RR Rural Residential Districts are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following. 
A.  Promote the stability of existing residential neighborhoods of a generally rural nature, which are unique within the community; 
B.  Avoid the overloading of existing streets and utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size and population density in relation to the land around them. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.1(a).)  
22.12.040 - RR Rural Residential District—Boundaries. 
A.  The Rural Residential District recognizes that each rural residential neighborhood has distinct, definable boundaries, within which a uniform level of zoning standards must be maintained for the benefit and preservation of the entire neighborhood. For each Rural Residential District, a zoning district exhibit map shall be prepared clearly showing the district boundary and incorporated into the zoning ordinance. 
B.  Following the procedures as outlined in Chapter 22.46 of this Title, the district boundaries and regulations will be established following a public hearing for which notices of hearing are to be mailed to each owner of real property within the proposed boundary, as indicated by the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  Amendments to district boundaries and/or regulations may be considered following the same procedures for hearing and notice as provided in Subsection B for the establishment of the Rural Residential District. An evaluation shall be made of the potential impact on the entire Rural Residential District in question prior to approving any revision in the boundary of a particular Rural Residential District or of the zoning densities within the boundary. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.1(b).)  
22.12.050 - RR Rural Residential District—Zoning and Prezoning. 
Upon the effective date of the ordinance establishing a Rural Residential District, those portions of the district lying outside the incorporated limits of the City are "prezoned" as indicated in Section 22.46.110 of this Title and in accordance with the provisions of the California Government Code, Section 65859. For such properties the zoning will become effective when the annexation becomes effective. The boundaries of the entire Rural Residential Zoning District shall be indicated on the zoning map. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.1(c).)  
22.12.060 - RR Rural Residential District—Conflicts. 
Conflicts occurring between Sections 22.12.030 through 22.12.070 and other provisions of the zoning regulations codified in this Title and provisions of the subdivision regulations (Title 21) shall be resolved in favor of Sections 22.12.030 through 22.12.070. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.1(d).)  
22.12.070 - RR Rural Residential District—Street Standards. 
One of the principal features of the rural appearance of existing rural neighborhoods is the manner of existing street improvements; relatively narrow streets, without curbs, gutters or sidewalks and, generally, without piped drainage systems. Preservation of this type and level of street standards appears to be an essential element in the stabilization of rural residential neighborhoods. Therefore, within the boundaries of a Rural Residential District, property owners are exempted from the requirement of the subdivision section for streets and related improvements (Sections 21.08.010 through 21.08.160). In case the public health, safety or welfare of residents of either the Rural Residential District or the community at large should require street improvements beyond those envisioned in this Section and Sections 22.12.030 through 22.12.060, a public hearing shall be held, following the same procedures for notification as specified in Section 22.12.040(B) herein, at which the need for improvements, their potential impact on the entire Rural Residential District in question, and the appropriateness of continuing the Rural Residential Zoning District in question are to be discussed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.1(e).)  
22.12.080 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  One family dwellings in which not more than 2 paying guests may be lodged and/or furnished meals; 
B.  In the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 district, multifamily dwellings, as follows: 
TABLE A 
Zoning
District 	Maximum Building Size (i.e., maximum number of dwelling units permitted in 1 building) 
R-3.5 	2 dwelling units per building 
R-2.5 	8 dwelling units per building 
R-1.5 	Size limits as appropriate shall be established by the Board of Adjustments in design review; 
 
C.  Accessory structures located on the same site as a permitted use including private garages and carports, storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses, recreation rooms, hobby shops and, when the basic structure is a 1 family dwelling, a guest house or accessory living quarters without a kitchen; 
D.  Home occupations; 
E.  Raising of fruit and nut trees, vegetables and horticultural specialties; 
F.  Except for the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 districts, the raising of poultry, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters and other small animals on a site not less than 20,000 square feet in area, provided that not more than 20 of any 1 or combination of such poultry or small animals shall be permitted on any 1 acre or smaller site, and provided that no structure housing poultry or small animals shall be closer than 25 feet to a dwelling unit on the site or 50 feet to the property line; 
G.  Except in the R-1.5, R-2.5, R-3.5 and all RR districts, private stables for the keeping of not more than 3 horses on a site of not less than 80,000 square feet in area, provided that 1 additional horse may be kept for each additional 40,000 square feet of the site, and provided that no stable shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line, closer than 50 feet to any dwelling on the site, or closer than 100 feet to any other dwelling; 
H.  In the RR districts, private stables for the keeping of not more than 2 horses on a site of not less than 40,000 square feet in area, provided that 1 additional horse may be kept for each additional 20,000 square feet of the site, and provided that any stable meets the conditions of subsection G above; 
I.  In the R-1.5 district only, lodging houses and apartment hotels; 
J.  State authorized, certified or licensed family care, foster home or group home serving 6 or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons; 
K.  Family day care homes. 
L.  Transitional Housing. Transitional housing shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses and dwelling types of the same type and in the same zone (e.g. permits single-family dwellings within a single-family zoning district and subject to the same maximum density, minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage, etc. applicable to a single-family dwelling. Also permits multi-family dwellings within a multi-family zoning district and subject to the same maximum density, minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage, etc. applicable to a multi-family dwelling. Does not permit single-family zoning requirements to be applied to multi-family residential units and vice versa). 
M.  Supportive Housing. Supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses and dwellings of the same type and in the same zone (e.g. permits single-family dwellings within a single-family zoning district and subject to the same maximum density, minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage, etc. applicable to a single-family dwelling. Also permits multi-family dwellings within a multi-family zoning district and subject to the same maximum density, minimum lot size and maximum lot coverage, etc. applicable to a multi-family dwelling. Does not permit single-family zoning requirements to be applied to multi-family residential units and vice versa). 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 15, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1312 C.S., § III (part), 2004; Ord. 1096 C.S., § II, 1987; Ord. 1055 C.S., § 3, 1985; Ord. 1027 C.S., § 1, 1984; Ord. 963 C.S., § 2, 1982; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,103.2.)  
22.12.084 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to comply with amendments made in 2002, to State Law Section 65852.2 which provides for Cities to set standards for the development of second dwelling units so as to increase the supply of smaller and affordable housing while ensuring that they remain compatible with the existing neighborhood. 
(Ord. 1312 C.S. § I, 2004.)  
22.12.085 - Secondary Housing Units as Permitted Use. 
A.  Intent. This Section is intended to implement the City's Housing Element of the General Plan, and is adopted to comply with State Law (Government Code Section 65852.1 et seq.), by allowing secondary housing units through administrative review in all residential districts, subject to meeting the standards prescribed below. 
B.  Where Permitted. A secondary housing unit may be permitted, subject to the design and development standards prescribed in subsection C of this Section, on a lot in any residential district with a single-family dwelling. At no case shall more than a total of 2 dwelling units; 1 primary, the other secondary, be permitted on any such lot. 
C.  Design and Development Standards. 
1.  Location on Lot. A secondary housing unit may only be located within the area of the lot where the zoning code permits either the primary single-family dwelling, or accessory structure, as per the applicable requirements for minimum yards, maximum height and maximum lot coverage for the subject residential district, and if applicable, the special property line setback requirements prescribed for accessory structures, Section 22.12.265. Secondary housing units may be attached to the primary single-family residence, or detached from the residence subject to separation requirements prescribed by the zoning code, and the building code as adopted and enforced at time of application. 
2.  Minimum Size and Facilities. The secondary housing unit shall contain no less than the 150 square feet area minimum required for an efficiency dwelling unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. This unit shall include provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
3.  Maximum Size. A secondary housing unit may be no larger than 1,000 square feet, excluding the garage. Additional size limitations may apply to a secondary housing unit built as an accessory structure, as per the size limitations applied to all accessory structures prescribed in Section 22.12.265(A). 
4.  Parking. A minimum of 1 independently usable off-street parking space shall be provided for the secondary housing unit, which shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the primary single-family dwelling. This space need not be covered, and shall comply with all development standard set forth in Chapter 22.36 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities). A tandem parking space may also be used to meet the parking requirement for the secondary housing unit, providing such space will not encumber access to a required parking space for the primary single-family dwelling. Required parking for the primary single-family dwelling may not be removed for the creation of a secondary housing unit (e.g., garage conversions), or allocated to meet the parking requirement for the secondary housing unit, unless replacement covered parking is provided in a location permitted by the zoning code. 
5.  Architectural and Site Plan Standards. 
a.  The secondary housing unit shall be visually subordinate to the primary single-family dwelling on the parcel, by its size, location, and design. The exterior entry to the secondary housing unit shall clearly appear as a secondary entry when compared to the entry for the primary single-family dwelling. 
b.  The exterior appearance and character shall echo the architectural form and style of the primary single-family dwelling. Siding materials, roof pitches and colors are to be substantially the same as those of the primary dwelling. 
c.  Outside stairways leading to a second story secondary housing unit shall not be in the front of the primary single-family dwelling, or in an exterior side yard if visible from the public right-of-way. Access to a first story unit by stairs or ADA accessible ramp may be permitted in the front of the primary dwelling. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Variances May Be Granted. As with the development of a single-family dwelling, a variance to the minimum yard and maximum site coverage requirements of this zoning code may be granted pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 22.44. The findings for or against such a variance request shall be limited to the review standards in Section 22.44.070, and the secondary housing unit use shall not be a factor in making findings for or against the application. 
2.  Use Permits May Be Granted. As with the development of a single-family dwelling, a use permit to exceed the maximum permitted height of a zoning district and the maximum permitted height and size limitations prescribed for accessory structure, Section 22.12.265, as well as to the quantitative requirements of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this Section, may be granted pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 22.40. The findings for or against such a use permit request shall be limited to the review standards in Section 22.40.070, and the secondary housing unit use shall not be a factor in making findings for or against the application. 
E.  General Requirements. 
1.  Use of Nonconforming Structures. An existing primary single-family dwelling that is nonconforming to the height limitations, minimum yard and maximum lot coverage requirements of the zoning code may be used for a secondary housing unit, provided that such units are in compliance with all other standards of this Section, and any modifications made to such a structure do not increase the nonconformity. 
2.  Compliance with Building Codes. All secondary housing units shall comply with all applicable requirements of the building code as adopted and enforced at time of application. In cases where a secondary dwelling unit is to be created through the reconfiguration of a portion of an existing single-family dwelling, both the secondary and primary dwelling shall be upgraded to comply with such building code requirements, which include but is not limited to noise separation between units sharing common walls, emergency egress and heating/ventilation requirements, as required by the building official. 
3.  Permanent Foundation. A permanent foundation shall be required for all second housing units. 
4.  Requirement for Owner Occupancy. On all lots containing secondary housing units, either the primary or secondary dwelling shall be owner-occupied and eligible for a "homeowner's exemption" for property tax purposes. The owner shall sign a notice of occupancy restriction, which the City will record with the County Recorder's office, prior to issuance of a building permit for the secondary housing unit. 
5.  Privacy. Any window or door of a second story second housing unit shall utilize techniques to lessen the privacy impacts onto adjacent properties. These techniques may include, use of obscured glazing, window placement above eye level, windows and doors located toward the existing on-site residence or screening treatments. 
6.  Number Per Lot. A maximum of 1 secondary housing shall be permitted on any lot. 
F.  Application Requirements. Prior to submitting a building permit application, an application for administrative design review shall first be submitted, per Section 22.06.040, which, at a minimum, shall include: 
1.  Plot Plan (Drawn to Scale). Dimensions of the perimeter of parcel on which the second dwelling will be located. Indicate the location and dimensioned setbacks of all existing and proposed structures on the project site and structures located within 50 feet of the project site. All easements, building envelopes, and special requirements of the subdivision as shown on the final map and improvement plans shall be included. Provide average slope calculations for the project site. 
2.  Floor Plans. Each room shall be dimensioned and the resulting floor area calculation included. The use of each room shall be identified. The size and location of all windows and doors shall be clearly depicted. 
3.  Elevation Views. Provide north, south, east and west elevations which show all openings, exterior finishes, original and finish grades, stepped footing outline, roof pitch, materials and color board for the existing residence and the proposed second dwelling unit. 
4.  Cross-Section. Provide building cross-sections including, but not limited to: structural wall elements, roof, foundation, fireplace and any other sections necessary to illustrate earth-to-wood clearances and floor to ceiling heights. 
5.  Fees. The fee for review shall be the same as required for administrative design review, or as required by currently adopted fee resolution. 
G.  Review and Approval Authority. 
1.  Application to be Administratively Approved. The Community Development Director shall administratively approve applications that are compliance with the requirements of this Section. Appeals of the Director's action may be appealed to the Planning Commission who will review the application pursuant to the criteria in this Section. 
2.  Approval of Unit Does Not Permit Land Division. Approval of a secondary housing unit shall not be deemed to be a division of land for purposes of Government Code Section 66410 et seq. or Title 21 of the Municipal Code, nor shall the administrative approval above entitle the applicant to either: (a) such a division of land; or (b) to have each of the 2 dwelling units on the parcel separately assessed for property tax purposes. 
(Ord. 1335 C.S. § 5, 2007: Ord. 1312 C.S. § III (part), 2004.)  
22.12.090 - Conditional Uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title: 
A.  Temporary real estate offices, construction yards and sheds; 
B.  Colleges; nursery schools; private nonprofit schools and colleges, not including art, craft, music or dancing schools or business, professional or trade schools and colleges; churches, parsonages parish houses, monasteries, convents and other religious institutions; public and private philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions, sanitariums and nursing homes; private noncommercial clubs and lodges; golf courses; cemeteries, columbariums and crematories; 
C.  Pumping stations, power stations, drainage ways and structures, storage tanks, and transmission lines found by the City Planning Commission to be necessary for the public health, safety or welfare; 
D.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use; 
E.  In the R-1.5 district, mobile home parks; 
F.  In the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts, state authorized or certified or licensed small group homes (serving 7 to 15 mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons); 
G.  In the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts, in the proximity of the Contra Costa County Hospital, group care and rehabilitation facilities (other than state authorized, certified or licensed homes serving mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons) serving up to 15 persons; 
H.  In the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 districts, on sites adjoining major thoroughfares, residential office facilities in existing residential structures or newly constructed compatible structures of residential appearance for the following activities: 
1.  Professional offices including accountants, architects, artists, attorneys, authors, engineers, dentists, doctors; 
2.  Real estate offices; 
3.  Antiques, arts and crafts sales. 
Size and staff of residential office activities shall be limited in scope as appropriate for the residential district in which it is located. Signs shall be limited in size to 4 square feet maximum size and 1 sign per site. The Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings in granting a use permit under this subsection that: 
1.  Approval of this use permit will be consistent with objectives of the General Plan; 
2.  The construction and/or use proposed will be consistent with and compatible with existing structures and uses on adjoining sites and in the immediate neighborhood; 
3.  Approval of this use permit will not result in any adverse environmental impact; 
I.  Except in the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts, dog fancier's permits on sites of 20,000 square feet or more; 
J.  Planned unit developments in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.42 of this Title; 
K.  In the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 districts only, multiple-family residential structures on sites up to 9,999 square feet in area adjoining, on one or both sides, sites with existing multiple-family residential structures, subject to the following conditions that: 
1.  The maximum density shall be the average density (rounded down to a whole unit) of the improved sites adjoining the side lines of the site; however, in no case shall there be less than 1,500 square feet of site area per living unit. Density for corner lots shall be the average of the adjoining lots in the same block on each street frontage; 
2.  The architectural and site design of the improvements shall be compatible with existing structures in the neighborhood, and shall be similar in appearance to structures designed to comply with the basic requirements of the zoning district; 
3.  A use permit for multiple-family residential structures on sites up to 9,999 square feet shall be granted only upon a minimum of 2/3 vote of the Board of Adjustments; 
4.  The Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings in granting a use permit under this subsection that: 
a.  Specific adjoining and/or surrounding structures and improvements detrimentally affect the site, and that unnecessary hardship, inconsistent with the objectives of this Title, would result from a strict enforcement of the zoning regulations, absent a conditional use permit under this subsection; 
b.  The structures and improvements detrimentally affecting the site have an apparent remaining usefulness indicating their continued presence and effect on the site for the foreseeable future; 
c.  Approval of this use permit will be consistent with the objectives of the General Plan; 
d.  Approval of this use permit will not result in any adverse environmental impact. 
5.  In granting of a conditional use permit under this subsection, no condition to this subsection shall be subject to variance. 
This subsection is incorporated into the zoning title in recognition of the fact that scattered multiple residential development has occurred over the years within some of the areas zoned R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 and that some of this existing development can have adverse effects on adjoining or nearby sites. It is the intent of this subsection to provide a mechanism for relief from unnecessary hardships imposed by a combination of the basic zoning provisions and existing developments by providing a means for accomplishing a transition between existing nonconforming multiple residential densities and the planned densities of the zoning district. 
L.  "Bed and Breakfast Inns" operated in conjunction with the provisions of Section 22.04.051, subject to the design review approval of exterior improvements and/or alterations pursuant to Sections 22.34.040 through 22.34.070. 
M.  Emergency response residential facilities, such as fire stations and ambulance facilities, where staff live on-site. 
N.  Wind generator, subject to the conditions listed below: 
1.  A use permit may only be considered for generators serving as an accessory use to a primary residential use. The use of a generator as a business is prohibited (only the sale of surplus power back to the utility that serves the primary residential use is permitted). 
2.  A wind generator may not be located in any minimum required yard. 
3.  The maximum permitted height, measured as the distance from the maximum height reached by the rotor or tip of the propeller blade down to the grade directly below the blade, is 25 feet. 
4.  The colors and materials of the system shall be of muted earthtones, to the extent practical, so as to minimize the visual intrusion of the equipment into its residential setting. 
5.  Noise from the system shall not exceed the requirements of Chapter 8.34, Noise Control. 
O.  Homeless Shelters, Ongoing. Homeless shelters, ongoing, within permitted religious or eleemosynary institutions. In addition to the applicable conditions of use permit approval pursuant to 22.40.070, Homeless Shelters, Ongoing, within permitted religious or eleemosynary institution, are subject to the development and operational standards of Section 22.34.230, Homeless Shelters. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 16, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1323 C.S., § II, 2005; Ord. 1066 C.S., § I, 1986; Ord. 1027 C.S., § 3, 1984; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,103.3.)  
22.12.100 - Distances Between Structures. 
A.  Garages, carports and other accessory structures may be attached to and have a common wall with the main structure on a site or may be connected with the main structure by a breezeway. 
B.  When there is more than one structure on a site, the minimum distance between a structure used for human habitation and another structure shall be 10 feet unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director. The minimum distance between structures shall be increased 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of either structure. 
(Ord. 965 C.S. § 5, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.4.)  
22.12.110 - Minimum Site Area. 
The minimum site area for R residential districts shall be as specified in Table B. 
Table B 
District 	Minimum site area 
	
R-1.5* 	10,000 square feet 
R-2.5 	3,500 square feet 
R-3.5 	4,000 square feet 
R-6.0 	6,000 square feet 
R-7.5 	7,500 square feet 
R-10. 	10,000 square feet 
R-15 	15,000 square feet 
R-20 and RR-20 	20,000 square feet 
R-40 and RR-40 	40,000 square feet 
R-65 and RR-65 	65,000 square feet 
R-80 and RR-80 	80,000 square feet 
R-100 and RR-100 	100,000 square feet 
 
Note:  *R-3.5 and R-2.5 existing sites with less than the required minimum site area shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.12.120. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.5.)  
22.12.120 - Site Area Per Dwelling Unit. 
Each site shall have an area of not less than specified in Table C. 
TABLE C 
District 	Size of Site 	Minimum Site Area Per Dwelling Unit (10 percent and flatter land) 
R-1.5 	Up to 9,999 sq. ft. 	2,500 square feet 
	10,000-19,999 sq. ft. 	1,500 square feet 
	20,000 sq. ft. 	1,500 square feet except that special consideration may be given by the Board of Adjustments to reduce the minimum site area per dwelling unit to not less than 1,250 square feet for good site planning, architectural design and landscaping. 
R-2.5 	All 	2,500 square feet 
R-3.5 	All 	3,500 square feet 
Remaining R and RR districts 	All 	Minimum site area specified in Section 22.12.110 Table B, for permitted uses 
 
Note: For all zoning districts above, the minimum site area per dwelling unit specified is only for land lying at slopes of ten percent (10%) or flatter (as defined in Sections 22.12.130 through 22.12.180). For land steeper than ten percent (10%) in slope, adjustments must be made to the minimum site area per dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of Sections 22.12.130 through 22.12.180, slope density regulations. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.6.)  
22.12.190 - Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. 
A.  Each site shall have not less than 40 feet of frontage on a public street, except that a corridor access lot having not less than 15,000 square feet of area, exclusive of corridor area, may not have less than 20 feet of frontage. 
B.  Each site shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet and shall be of width not less than prescribed in Table E. 
TABLE E 
District 	Minimum Width 	Minimum Width Corner Lot 
		
R-1.5 	60 feet 	70 feet 
R-2.5 	35 feet 	60 feet 
R-3.5 	40 feet 	50 feet 
R-6.0 	60 feet 	70 feet 
R-7.5 	70 feet 	80 feet 
R-10.0 	80 feet 	90 feet 
R-15 	100 feet 	110 feet 
R-20 and RR-20 	100 feet 	110 feet 
R-40 and RR-40 	150 feet 	150 feet 
R-65 and RR-65 	150 feet 	150 feet 
R-80 and RR-80 	150 feet 	150 feet 
R-100 and RR-100 	150 feet 	150 feet 
 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.8.)  
22.12.200 - Dwelling Units Per Site. 
Except as provided herein for the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 districts not more than one dwelling unit shall be located on a site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.9.)  
22.12.210 - Maximum Site Area Coverage. 
The maximum site area covered by structures shall be as prescribed in Table F. 
TABLE F 
District 	Maximum Coverage 
R-1.5 	40 percent 
R-2.5 	35 percent 
R-3.5 	40 percent 
R-6.0 	40 percent 
R-7.5 	35 percent 
R-10.0 	30 percent 
R-15 	30 percent 
R-20 and RR-20 	25 percent 
R-40 and RR-40 	20 percent 
R-65 and RR-65 	15 percent 
R-80 and RR-80 	10 percent 
R-100 and RR-100 	5 percent 
 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.10.)  
22.12.220 - Front Yards. 
A.  The minimum front yard shall be as prescribed in Table G subject to the exceptions listed in subsection B. 
TABLE G 
District 	Minimum Front Yard 
	
R-l.5 	10 feet 
R-2.5 	20 feet 
R-3.5 	20 feet 
R-6.0 	20 feet 
R-7.5 	20 feet 
R-10.0 	25 feet 
R-15 	25 feet 
R-20 and RR-20 	25 feet 
R-40 and RR-40 	25 feet 
R-65 and RR-65 	40 feet 
R-80 and RR-80 	50 feet 
R-100 and RR-100 	50 feet 
 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  On a site situated between sites improved with buildings, the minimum front yard shall be the average depth of the front yards on the improved sites adjoining the side lines of the site. 
2.  Where a site is not situated between sites improved with buildings and where sites comprising forty percent (40%) of the frontage on a block are improved with buildings, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the existing front yard depths in the block. 
3.  In computing average front yard depths, a depth 10 feet greater than the minimum required front yard shall be used in lieu of any greater front yard depth. 
4.  On a site having an average natural slope of thirty percent (30%) or more measured from the established grade of the street at the edge of the existing or proposed pavement to the rear line of the required front yard, a garage or carport may be constructed not less than 15 feet from the edge of the pavement, provided that in no case shall a garage or carport have a front yard of less than 3 feet. 
5.  For cul-de-sac lots which front upon the turnaround, the minimum front yard shall be 15 feet, providing the driveway is placed in such manner that a standard automobile parked in the driveway will not encroach upon the sidewalk. 
6.  On corner lots in the R-6.0 and R-7.5 districts, the front yard may be reduced to 15 feet minimum if the structure fronts upon the longer street frontage, provided there is 20 feet between the front of the garage or carport and the front property line. On corner lots in the R-10.0, R-20 and RR-20, and R-40 and RR-40 districts, the front yard may be reduced to 20 feet if the structure fronts upon the longer street frontage. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.11.)  
22.12.230 - Side Yards. 
A.  The minimum side yard shall be ten percent (10%) of the average width of the site, subject to the exceptions listed in Table H and thereafter in this section. 
TABLE H 
District 	Minimum Permitted 	Maximum Required 
		
R-1.5 	5 feet 	10 feet 
R-2.5 	5 feet 	10 feet 
R-3.5 	5 feet 	10 feet 
R-6.0 	5 feet 	10 feet 
R-7.5 	5 feet 	10 feet 
R-10.0 	5 feet 	12 feet 
R-15 	10 feet 	15 feet 
R-20 and RR-20 	10 feet 	15 feet 
R-40 and R-40 	15 feet 	25 feet 
R-80 and R-80 	25 feet 	35 feet 
R-100 and RR-100 	30 feet 	40 feet 
 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  In the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts, on the street side of a cornet lot the side yard shall be not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the average width of the site, provided that a side yard of more than 20 feet shall not be required; except where required due to the height or length of structure on the site, as detailed in subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 herein, and a side yard of less than 7 ½ feet shall not be permitted. 
2.  Except in the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts, on the street side of a corner lot the side yard shall be not less than twenty percent (20%) of the average width of the site, provided that a side yard less than twice the minimum required interior side yard shall not be permitted and a side yard of more than twice the maximum required interior side yard shall not be required; except where required due to the height or length of structure(s) on the site, as detailed by subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 herein. 
3.  Table H sets forth the minimum requirements for structures of 12 feet or less in height. For structures above 12 feet in height, 1 foot shall be added to each side yard for each 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of a structure. Second-story additions to existing one story single family structures will be permitted with side yards smaller than specified above, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The second-story addition shall not encroach into the existing side yard areas; 
b.  Provisions of Sections 22.34.030 through 22.34.070 shall apply to any such second-story additions. 
4.  Table H sets forth the minimum requirements for structures less than 40 feet in length. One foot shall be added to each side yard for each 5 feet by which a wall of a structure within 25 feet of the side property line exceeds 40 feet in length parallel to the property line. 
5.  The increases in side yards required by subdivisions 3 and 4 herein shall be additive. 
6.  A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall not be less than 10 feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.12.)  
22.12.240 - Rear Yards. 
Except for the R-1.5 and R-2.5 Districts, the minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  On a reversed corner lot the minimum rear yard shall be not less than the side yard prescribed in Section 22.12.230, provided that the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard on the adjoining key lot. 
B.  Rear yard areas may be averaged on a single site to obtain the required 25-foot rear yard; not more than 50% of the width of the structure may extend closer than 25 feet to the rear property line, nor shall any portion of the structure extend closer than 15 feet to the rear property line. 
C.  In the R-1.5 District, the minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet subject to the following exception. In the R-2.5 District, the minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  In the R-1.5 District the rear yard may be reduced to not less than 10 feet provided that 1 side yard is not less than 20 feet. 
2.  In the R-2.5 District, the rear yard may be reduced to not less than 15 feet provided 1 side yard is not less than 25 feet. 
3.  One foot shall be added to the rear yard for each 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of a structure. 
4.  On a reversed corner lot the minimum rear yard shall be not less than the side yard prescribed in Section 22.12.230, provided that the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard on the adjoining key lot. 
(Ord. 1335 C.S. § 2, 2007: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.13.)  
22.12.250 - Usable Open Space. 
The minimum usable open space per dwelling unit for multifamily residential structures in residential districts shall comply with the provisions in Table I. 
TABLE I 
District 	Minimum Usable Open Space Per Dwelling Unit 
R-1.5 	400 square feet 
R-2.5 	450 square feet 
R-3.5 	500 square feet 
 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.14.)  
22.12.260 - Height of Structures. 
Except in the R-1.5 district, the maximum height of structures shall be two stories or a maximum of 25 feet, whichever is less. In the R-1.5 district, the maximum height of structures shall be two stories over depressed parking, or a maximum of 30 feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code 10,103.15.)  
22.12.265 - Accessory Structures. 
A.  Intent. These specific limitations as to the height, number or size of accessory structures are intended to ensure adequate light, air and privacy for residential properties, balancing the appropriateness of the accessory structures' design to preserving the residential character and neighbor's privacy with the applicant's ability to fully utilize the property in accordance with all applicable standards of the City's zoning regulations. 
B.  Size and Location Limitations. Accessory structures shall conform to the maximum coverage, and minimum yard requirements of the applicable zoning district, subject to the following special limitations and exceptions: 
1.  Maximum Size. The maximum size of any 1 accessory structure is 1,000 square feet; and the total size of all accessory structures on a lot cannot exceed 50% of the main structure's gross floor area. Exceptions to these maximum size limitations may be granted with approval of a use permit. 
2.  Maximum Height. The height of an accessory structure may not exceed one story or 15 feet. Exceptions to exceed either the 1 story, or 15 feet maximum, or both, may be granted with approval of a use permit. 
3.  Exceptions to Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Structures Within Minimum Required Rear Yards. Provided that the accessory structure(s) do not cover more than 25% of the minimum rear yard otherwise required by Section 22.12.240 Rear Yards, accessory structure(s) may be placed, or partially placed, within such minimum required rear yards, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A minimum setback of 5 feet shall be maintained from the rear and interior side property lines that are adjacent to the otherwise required minimum rear yard. 
b.  Accessory structures in the minimum required rear yards of corner lots shall be no closer to the street-side side property line than the minimum street-side side yard required by Section 22.12.230, Side Yards. 
c.  Accessory structures in the minimum required rear yards of reverse corner lots shall be no closer to the rear property line than the minimum permitted side yard of the adjoining key lot as required by Section 22.12.230(A), Table H, Side Yards. 
4.  Special Limitations for Keeping of Animals. Accessory structures, where permitted for the housing of animals, such as horse stables and paddocks, chicken coops, rabbit hitches and similar structures, shall maintain the minimum setbacks from property lines and dwelling as prescribed in Section 22.12.080, Permitted Uses in R-Residential Districts. Other accessory structures which, in the option of the Community Development Director, are not customarily or incidental to the main residential use of the property, require use permit approval. 
(Ord. 1335 C.S. § 3, 2007.)  
22.12.270 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
A.  Off-street parking shall be provided for residential development in accordance with the requirements of Section 22.36.030 of this title. 
B.  Parking and loading facility requirements for nonresidential uses and loading facility requirements for apartment hotels in excess of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, shall comply with the regulations prescribed in Chapter 22.36 of this title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,103.16.)  
CHAPTER 22.13 - DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT (D) 
 
22.13.010 - Purposes. 
In addition to the purposes prescribed in Sections 22.02.010, 22.12.020 and 22.12.320 of this title, the D Overlay District (Exhibit "A") is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To recognize the existing higher density development of detached and attached units, duplexes, triplexes and multifamily units on lots generally ranging from 4,000 to 6,000 square feet in some areas of the downtown residential district and that single family development in these areas may be inappropriate; 
B.  To provide a transition between these higher density developments and adjacent single family residences; 
C.  To promote the stability and viability of existing residential neighborhoods in the downtown area and maintain the small town, character and historic setting of Downtown Martinez; 
D.  To encourage future infill development of vacant and under utilized land that reinforces existing architectural styles and at a density to support higher quality development; 
E.  To encourage the renovation and rehabilitation of existing housing that will enhance the existing downtown neighborhoods; 
F.  To encourage the consolidation of lots to provide flexibility and innovative design solutions that improve the use of space to accommodate a variety of dwelling options near the downtown commercial district. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996.)  
22.13.020 - Permitted Uses. 
The permitted uses in the D District shall be the permitted uses of each individual residential zone district which has been combined with the overlay zone. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996.)  
22.13.030 - Conditional Uses. 
The conditional uses in the D District shall be the conditional uses of each individual residential zone district which has been combined with the overlay zone. In addition, with a use permit, the following increases in density from the individual residential zone or exceptions from the zoning requirements may be permitted: 
A.  Properties may be developed to meet the R-1.5 density standards in the R-2.5 District and the R-2.5 density standards in the R-3.5 District; 
B.  Properties. 
1.  adjoining, on one or both sides, parcels with existing multiple family residential structures; or 
2.  with multiple family residential structures across the street for more than one half of the entire block frontage; 
may be developed as multi-family projects at the average density (rounded off to the nearest whole unit) of the two adjoining properties or the average density (rounded off to the nearest whole unit) of the properties across the street and adjoining properties together, whichever is greater. 
C.  A front yard setback of 10 feet may be permitted for the main structure, if the Planning Commission can make the finding that it would be consistent with and not detrimental to the existing development in the neighborhood. 
D.  A minimum of one covered parking space per unit may be approved with a use permit, if the Planning Commission can make the findings that: 
1.  One parking space per unit would be sufficient for the proposed development; 
2.  There would be sufficient overflow street parking; and 
3.  Reducing the parking standards would not be detrimental to the neighborhood. 
E.  The Planning Commission shall make the following additional findings in granting a use permit under this section: 
1.  That the residential development will complement and be compatible with the existing residential community and reflect the historic ambiance of the downtown residential district, 
2.  That the architecture, landscaping and site plan of the residential development will result in a significantly better environment than otherwise would have occurred under the existing zone district requirements. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996)  
22.13.040 - Distances Between Structures; Minimum Site Area; Frontage, Width and Depth of Site; Usable Open Space. 
The required distances between structures, minimum site area, frontage, width and depth of the site, usable open space shall be those of the R Residential zone with which the D overlay district is combined, namely those specified in Section 22.12.100, 22.12.110, 22.12.190, 22.12.230, 22.33.050, 22.12.250 stat. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1; 1996; Ord. 1247 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.13.050 - Site Area Per Dwelling Unit. 
With a use permit, the following increases in density of the individual residential zone district specified below with which the D Overlay District is combined may be permitted 
District 	Minimum Site Area Per Dwelling Unit 
R-l.5 	1250 square feet 
R-2.5 	1500 square feet 
R-3.5 	2500 square feet 
 
Averaging the Number of Allowed Units - a fraction of a unit shall be rounded up so it equals one unit. 
(Ord. 1247 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.13.060 - Maximum Site Area Coverage. 
The maximum site area covered by structures shall be 45%. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996)  
22.13.070 - Front Yards. 
A.  The minimum front yard shall be the average of the two sides adjoining properties to a maximum required of 20 feet except, as permitted with a use permit (see 22.13.030 C.). 
B.  The minimum distance between garage door (roll-up door required) and the sidewalk shall be 15 feet or the average of the existing garages adjacent to the property. A carport may be 10 feet behind the sidewalk. 
C.  Exceptions: 
1.  All exceptions noted in Section 22.12.220. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996.)  
22.13.080 - Side Yards. 
The minimum side yard shall be 5 feet for a one-story structure up to 12 feet high, 10 feet for a two-story structure and one-story structure over 12 feet high. On a corner lot, the minimum street side yard setback shall be 10 feet. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996)  
22.13.090 - Rear Yards. 
The minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet subject to the following exception: 
Rear yard areas may be averaged on a single site to obtain the required 15-foot rear yard not more than fifty percent (50%) of the width of the structure may extend closer than 15 feet to the rear property line, nor shall any portion of the structure extend closer than 10 feet to the rear property. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996)  
22.13.100 - Height of Structures. 
The maximum height of structures shall be the average height of buildings on adjacent properties of two stories (maximum of 25 feet, whichever is higher) above the 100-year flood plain except in the R-1.5 and R-2.5 districts and for development under the R-2.5 standards where two stories over concealed parking (maximum of 30 feet) shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S. § 1, 1996)  
CHAPTER 22.14 - PA PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE DISTRICTS 
 
22.14.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 3 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.15.) 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title, the PA professional and administrative office district is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes to: 
A.  Reserve appropriately located areas for harmonious transitional uses to serve as buffers between residential districts and commercial or industrial districts; 
B.  Provide opportunities for professional and administrative offices of a semi-commercial character to locate outside of commercial districts; 
C.  Create a suitable environment for major public buildings and for community facilities and institutions which appropriately may be located in professional and administrative office districts; 
D.  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern professional and administrative offices, including off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate, off-street loading of trucks; 
E.  Minimize traffic congestion and to avoid overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
F.  Protect professional and administrative offices from the noise, disturbance, traffic hazards, safety hazards and other objectionable influences incidental to commercial uses; 
G.  Protect professional and administrative offices from the noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and truck traffic incidental to industrial use. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.0.)  
22.14.030 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  All uses permitted in an R-1.5 district, provided that the minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 1,500 square feet; 
B.  Professional and administrative offices not including any of the uses prescribed in Sections 22.16.040B and 22.16.070B of this Title; 
C.  Public administration buildings and grounds excepting schools; 
D.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Section 22.36.020 of this title; 
E.  Churches, parsonages, parish houses, monasteries, convents and other religious institutions; 
F.  Public and private philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions; 
G.  Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes, not including hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes for mental or drug addict or liquor addict cases; 
H.  Private, noncommercial clubs and lodges; 
I.  Union halls; 
j.  Public and private libraries, museums and art galleries; 
K.  Telephone exchanges; 
L.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a permitted use. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.1.)  
22.14.040 - Conditional Uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this title: 
A.  Private schools and colleges; 
B.  Pumping stations, power stations, drainage ways and structures, storage tanks and transmission lines found by the City Planning Commission to be necessary for the public health, safety or welfare; 
C.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a conditional use; 
D.  Group care and rehabilitation facilities (other than State authorized, certified or licensed family care, foster home or group home serving 6 or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons); 
E.  Child Daycare Facilities. 
(Ord.  1115 C.S. § III 1988: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.2.) 
F.  Lunch wagons, except Downtown (north of Green Street, south of Marina Vista, between Berrellesa and Court Streets), provided that on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
1.  The use will not be detrimental to other businesses in the area. 
2.  The use will not create a safety hazard. 
3.  The use will meet the Design Review Criteria and Standards, Chapter 22.34.045. 
4.  The use will not be a nuisance to neighboring properties especially residences. 
G.  Veterinary offices and small animal hospitals including short-term boarding of animals and incidental care such as bathing and trimming, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building which complies with specifications of soundproof construction which shall be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1274 C.S. § 1, 2000; Ord. 1245 C.S. § 1 (part) 1997.)  
22.14.050 - Required Condition. 
The following conditions shall be required of all uses in the PA district: 
A.  All professional pursuits and administrative enterprises shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas; 
B.  No sales, production, repair or processing shall be permitted except in a medical or dental laboratory accessory to a professional office; 
C.  No use shall be permitted and no process equipment materials shall be employed which are found by the City Planning Commission to be objectionable to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or truck traffic or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.3.)  
22.14.060 - Distances Between Structures. 
A.  Garages, carports and other accessory structures may be attached to and have a common wall with the main structure on a site or may be connected with the main structure by a breezeway; 
B.  Where there is more than one structure on a site, the minimum distance between a structure used for human habitation and another structure shall be 10 feet. The minimum distance between structures shall be increased 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of either structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.4.)  
22.14.070 - Site Area. 
The minimum site area shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.5.)  
22.14.080 - Frontage and Width of Site. 
Each site shall have not less than 40 feet of frontage on a Public street and shall have a width of not less than 60 feet subject to the exception that the width of a corner lot shall not be less than 70 feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.6.)  
22.14.090 - Coverage. 
The maximum site area covered by structures shall be fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975 prior code § 10,104.7.)  
22.14.100 - Front Yard. 
The minimum front yard shall be 10 feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.8.)  
22.14.110 - Side Yard. 
The minimum side yard shall be ten percent (10%) of the average width of the site provided that a side yard of more than 10 feet shall not be required and a side yard of less than 5 feet shall not be permitted, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  On the street side of a corner lot the side yard shall not be less than 10 feet; 
B.  One foot shall be added to each side yard for each 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of the structure; 
C.  Where the side property line of a site of a professional office or an administrative office adjoins property in an R district, the side yard adjoining the R district shall be not less than 20 feet and a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. In addition, the Board of Adjustments shall require that 5 feet adjoining the property line be landscaped with plant materials and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to ensure privacy, to screen unsightliness or to insulate adjoining dwellings against noise; 
D.  A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall be not less than 10 feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.9.)  
22.14.120 - Rear Yard. 
The minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  One foot shall be added to the minimum rear yard for each 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of the structure; 
B.  Where the rear property line of a site of a professional office or an administrative office adjoins property in an R district the rear yard shall be not less than 35 feet and a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. In addition, the Board of Adjustments shall require that the 5 feet adjoining the property line be landscaped with plant materials and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to ensure privacy, to screen unsightliness or to insulate adjoining dwellings against noise. 
C.  Accessory structures not exceeding 12 feet in height, including garages and carports, garden structures, greenhouses and storage buildings may be located in a required rear yard except on a reversed corner lot. 
(Ord. 8220 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.10.)  
22.14.130 - Usable Open Space. 
Minimum usable open space in the PA district shall be 400 square feet per residential dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.11.)  
22.14.140 - Height of Structures. 
No Structures shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.12.)  
22.14.150 - Landscaped Areas. 
The required front yard, the required rear yard on a double frontage lot, and not less than 5 feet of the required side yard adjoining the side lot line on the street side of a corner lot shall be landscaped and permanently maintained. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.13.)  
22.14.160 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
A.  Off-street parking shall be provided for office development, in accordance with the requirements of Section 22.36.040; 
B.  For residential uses, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 22.36.030; 
C.  Dimensions and locations of required parking spaces shall conform to the regulations prescribed in Chapter 22.36 of this Title; 
D.  Loading facility requirements for other uses, and for structures in excess of 5,000 square feet gross floor area shall comply with the regulations prescribed in Chapter 22.36 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,104.14.)  
CHAPTER 22.15 - PURPOSES OF R and D DISTRICT 
 
22.15.010 - Purpose. 
The Research and Development District is designed to create and maintain sites for a limited group of research and development uses which may have special requirements for space and desire sites in a research park environment. 
A.  The intent of said District is to establish a high standard of development which emphasized quality design in a campus environment. Generally, uses within the Research and Development District shall be non-polluting, technologically oriented and compatible with adjoining uses; 
B.  A campus design shall be generally defined as one which utilizes a superior landscape plan, considers pedestrian orientation within the project, and physical amenities such as paths, trails and quality architectural design; 
C.  In no way shall the Research and Development use pose any hazard to the health and safety of the community. No by-products of any process shall create an injurious condition. 
(Ord. 992 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
22.15.020 - Permitted Uses. 
Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the Research and Development District; 
A.  Professional, executive and administrative offices; (uses which are consistent with the purposes of the R and D District); 
B.  Research laboratories; 
C.  Accessory facilities and activities customarily associated with or essential to permitted uses; 
D.  Financial institutions; 
E.  Manufacturing, assembly and packaging of electric and electronic instruments and devices such as computers, phonographs, radio and television sets. The Planning Commission will however, reserve the right to review these manufacturing uses and may propose additional conditions pertaining, but not limited, to potential impacts, such as noise, hours of operation and hazardous waste disposal; 
F.  Health clubs. 
(Ord. 1053 C.S. § I 1985: Ord. 992 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
22.15.030 - Conditional Uses. 
The following uses may be conditionally allowed in the Research and Development District, subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit: 
A.  Limited commercial facilities which are incidental to and primarily serve R & D, such as restaurants (non take-out), copying services, motels, business supplies, etc., provided that the Board of Adjustments finds that the proposed use will: 
1.  Be oriented to, incidental to, and serve, an R & D development; 
2.  Be a use not able to be located (or already found) on nearby existing commercially-zoned property; 
B.  Private clubs, lounges, or fraternal orders; 
C.  Other manufacturing and assembly and packaging uses, not in permitted uses, when it can be demonstrated the use will be non-polluting and not conflict with any adjoining land uses; 
D.  Blueprinting, photostating, photo engraving, printing, publishing and book binding. 
(Ord. 1053 C.S. § II, 1985: Ord. 992 C.S. § 1, 1983.) 
E.  Public and private schools, colleges and related facilities. 
(Ord. 1161 C.S. § I, 1991.)  
22.15.040 - Site Development Regulations; Required Conditions. 
The following site development regulations shall apply in the R & D District: 
A.  Site Area: Minimum site area shall be one acre; 
B.  Site Width: Minimum site width shall be 100 ft; 
C.  Site Depth: Minimum site depth shall be 150 ft; 
D.  Front Yard: Minimum front yard shall be 30 ft; 
E.  Side and Rear Yards: The minimum side yard shall be 20 ft. The minimum rear yard shall be 25 ft. Where the lot has its side or rear yard adjacent to any residential district, a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 ft. in height shall be located on the property line. Additionally, 5 ft. adjoining the property line shall be landscaped with plant materials and permanently maintained; 
F.  Maximum Site Coverage: Thirty percent (30%) of the site area; 
G.  Height of Buildings: A structure may be two (2) stories, not to exceed 36 ft., in height; 
H.  Landscaping: Landscaping shall be considered as an integral part of any development plan. All landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission; 
I.  Parking: Parking shall be constructed at a ratio established by Section 22.36 for the proposed use. Parking areas shall be a major design feature of the site plan and considered by the Planning Commission. 
The Commission may require fewer parking spaces when it can be adequately demonstrated by the applicant the proposal will demand less parking than required by Code. 
Parking area development shall comply to all regulations stipulated in Chapter 22.36.080 through 210 of the Municipal Code. 
J.  Design Review: No building shall be constructed or moved onto any building site, nor any existing main building enlarged, remodeled or otherwise altered on the exterior, nor shall any landscaping previously required pursuant to any permit be altered, nor shall any parking layout or dimension be altered until the design plan and site plan have been approved by the Martinez Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1053 C.S. § II, 1985: Ord. 992 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
22.15.050 - Required Conditions. 
A.  When a proposal within the district involves the use, manufacturing or disposal of toxic, hazardous, or otherwise dangerous materials and by-products, the proposal shall be reviewed by the State Department of Health and Department of Resources for recommendations pertaining to the safe handling of such materials. 
B.  All uses shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas and outdoor dining areas, and other uses specifically approved by permit. 
C.  All uses have a minimum of 40% (forty percent) of gross floor area devoted to office design or laboratory space unless otherwise specifically approved by Use Permit. 
(Ord. 1053 C.S. § IV, 1985: Ord. 992 C.S. § 1, 1983.)  
CHAPTER 22.16 - C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 
22.16.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.10.)  
22.16.020 - Purposes. 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title, the C Commercial Districts are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  Provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices, service establishments, amusement establishments and wholesale businesses offering various ranges of commodities and services scaled to meet the needs of the different geographical areas and various categories of patrons they serve; 
B.  Provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service establishments and wholesale businesses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
C.  Provide space for community facilities and institutions which appropriately may be located in commercial areas; 
D.  Provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas; 
E.  Minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
F.  Protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic and other objectionable influences incidental to industrial uses; 
G.  Protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.0.)  
22.16.030 - Permitted Uses—Generally. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the commercial districts as set out in Sections 22.16.040 through 22.16.070. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 1 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.1 (part).)  
22.16.040 - Permitted Uses—NC—Neighborhood Commercial District. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  Professional and administrative offices; 
B.  Retail stores and service establishments which supply commodities or provide services primarily to meet the needs of residents of a residential neighborhood, including: 
Art and antique stores 
Art and craft schools and colleges 
Artist supply stores 
Bakery goods stores 
Banks 
Barbershops and beauty shops 
Bookstores and rental libraries 
Business, professional, and trade schools and colleges 
Candy stores 
Cleaning and laundry agencies, including the use of 1 synthetic dry cleaning machine using noninflammable and nonexplosive solvents and having a capacity of not more than 40 pounds per cycle 
Clothing stores 
Department stores 
Drugstores 
Dry goods stores 
Florists 
Food lockers 
Food stores, delicatessens and supermarkets 
Furniture stores 
Garden shops 
Gift shops 
Gymnasiums 
Hardware stores 
Hobby shops 
Household appliance stores 
Interior decorating shops 
Jewelry stores 
Leather goods and luggage stores 
Locksmiths 
Medical and orthopedic appliance stores 
Messenger offices 
Millinery shops 
Music and dance studios 
Music stores 
Newsstands 
Office and business machine stores 
Offices and office buildings other than professional and administrative offices 
Optician and optometrist shops 
Paint and wallpaper stores 
Pet and bird stores 
Photographic supply stores 
Photography studios 
Picture framing shops 
Post offices 
Pressing establishments 
Radio and television repair shops 
Realtors and real estate sales offices 
Restaurants, but not including restaurants serving alcoholic beverages, except beer and wine only 
Scientific instrument stores 
Self-service laundries and/or self-service dry cleaning machines using noninflammable and nonexplosive solvents 
Shoe repair shops 
Shoe stores 
Soda fountains 
Sporting goods stores 
Stamp and coin stores 
Stationery and office supply stores 
Tailor and dressmaking shops 
Telegraph offices 
Telephone exchanges 
Toy stores 
Travel bureaus 
Umbrella repair shops 
Variety stores 
Watch and clock repair shops and other uses which are added to this list by the City Planning Commission in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title; 
C.  Dwelling units located above the ground floor of a building shall be permitted on a site with an area of not less than 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit; 
D.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Chapter 22.36 of this Title; 
E.  Lodging houses and apartment hotels; 
F.  Accessory structures and uses, not including warehouses on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a permitted use; 
G.  Christmas tree sales lots, nurseries, and garden supply stores, provided that all equipment, supplies and merchandise other than plants shall be kept within a completely enclosed building and that fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in packaged form only. 
(Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 8, 2-5-2014; Ord. 1290 C.S. § 1, 2001; Ord. 1284 C.S. § 1, 2001; Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.1(a).)  
22.16.050 - Permitted Uses—CC—Central Commercial District. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  All the uses permitted in Section 22.16.040; 
B.  Retail stores and service establishments including: 
Addressograph stores 
Auction rooms 
Bicycle shops 
Blueprint and photostat shops 
Bus depots and transit stations provided that no business or other transit vehicles shall be stored on the site and no repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on the site 
Clothing and costume rental establishments 
Department stores 
Electrical appliance repair shops 
Hand laundries 
Household repair shops 
Laboratories 
Musical instrument repair shops 
Plumbing, heating and ventilating equipment showrooms with storage of floor samples only 
Printing shops 
Radio and television broadcasting studios 
Sign painting shops 
Soda fountains 
Taxidermists 
Telephone exchanges 
Upholstering shops 
Wholesale establishments without stocks and other uses added to this list by the Planning Commission in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title; 
C.  Private clubs and lodges; 
D.  Churches and other religious institutions; 
E.  Public and private philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions; 
F.  Public and private libraries, art galleries and museums; 
G.  Automobile supply stores; hotels and motels; mortuaries. 
(Ord. 1284 C.S. § 2, 2001; Ord. 1042 C.S. § I, 1985: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.1(b).)  
22.16.060 - Permitted Uses—TC—Thoroughfare Commercial District. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  All the uses permitted in Sections 22.16.040F, G and 22.16.050G; 
B.  Automobile sales and services. 
Bowling Alleys 
Repair garages 
Restaurants 
Trailer sales and service 
Veterinarians' offices and small animal hospitals including short-term boarding of animals and incidental care such as bathing and trimming, providing that all operations are conducted within a completely enclosed building which complies with the standards of sound proof construction which shall be prescribed by the Board of Adjustments. 
Other uses which may be added to this list by the City Planning Commission in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.1(c).)  
22.16.065 - Permitted Uses—CR—Commercial Recreation District. 
Permitted uses are as follows; 
A.  Aquariums 
Arboretums 
Archery ranges 
Auditoriums 
Billiard and pool halls 
Bowling alleys 
Botanical gardens 
Campgrounds 
Clubs providing game playing areas with spectator facilities, including tennis, handball, volleyball courts, racquet ball, basketball and squash. 
Community centers and recreational buildings 
Cultural centers 
Dance halls and studios 
Electronic games 
Fishing ponds 
Golf courses and driving ranges 
Gymnasium 
Horse training, boarding and stabling facilities and horse riding 
Museums 
Physical fitness and health clubs which are part of a complex and are not sole occupant of a building 
Skating rinks 
Swimming pools 
Theaters within an enclosed building 
Shooting galleries within an enclosed building. 
B.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as such permitted use. 
C.  Other commercial recreation and outdoor uses not specifically listed above which are similar to and are no more objectionable than those listed may be permitted upon approval by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 931 C.S., § 1, 1980.)  
22.16.066 - Conditional Uses—CR—Commercial Recreation District. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title. 
Conditional uses are as follows: 
A.  Animal menageries 
Amusement parks 
Amphitheaters or open-air theaters 
Bicycle riding recreation facilities including riding tracks and bicycle motocrosses (non-motorized) 
Carnivals 
Drive-in theaters 
Cafes and night clubs 
Hotels and motels 
Horse tracks 
Miniature golf 
Music studios 
Open-air markets 
Outdoor shooting galleries 
Car race tracks (motorized vehicle) 
Restaurants (not including fast food) contained in a free standing building in which the restaurant is the sole occupant or combined with a bar, cocktail lounge, live entertainment or dancing 
Skateboard parks 
Sports arena 
Trap shooting 
Water slides 
2 All uses permitted in Section 22.16.040 A and B when not abutting other commercial or office districts and not occupying more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot area (including required parking) 
B.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use. 
C.  Other uses not specifically listed above which are similar to and are no more objectionable than those listed may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 931 C.S. § 2, 1980.)  
22.16.070 - Permitted Uses—SC—Service Commercial District. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  All the uses permitted in Section 22.16.050A and B; 
B.  Commercial service establishments, including: 
Automobile repairing, overhauling rebuilding and painting 
Automobile sales and service 
Automobile upholstery and top shops 
Automobile washing including the use of mechanical conveyors, blowers and steam cleaning 
Bakeries 
Blacksmith shops 
Boat sales and service 
Bookbinding 
Bottle works 
Building materials yards other than gravel, rock or cement yards 
Cabinet shops 
Carpenters shops 
Carpet and rug cleaning and dyeing 
Catering shops 
Cleaning and dyeing 
Cold storage plants 
Contractors' equipment rental yards 
Contractors' storage yards 
Dairy products plants 
Diaper supply services 
Electrical repair shops 
Exterminators 
Feed and fuel stores 
Freight forwarding terminals 
Glass shops 
Heating and ventilating shops 
Household and office equipment and machinery repair shops 
Ice storage houses 
Kennels located not closer than 500 feet to an R District or a PA District 
Laundries 
Linen supply services 
Live storage, killing or dressing of poultry or rabbits for retail sale on the premises, located not closer than 500 feet to an R District or a PA District 
Lumberyards not including planning mills or saw mills 
Machinery sales and rentals 
Mattress repair shops 
Motorcycle sales and services 
Nurseries and garden supply stores 
Packing and crating 
Parcel delivery service 
Photographic developing and printing 
Plumbing shops 
Printing, lithographing and engraving 
Public utility structures and installations 
Railroad stations 
Refrigeration equipment 
Repair garages 
Safe and vault repairing 
Sheet metal shops 
Small animal boarding located not closer than 500 feet to an R District or a PA District 
Stone and monument yards 
Storage yards for commercial vehicle 
Tire sales, retreading and recapping 
Tool or cutlery sharpening or, grinding 
Trailer sales and services 
Transit yards 
Trucking terminals 
Used car sales 
Veterinarians' offices and small animal hospitals located not closer than 500 feet to an R District or PA District 
Veterinarians' offices and small animal hospitals including short-term boarding of animals and incidental care such as bathing and trimming, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building which complies with specifications of soundproof construction which shall be prescribed by the Board of Adjustments 
Warehouses except for the storage or flammable liquids 
Welding shops 
Wholesale establishments and other uses which are added to this list by the City Planning Commission in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title; 
C.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for off-street parking facilities in Chapter 22.36 of this Title; 
D.  Accessory structures and uses on the same site with and necessary to the operation of a permitted use. 
E.  Homeless Shelters, Emergency. Homeless shelters, emergency, subject to the development and operational standards of Section 22.34.230, Homeless Shelters. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 17, 2-19-2014; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10.105.1(d).)  
22.16.080 - Conditional Uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title. 
A.  Pumping stations, power stations, drainage ways and structures, storage tanks and transmission lines found by the City Planning Commission to be necessary for the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  Gasoline service stations, except as follows: 
1.  The NC and CC Districts shall not include automotive repair services; all operations except the sale of gasoline and oil shall be conducted within a building enclosed on at least 3 sides; 
2.  A gasoline filling station, when permitted on the granting of a use permit, shall be permitted on a corner provided that all signs, gasoline filling pumps and other equipment, including vehicles tending to obstruct the sight distance, shall be located at least 25 feet from the street line and side property line; 
3.  Any existing gasoline service station which, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section, provides automotive service, repair, maintenance, accessory sales and installation and/or other related services or products as authorized pursuant to this Title, or maintains the availability of air and water for tires, batteries, radiators, etc., shall not discontinue such services, product availability or maintenance without first receiving approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title. In considering any such conditional use permit application, the Board of Adjustments shall, in addition to complying with the provisions of Sections 22.40.070 (A) (1) through (3), not grant such permit unless it also finds that: 
The proposed discontinuation of service, product availability and/or facility availability and maintenance would not have a significant adverse effect, either by itself or by virtue of the cumulative effects of other similar actions, on the general motoring public, particularly including aged and/or handicapped individuals who may be dependent on such services, products or facilities. 
C.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a conditional use. 
D.  Bars. Provided that on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, in addition to the findings required pursuant to Section 22.40. 070, a Conditional Use Permit shall be granted only if the Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Commission, or City Council, on appeal, makes all of the following additional findings of fact: 
1.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the welfare of the area residents, or result in an undue concentration of establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages in the area. 
2.  The proposed use is located at an appropriate distance from: 
a.  Religious facilities, schools, public parks and playgrounds, and other similar uses; and 
b.  The size and proposed activity level (i.e., music, entertainment activities, food service, arcade games, or other amusement activities, etc.) will be compatible with the uses in and/or character of, the surrounding area. 
3.  The applicant has committed to voluntarily provide a beverage service training program, should one be made available locally on a no-charge basis for employees who sell or dispense alcoholic beverages, and would provide them with the knowledge and skills needed to comply with their responsibilities under state law, including the following topics; 
a.  State laws relating to alcoholic beverages, particularly ABC regulations and penal provisions concerning sales to minors and intoxicated persons, driving under the influence, hours of legal operation, and penalties for violations of these laws; 
b.  The potential legal liabilities of owners and employees of businesses dispensing alcoholic beverages to patrons who may subsequently injure, kill, or harm themselves or others as a result of the excessive consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
c.  Alcohol as a drug and its effects on the body and behavior, including the operation of motor vehicles; 
d.  Methods of dealing with intoxicated customers and recognizing underage customers; 
e.  Methods to appropriately pace customer drinking to reduce the risk that the customer will leave the premises in an intoxicated manner; 
f.  Knowledge of mixology, including marketable alternatives to alcoholic beverages. 
4.  Nonconforming Uses. Establishments which were legally operating prior to March 7, 2014 may continue to operate as nonconforming uses in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 22.38 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots). In addition to those provisions, nonconforming establishments shall be required to apply for a use permit in compliance with this Section, if any of the following occur after March 7, 2014: 
a.  The existing establishment requests permission for the ABC to change the establishments ABC license in any manner, including a change to the character or type of the license or a change in ownership; 
b.  The establishment's license is revoked by the ABC; 
c.  The establishment's liquor license is suspended for more than 45 days by the ABC; or 
d.  There is a 20 percent or larger expansion of the area within the establishment that is designated for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
E.  On-sale alcoholic beverage sales operated in conjunction with a bona-fide public eating place, which provides meals, which are prepared on-site in a full commercial kitchen conforming to all current requirements of the Contra Costa County Health Services Department, the Municipal Code of the City of Martinez and the City Building Official, but not including restaurants serving only beer, wine or both beer and wine. 
F.  In the NC-Neighborhood Commercial District: 
1.  Private clubs and lodges; 
2.  Churches and other religious institutions; 
3.  Public and private philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions; 
4.  Public and private libraries, art galleries and museums; 
5.  Bowling alleys; 
6.  Drive-in restaurants; 
7.  Take-out restaurants; 
8.  Bakeries and other specialty food establishments which bake or prepare goods primarily for retail sale from the same location; 
9.  Nightclubs; 
10.  Child daycare facilities. 
G.  In the TC-Thoroughfare Commercial District: 
1.  Drive-in restaurant; 
2.  Take-out restaurants. 
H.  In the SC-Service District: 
1.  Light manufacturing uses involving only the assembly, packaging, repairing or processing of previously prepared material, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  All activities, except incidental storage shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building; 
b.  The building shall be so constructed, the machinery and equipment shall be so installed and maintained, and the activity shall be so conducted so that all odor, dust, dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, illumination, glare and all other objectionable factors shall be confined or reduced to the extent that no annoyance or injury shall result to persons residing or working in the vicinity or to property located in the vicinity; 
c.  No machine shall be used which has more than 5 horsepower capacity; 
d.  No punch press exceeding 5 tons rated capacity and no drop hammer or automatic screw machine shall be used. 
2.  Commercial amusement establishments including amusement parks, carnivals, circuses and other transient amusement enterprises. 
I.  Dog fanciers' permit on sites of 20,000 square feet or more. 
J.  In N-C and C-C Districts: Group care and rehabilitation facilities. 
K.  In CC Districts: Commercial Amusement establishments in buildings, including card rooms, nightclubs, dance halls, bowling alleys, video arcades, skating rinks, theatres, and auditoriums. 
L.  In CC Districts: Retail stores listed in Section 22.16.050(B) which have a regional market area. 
M.  Lunch wagons, except downtown (north of Green Street, south of Marina Vista, between Berrellesa and Court Streets) provided that on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
1.  The use will not be detrimental to other businesses in the area; 
2.  The use will not create a safety hazard; 
3.  The use will meet the Design Review Criteria and Standards, Section 22.34.045; 
4.  The use will not be a nuisance to neighboring properties especially residences. 
N.  In the NC, CC, SC and TC Districts: Medical Marijuana dispensaries which shall only be permitted in accordance with Chapter 22.40. 
O.  In the NC District: 
1.  Clinics; 
2.  Liquor stores; 
3.  Massage Parlors. 
Provided that on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, in addition to the findings required pursuant to Section 22.40.070, a Conditional Use Permit shall be granted only if the Planning Commission, or the City Council, on appeal, makes all of the following additional findings of fact: 
a.  The use will not be detrimental to other businesses in the area. 
b.  The use as proposed and at the location requested, will not create a potentially adverse impact on surrounding uses. 
c.  Approval of the use will not constitute an over-concentration of this use within a given commercial area. 
d.  The proposed use will not result in the substantial aggravation of crime problems or make law enforcement unduly difficult. 
e.  The operation of the use will not be a nuisance to neighboring properties or businesses. 
P.  In the CC Districts, retail stores and service establishments, subject to the findings listed in subsection (O) of this Section including: 
1.  Gunsmith shops; 
2.  Secondhand stores and pawnshops; 
3.  Bail bond shops (on or above the second floor, not on sites with frontage on Main Street or Ferry Street); 
4.  Check cashing shops; 
5.  Tattoo and body piercing parlors; 
6.  Billiard halls; 
7.  All conditional uses in the NC District. 
Q.  In the CC District: 
1.  Parcel delivery services including garage facilities for delivery trucks but excluding repair shop facilities; 
2.  Storage buildings for household goods (including mini-storage and self-storage facilities); 
3.  Storage garages; 
4.  Hotels and motels; 
5.  Dwelling units (located above the ground floor of a building, or at the rear of the ground floor, if the site fronts on Main Street or Ferry Street) may be allowed, with a site area per unit of not less than 1000 square feet. 
R.  In the SC District, all Conditional Uses, in the NC or CC Districts, subject to the same findings as required by the NC or CC District. 
S.  DN-N-C, CC, SC and TC Districts activities devoted primarily to the sale or exchange of tobacco-related products. 
T.  Homeless Shelters, Ongoing. Homeless shelters, ongoing, within permitted religious or eleemosynary institutions. In addition to the applicable conditions of use permit approval pursuant to 22.40.070, Homeless Shelters, Ongoing, within permitted religious or eleemosynary institution, are subject to the development and operational standards of Section 22.34.230, Homeless Shelters. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 18, 2-19-2014; Ord. No. 1377 C.S., § 9, 2-5-2014; Ord. 1328 C.S., § 6, 2006; Ord. 1290 C.S., § 2, 2001; Ord. 1284 C.S., § 3, 2001; Ord. 1277 C.S., § 4, 2000.)  
22.16.090 - Required Conditions-Generally. 
The following conditions shall be required of uses within the C-Commercial Districts as set out in Sections 22.16.100 through 22.16.160. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3 (part).)  
22.16.100 - Required Conditions-Specifications Generally. 
No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be employed which are found by the City Planning Commission to be objectionable to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, refuse, dirt, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or heavy truck traffic or to involve a hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,150.3(a).)  
22.16.110 - Required Conditions—NC and CC Districts. 
In the NC and CC Districts all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations outdoor dining areas, nurseries, garden shops and Christmas tree sales lots. A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, on a site abutting on or across a street or alley from an R District or a PA District shall be screened by a solid masonry wall, board fence or compact evergreen hedge not less than 6 feet in height if found by the Board of Adjustments to be unsightly. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3(b).)  
22.16.120 - Required Conditions—TC and SC Districts. 
In the TC and SC Districts, a business, service or process which is not conducted within a completely enclosed structure and which is located on a site abutting on or across a street or alley from property in an R, PA, NC or CC District, shall be required to be screened either by a solid masonry wall, board fence or compact evergreen hedge not less than 6 feet in height if found by the Board of Adjustments to be unsightly. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3(c).)  
22.16.130 - Required Conditions—SC District. 
In the SC District, open storage or materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded by a solid masonry wall board, fence or compact evergreen hedge (with gates where necessary) not less than 6 feet in height, provided that neither the area nor the wall fence or hedge shall be located in any required front yard or any required side yard on the street side of a corner lot and provided further that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall, fence or hedge. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3(d).)  
22.16.140 - Required Conditions—NC District—Products to be Sold Where Produced. 
In the NC District, all products produced on the site. Of any of the permitted uses shall be sold primarily at retail on the site where produced. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3(e).)  
22.16.150 - Required Conditions—NC District—Number of Employees. 
In the NC district not more than five (5) persons shall be engaged in the production, repair or processing of materials, except that this provision shall not apply to bars, restaurants and soda fountains. 
(Ord. 822. C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.3(f).)  
22.16.160 - Required Conditions—CC District. 
In the CC District, not more than ten (10) persons shall be engaged in the production, repair or processing of materials, except that this provision shall not apply to bars, restaurants and soda fountains. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § l0,105.3(g).)  
22.16.165 - Required Conditions—CR District. 
In the CR District, a commercial recreation use which is not conducted within a completely enclosed structure and which is located on a site abutting or across a street from a property in the R or PA district, shall be required to be screened by a 6 foot solid masonry wall or board fence or landscaping or a combination thereof in order to minimize potential noise, odor and visual impacts. Additionally, increased setbacks may be required. No building(s) shall cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area and all areas not covered by buildings, parking and loading, and vehicular access shall be landscaped. 
(Ord. 931 C.S. § 3, 1980.)  
22.16.170 - Front Yard. 
A.  The minimum front yard shall be as prescribed in Table J, subject to the exceptions listed below: 
TABLE J 
District 	Minimum Front Yard 
 
NC ..... 15 feet 
CC ..... 5 feet 
TC ..... 15 feet 
SC ..... 5 feet 
 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  In the NC and TC Districts, on a site abutting on property in an R District and fronting on the same street, the minimum front yard shall be not less than the required front yard of the adjoining site in the R District. 
2.  In the CC and SC Districts, no Structure shall be closer than 15 feet to a street intersection, except that portions of a structure which are less than 3 ½ feet or more than 8 feet above sidewalk grade and one column, not exceeding 1 foot in any horizontal dimension shall not be subject to this requirement. 
3.  In the CC and SC Districts, on a site abutting on property in an R District and fronting on the same street, the minimum front yard shall be not less than, one-half the required front yard on the adjoining site in the R District. 
4.  In the CR District the front yard setback shall be 20 feet. The front yard shall increase 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of the height of the structure. 
(Ord. 931 C.S. § 4, 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.4.)  
22.16.180 - Side Yards. 
The minimum side yard shall be as follows: 
A.  In the NC and TC Districts, a 15-foot side yard shall be required subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  Where the side property line of a site adjoins property in an R or a PA district, a solid decorative masonry wall or, decorative board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. 
2.  Interior side yards may not be required where adjoining commercial properties are master planned, site planned and architecturally designed as a single unit. 
B.  In the CC and SC districts, no side yards shall be required, subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  On a reversed corner lot adjoining property in an R District or a PA District, the minimum side yard shall be not less than ½ the required front yard on the side adjoining key lot. 
2.  Where the side property line of a site adjoins property in an R District or a PA District, the minimum side yard adjoining the R district or PA District shall be 10 feet. Where the side property line of a site adjoins property in an R District, a decorative masonry wall or decorative board fence 6 feet in height or screen planting shall be located on the property line or planting area. 
C.  One foot shall be added to each required side for each 3 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of a structure. 
D.  In the CR District the side yard shall be 20 feet. The, side yards hall increase 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of the structure. 
(Ord. 931 C.S. § 5, 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,105.5.)  
22.16.190 - Rear Yards. 
The minimum rear yards shall be as follows: 
A.  In the NC and TC districts, a 15-foot rear yard shall be required in addition to the following conditions: 
1.  Where the rear property line of a site adjoins property in an R District, a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. 
2.  Interior rear yards may not be required where adjoining, commercial properties are master planned, site planned and architecturally designed as a single unit. 
B.  In the CC and SC Districts, no rear yard shall be required subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  Where the rear property line of a site adjoins property in an R district or a PA District, the minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet. Where the rear property line of a site adjoins property in an R district, a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. 
2.  One foot shall be added to the rear yard for each 3 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of a structure. 
C.  In the CR District the rear yard shall be 20 feet. The rear yard shall increase 1 foot for every 2 feet of height above the lowest 12 feet of height of the structures. 
(Ord. 931 C.S. § 6, 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,105.6.)  
22.16.200 - Height of Structures. 
No structure shall exceed 30 feet in height in the NC, CR, TC or SC Districts. In the CC District, the height of structures shall not exceed 40 feet, or 3 stories. The Planning Commission may approve taller buildings by use permit. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 7, 2006: Ord. 931 C.S. § 7, 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,105.7.)  
22.16.210 - Landscaped Areas. 
Areas between the property line and structures or off-street parking or loading facilities shall be landscaped with plant material and permanently maintained. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.8.)  
22.16.220 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 22.36 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,105.9.)  
CHAPTER 22.18 - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 
22.18.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.11.)  
22.18.020 - Purposes. 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title, the I Industrial Districts are included in the zoning plan to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for various types of industrial plants and related activities; 
B.  To protect areas appropriate for industrial use from intrusion by residences and other inharmonious uses; 
C.  To protect residential, professional and administrative offices, and commercial properties and to protect nuisance-free, nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare and other objectionable influences and from fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses by restricting such uses to appropriately located areas; 
D.  To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to concentrate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other; 
E.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas; 
F.  To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to minimize the hazards of fire; 
G.  To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them; 
H.  To provide industrial employment opportunities for residents of the City; 
I.  The controlled industrial district is intended to optimize utilization of those designated areas by the elimination of incongruous uses, including residential and commercial development. It is further intended that development shall be restricted to activities to be conducted with a high level of site development and operational performance, devoid of such objectionable qualities as noise, smoke, fumes, glare, odor, water pollution or safety and fire hazards. Additional provisions for open space and landscaping are required to encourage compatibility with surrounding and abutting districts. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.0.)  
22.18.030 - LI Light Industrial District—Permitted Uses. 
In the LI Light Industrial District the following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging and processing of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials asbestos, bone, canvas cellophane, cellulose, cork, feathers, felt fiber and synthetic fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paint (not employing a boiling process), paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber and synthetic rubber, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco and wood (not including a planning mill or saw mill); 
Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging and processing of cosmetics, drugs, pharmaceuticals; perfumes, perfumed toilet soap (not including refining or rendering of fats or oils) and toiletries; 
Manufacturing, canning, and packaging of foods and food products, including fruits and vegetables, but not including fish and meat products, pickles, sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast or refining or rendering of fats or oils, provided that no noxious or offensive odors are permitted to emanate from the premises; 
Manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small glazed tile, utilizing only previously pulverized clay, provided that kilns are fired only by electricity or gas; 
Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures and light sheet metal products including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves and the like; 
Manufacture of scientific, medical, dental and drafting instruments, orthopedic and medical appliances, optical goods, watches and, clocks, electronics equipment, precision instruments, musical instruments, cameras and photographic equipment except film; 
Assembly of small electric appliances such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters and electric toys, but not including refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers and similar home appliances; 
Assembly of electrical equipment such as radio and television receivers, phonographs and home motion picture equipment, but not including electrical machinery; 
Manufacture and assembly of electrical supplies such as coils, condensers, crystal holders, insulation, lamps, switches and wire and cable assembly, provided no noxious or offensive fumes or odors are produced; 
Manufacture of cutlery, hardware and hand tools; die and pattern making; metal stamping and extrusion of small products such as costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons and kitchen utensils; 
Blacksmith shops 
Bottling works 
Bus depots and transit stations 
Cold storage plants 
Dairy products plants 
Freight forwarding terminals 
Furniture manufacture 
Ice manufacture 
Laboratories 
Machine shops not involving the use of drop hammers, automatic screw machines or, punch presses with a rated capacity of over 20 tons 
Marina and small boat harbor 
Mattress manufacture 
Metal finishing and plating 
Motion picture production 
Printing, lithographing and engraving 
Public utility structures and installations 
Railroad stations 
Small boat building not including ship building 
Storage yards for commercial vehicles 
Textile, knitting and hosiery mills 
Transit yards 
Trucking terminals 
Warehouses except for the storage of fuel or flammable liquids 
Welding shops 
Woodwork shops and sash and door manufacturing, including only incidental mill work which shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure and other uses which are added to this list by tile City Planning Commission, in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
B.  Offices, retail stores and watchmen's living quarters incidental to and on the same site with a light industrial or related use prescribed in Subsection A; 
C.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Chapter 22.36 of this Title; 
D.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use. 
E.  Homeless Shelters, Emergency. Homeless shelters, emergency, subject to the development and operational standards of Section 22.34.230, Homeless Shelters. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 4, 2-19-2014; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,106.1(a).)  
22.18.040 - HI Heavy Industrial District—Permitted Uses. 
A.  All uses permitted in the LI district; 
B.  Aircraft and aircraft accessories and parts manufacture 
Asphalt and asphalt products manufacture 
Automobile, truck and trailer accessories and parts manufacture 
Automobile, truck and trailer assembly 
Bag cleaning 
Battery manufacture 
Boiler works 
Box factories and cooperage 
Breweries, distilleries and wineries 
Building materials manufacture and assembly including composition, wallboards, partitions, panels and prefabricated structures 
Business machines manufacture including accounting machines, calculators, card-counting equipment and typewriters 
Can and metal container manufacture 
Candle manufacture not including rendering 
Carpet and rug manufacture 
Cement products manufacture including concrete mixing and batching 
Chemical fertilizer manufacture and storage 
Chemical products manufacture, provided no noxious odor or dust is produced and no hazard of fire or explosion is created, including petrochemicals manufacture and storage, adhesive bleaching products, bluing, calcimine, dye-stuffs, (except aniline dyes), essential oils, soda and soda compounds, and vegetable gelatin, glue and size 
Clay products manufacture including brick, firebrick, tile and pipe 
Coal storage 
Cork manufacture 
Cotton ginning and cotton wadding and linter manufacture 
Firearms manufacture 
Flour, feed and grain mills 
Food products manufacture including such processes as cooking, roasting, refining, pasteurizing and extraction involved in the preparation of such products as casein, cereal, chocolate and cocoa products, cider and vinegar, coffee, glucose, milk and dairy products, molasses and syrups, oleomargarine, pickles, rice, sauerkraut, sugar, vegetable oils and yeast 
Gas storage 
Glass and glass products manufacturing 
Grain elevators 
Graphite and graphite products manufacture 
Gravel, rock and cement yards 
Hair, felt and feathers processing 
Ink Manufacture 
Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and similar industrial and household chemical compounds, manufacture 
Jute, hemp, sisal and oakum products manufacture 
Leather and fur finishing and dyeing, not including tanning and curing 
Machinery manufacture including heavy electrical, agricultural, construction and mining machinery and light machinery and equipment such as air conditioning, commercial motion picture equipment, dishwashers, dryers, refrigerators and washing machines 
Machine tools manufacture including metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping machines and woodworking machines 
Match manufacture 
Meat products processing and packaging not including slaughtering and glue and size manufacture 
Metal alloys and foil manufacture including solder, pewter, brass and bronze and tin, lead and gold foil 
Metal casting and foundries not including magnesium, foundries 
Motor testing of internal combustion motors 
Painting, enameling and lacquering shops 
Paper products manufacture including shipping containers, pulp goods, carbon paper and coated paper stencils 
Paraffin products manufacture 
Petroleum and petroleum products refining including gasoline, kerosene, naphtha and oil 
Petroleum and petroleum products storage 
Plastics manufacture 
Porcelain products manufacture including bathroom and kitchen fixtures and equipment 
Precious metals reduction, smelting, and refining 
Public utility structures and installations 
Railroad equipment manufacture including railroad car and locomotive manufacture 
Railroad freight stations, repair shops and yards 
Rubber products manufacture including tires and tubes Salt works 
Sandblasting 
Ship building and ship repair yards 
Shipping docks, piers and other berthing facilities 
Shoe polish manufacture 
Starch and dextrine manufacture 
Steam plants 
Steel products manufacture and assembly including steel cabinets and lockers, doors, fencing and furniture 
Stone products manufacture and stone processing including abrasives, asbestos, stone screening, and sand and lime products 
Storage, sorting, collecting or baling of iron, junk, paper, rags or scrap metal within a completely enclosed structure 
Structural steel products manufacture including bars, girders, rails and wire rope 
Textile bleaching 
Tobacco curing and processing 
Wire and cable manufacture 
Wood and lumber processing and woodworking including planning mills and saw mills, excelsior, plywood, veneer and wood preserving treatment 
Wool scouring and pulling and other uses which are added to this list by the City Planning Commission, in accord with the procedure prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title; 
C.  Offices, retail stores and watchmen's living quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial or related use prescribed in Subsections A and B of this section; 
D.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Chapter 22.36 of this Title; 
E.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.1(b).)  
22.18.050 - CI Controlled Industrial District—Permitted Uses. 
In the CI controlled industrial district, the permitted uses are limited to agriculture, including horticulture, viticulture and the raising of small crops and fruits or nut-bearing trees. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.1(c).)  
22.18.060 - Conditional Uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title: 
A.  Pumping stations, power stations, drainage ways and structures, storage tanks and transmission lines found by the City Planning Commission to be necessary for the public health, safety or welfare; 
B.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a conditional use; 
C.  Outdoor advertising structures; in accordance with subsection 16.68.080.C. 
D.  In the LI Light Industrial District, the following conditional uses shall be permitted. 
Any of the uses listed in Section 22.18.040 and Subsection E of this section, provided that, on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, the City Planning Commission makes the following findings, in addition to the findings prescribed in Section 22.40.070 of this Title that: 
1.  Consideration of all of the determinable characteristics of the particular use which is the subject of the application indicates that the use has the same basic characteristics on the permitted uses prescribed in Section 22.18.030 of this Chapter, 
2.  The use will not create more vehicular or rail traffic than the volumes normally created by the permitted uses prescribed in Section 22.18.030 of this Chapter. 
3.  The separation between HI uses allowed in the LI district by a use permit and property in an R or PA district shall not be less than the required front, side and rear yard setbacks in an HI district (Sections 22.18.110.B, 22.18.120.E through G, and 22.18.130.C through F respectively). LI uses shall be permitted within these areas, subject to the setback requirements of the LI district; 
E.  In the HI Heavy Industrial District, the following conditional uses shall be permitted: 
Airports and heliports. 
Cement, lime, gypsum and plaster of Paris manufacture 
Charcoal, lampblack and fuel briquettes manufacture 
Chemical products manufacture including acetylene, aniline, dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, cleaning and polishing preparation, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen and oxygen, nitrating of cotton or other materials, nitrates of an explosive nature, potash, pyroxylin, rayon yard and carbolic, hydrochloric, picric and sulphuric acids 
Coal, coke and tar products manufacture 
Drop forges 
Dumps and slag piles 
Explosives manufacture and storage 
Fertilizer manufacture and storage, other than chemical 
Film manufacture 
Fireworks manufacture and storage 
Fish products processing and packaging 
Garbage dumps 
Gas manufacture 
Gas and oil wells 
Gelatin, glue and size manufacture from animal or fish refuse 
Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal and dead animals 
Junkyards 
Lard manufacture 
Linoleum and oil cloth manufacture 
Magnesium foundries 
Manure, peat and topsoil processing and storage 
Metal and metal ores refining, smelting, and alloying 
Motor vehicle wrecking yards 
Paint manufacture including enamel, lacquer, shellac, turpentine and varnish 
Paper mills 
Rifle ranges 
Rolling mills 
Rubber manufacture or processing including natural or synthetic rubber and gutta-percha 
Soap manufacturing including fat rendering 
Stockyards and slaughterhouses 
Stone quarries, gravel pits, mines and stone mills 
Storage of used building materials 
Tallow manufacture 
Tanneries and curing and storage of rawhides 
Wood and bone distillation 
Wood pulp and fiber reduction and processing; 
F.  In the CI Controlled Industrial District, the following conditional uses shall be permitted: 
Administrative offices 
Bookbinding, printing and lithography 
Cartography 
Editorial and designing activities 
Electrical products and instrument manufacturing 
Employees' cafeterias and auditoriums 
Finished paper products manufacturing 
Furniture manufacture and repair, or cabinet or millwork shops 
Garment manufacturing 
Household pottery manufacturing 
Laundry and dry cleaning plants 
Manufacture of clothing, novelties, toys and small appliances 
Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Chapter 22.36 of this Title 
Photographic printing, finishing and processing 
Plastic fabrication 
Processing, packaging and distribution operations, including pharmaceuticals, drugs and cosmetics 
Research laboratories and institutes 
Residences for watchmen or custodians 
Storage warehouses, excluding flammable fluids and explosives; 
G.  Dog fanciers' permit, on sites of 20,000 square feet or larger. 
H.  Private non-commercial clubs. 
I.  Lunch wagons, provided that on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, the Planning Commission makes the following findings: 
1.  The use will not be detrimental to other businesses in the area. 
2.  The use will not create a safety hazard. 
3.  The use will meet the Design Review Criteria and Standards, Chapter 22.34.045. 
4.  The use will not be a nuisance to neighboring properties especially residences. 
(Ord. No. 1364 C.S., § 2, 9-21-2011; Ord. 1245 C.S,. § 1, 1997; Ord. 1118 C.S., § II, 1988; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,104.2.)  
22.18.070 - I Industrial Districts—Required Conditions. 
The following conditions shall be required of uses in the I Industrial Districts: 
A business, service or process which is not conducted, within a completely enclosed structure and which is located on a site abutting on or across a street or alley from property in an R, PA, NC, CC or TC District shall be required to be screened either by a solid masonry wall, board fence or compact evergreen hedge not less than 6 feet in height if found by the Board of Adjustments to be unsightly. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.3(a).)  
22.18.080 - LI Light Industrial District—Required Conditions. 
In the LI Light Industrial District, the following conditions are required of all uses: 
A.  Open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded by a solid masonry wall, board fence or compact evergreen hedge (with solid gates where necessary) not less than 6 feet in height, provided that neither the area nor the wall, fence or hedge shall be located in any required yard or any required side yard on the street side of a corner lot, and provided further that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall, fence or hedge. 
B.  No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be employed which are found by the City Planning Commission to be objectionable to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or heavy truck traffic, or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.3(b).)  
22.18.090 - CI Controlled Industrial District—Required Condition. 
In the CI Controlled Industrial District, the following conditions are required of all uses: 
A.  Activity Standards. All activities shall be conducted in such a manner that noise, smoke, dust, odors and waste of any kind are confined and/or purified so as to control pollution of air, soil or water, to eliminate any detrimental effect to the public health, safety and welfare and to be in harmony with the objectives of the General Plan. All standards of the Bay Area water and air pollution boards, as well as those of the Planning Commission and the Health Department shall be strictly adhered to. 
B.  Illumination. Illumination of signs, facades, buildings, parking areas and loading facilities shall be arranged so as to eliminate glare from roadways and streets, and shall be directed away from properties lying outside the district. 
C.  Manufacturing and Storage Areas. All manufacturing and fabrication operations shall be conducted entirely within buildings. All equipment and material storage areas shall be screened by solid walls, fences or adequate landscaping not less than 6 feet in height. In no case shall materials be stacked or stored so as to exceed the height of the enclosure. 
D.  Exterior Treatment of Structures. Buildings shall be constructed of masonry, concrete or similar materials. Metal structures may be erected only with the express consent of the Planning Commission. 
E.  Landscaping. All areas not used for structures, enclosed storage, circulation, parking or loading facilities shall be landscaped. 
F.  Abutting Districts. Wherever a site abuts an R or PA district, or an area designated on the General Plan for residential or professional office use, a 6-foot masonry wall shall be erected. In addition, a 5-foot landscaped strip shall be permanently maintained to buffer noise and unsightliness. Where the CI District abuts any other district, a 6-foot fence or wall shall be erected. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.3(c).)  
22.18.100 - Site Area. 
The minimum site area shall be 10,000 square feet, except in the CI Controlled Industrial District, the minimum site area shall be 25,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.4.)  
22.18.110 - Front Yard. 
The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  On a site abutting on property in an R, PA or C District and fronting on the same street, the minimum front yard shall be not less than the required front yard in the R, PA or C District. 
B.  In the HI District, where the front property site is across a street or alley from property in an R or PA District, the minimum front yard shall be 100 feet. 
C.  The required front yard shall be entirely landscaped, except those areas necessary for walks and driveways. Parking or loading within the required front yard area is prohibited. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.5.)  
22.18.120 - Side Yards. 
The minimum side yard shall be 10 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  Except in the CI District, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than 20 feet. 
B.  In the CI District, the side yard on the street side of a corner lot, shall be not less than 30 feet. 
C.  In the LI District, where the side property line of a site adjoins property in an R District, or a PA District, the minimum side yard adjoining the R or PA District shall be 30 feet. Where the side property line of a site adjoins property in an R District, a solid masonry wall or board fence 6 feet in height shall be located on the property line. In addition, the Board of Adjustments shall require that the 5 feet adjoining the property line be landscaped with plant materials and permanently maintained when such landscaping is necessary to ensure privacy, to screen unsightliness or to insulate adjoining dwellings against noise. 
D.  In the CI District, where the side yard abuts an R or PA District, or an area designated on the General Plan for residential or professional office use, a side yard of 50 feet shall be required. 
E.  In the HI District, the side yard of a site adjoining property in an NC, CC or TC District shall be 75 feet. 
F.  In the HI District, the side yard of a site across the street or alley from an R or PA District shall be 100 feet. 
G.  In the HI District, the side property line of a site across a street or alley from an NC, CC or TC District shall be 25 feet. 
H.  One foot shall be added to the side yard for each 2 feet of height above the lowest 50 feet of height of a structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.6.)  
22.18.130 - Rear Yards. 
The minimum rear yard shall be 10 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  Except in the HI District where the property abuts an R or PA District, or an area designated on the General Plan for residential or professional office use, the minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
B.  An additional foot shall be added for each 3 feet in excess of 12 feet of building height. 
C.  In the HI District where the rear property line of a site adjoins property in an R or PA District, the minimum rear yard shall be 150 feet. 
D.  In the HI District where the rear property line of a site adjoins property in an NC, CC or TC District, the minimum rear yard shall be 75 feet. 
E.  In the HI District where the rear property line of a site is across a street or alley from property in an R or PA District, the minimum rear yard shall be 100 feet. 
F.  In the HI District where the rear property line of a site is across a street or alley from property in an NC, CC, or TC District, the minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.7.)  
22.18.140 - Height of Structures. 
No structure shall exceed 30 feet of height, except in the HI Heavy Industrial District, where taller structures may be allowed by a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.8.)  
22.18.150 - Site Coverage. 
In the CI Controlled Industrial District, the maximum area to be covered by structures shall be 50 percent of the total site area. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.9.)  
22.18.160 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for industrial development in accordance with the requirements specified in Chapter 22.36 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,106.10.)  
CHAPTER 22.19 - CIVIC DISTRICT 
 
22.19.010 - Purpose. 
The intent of the Civic District is to provide a center for the existing functions and future expansion of the Contra Costa County government, including administrative, judicial and correctional facilities, and for Federal, State and local civic facilities. Commercial and service uses are intended to be limited to those that are incidental to, and for the convenience of, the governmental and judicial uses. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
22.19.020 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the Civic District: 
A.  All facilities owned, leased or operated by the City, the County, the State, the Government of the United States, the Martinez Unified School District, or the Mt. Diablo Unified School District; 
B.  Public or private colleges and universities and facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto; 
C.  Banking establishments; 
D.  Business supply retail uses such as, but not limited to, office supplies, equipment rental and repair, photocopy shops, etc.; 
E.  Courts; 
F.  Libraries; 
G.  Museums; 
H.  Offices, including but not limited to administrative, general, government and professional; 
I.  Parks and open spaces; 
J.  Personal service establishments, such as, but not limited to, barber or beauty shops, tailors, shoe repairs, etc.; 
K.  Post offices; 
L.  Restaurants and cafeterias, including outdoor dining, that are 1,500 square feet or less in size, or within lease space 1,500 square feet or less in size; 
M.  Temporary uses, pursuant to the standards established in the zoning code and consistent with the purposes of this district; 
N.  Wireless telecommunication facilities, pursuant to the zoning code; 
O.  Accessory uses, incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted use. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
22.19.030 - Conditionally Permitted Uses. 
The following uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, in the Civic District: 
A.  Bail bonds, on or above the second floor; 
B.  Hotels; 
C.  Outdoor food preparation; 
D.  Parking structures and facilities. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
22.19.040 - Prohibited Uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in the Civic District: 
A.  Car washes; 
B.  Drive-through establishments; 
C.  Motels; 
D.  Vehicle repair; 
E.  Vehicle sales and vehicle parts sales; 
F.  Any use not specifically authorized. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
22.19.050 - Development Standards for the Civic District. 
All property in the Civic District shall be developed in accordance with the following standards. 
A.  Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in the Civic District shall be 3.0. 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum building height in the Civic District shall be 40 feet, or 3 stories. The Planning Commission may approve taller buildings by use permit. 
C.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for new development or for the creation of new parcels shall be 20,000 square feet. 
D.  Front Yard Setback. The maximum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. No parking is permitted in the front yard setback area. The front yard setback shall also apply to side and rear yards adjacent to a public street. For parcels that have frontage on Willow Street, the minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet. 
E.  Rear Yard Setback. No minimum rear yard setback is required, except where the rear parcel line abuts a residential zone district, the minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
F.  Interior Side Yard Setback. No minimum interior side yard setback is required, except where the rear parcel line abuts a residential zone district, the minimum interior side yard setback shall be 15 feet. 
G.  Parking. Refer to Chapter 22.36 for off-street parking requirements and standards. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
22.19.060 - Design Standards and Guidelines for the Civic District. 
The design guidelines are found in the downtown specific plan, Section 5.6. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 3 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 22.20 - GF GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES DISTRICTS 
 
22.20.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.7.)  
22.20.020 - Purposes. 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title, the GF Governmental Facilities Districts are included in the zoning regulations to accommodate governmental, public utility and educational facilities in a planned and orderly manner. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.0.)  
22.20.030 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  All facilities owned, leased or operated by the City, the County, the State, the Government of the United States, the Martinez Unified School District, the Mt. Diablo Unified School District and any other district; 
B.  Public or private colleges and universities and facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.1.)  
22.20.040 - Conditional Use. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title: 
Facilities of public utilities as defined by the Public Utilities Code of the State and corporations or other organizations whose activities are under the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.2.)  
22.20.050 - Minimum Site Area. 
The area and frontage of the site shall be sufficient for the specific intended use as set forth in the application for rezoning. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.3.)  
22.20.060 - Minima Yard Requirements. 
The minimum front, side and rear yards required in this district shall be equal to those required in the most restrictive abutting district. One-half foot shall be added to each yard requirement for each 1 foot that the building exceeds the maximum height allowed in the most restrictive abutting district. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107,4.)  
22.20.070 - Height of Structures. 
Building height and coverage must such that the total floor area does not exceed that allowed in the most restrictive abutting district. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.5.)  
22.20.080 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on the site of each use as prescribed in the provisions of Chapter 22.36 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,107.6.)  
CHAPTER 22.21 - PLANNED UNIT DISTRICT 
 
22.21.010 - Applicability. 
In addition to the purposes prescribed in Sections 22.02.010 of this Title, the Planned Unit District is included in the zoning regulations to allow the completion and continuing conforming status of developments that were approved by Contra Costa County, pursuant to its Planned Unit District regulations prior to annexation by the City. This District is not intended to allow for new developments, or for major modifications to previously approved yet uncompleted developments. 
(Ord. No. 1361 C.S., § 1, 2-2-2011)  
22.21.020 - Establishment and Purpose. 
The P-1; Planned Development District, is hereby established in order to recognize those existing and permitted large-scale integrated developments, where flexible regulations had been applied to individual developments, as such were designated by the County within its Planned Unit Districts. 
(Ord. No. 1361 C.S., § 1, 2-2-2011)  
22.21.030 - Use Regulations. 
Residential uses that have been approved by Contra Costa County, as part of a Final Development Plan within the applicable Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 1361 C.S., § 1, 2-2-2011)  
22.21.040 - Development Standards. 
All development standards, including but not limited to: maximum density, minimum lot size, minimum required yards, maximum height, maximum floor area ratio and/or minimum required parking shall be as approved by Contra Costa County, as part of a Final Development Plan within the applicable Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 1361 C.S., § 1, 2-2-2011)  
22.21.050 - Process to Modify Approved Final Development Plans. 
A.  Minor Changes. Minor changes, including but not limited to individual unit floor plans and/or Design Review approvals, shall not be considered be an abandonment of the Final Development Plan, and shall be reviewed as prescribed by the Final Development Plan, or if no process is therein specified, as directed by the Community Development Director. The Director may defer such requests to the Design Review Committee and/or Planning Commission. 
B.  Major Changes. Major changes, including but not limited to project's land uses, maximum development density and/or maximum number of units per building shall be considered an abandonment of the Final Development Plan and cannot be approved within the P-1 Planned Development District. Approval of such changes require approval of a Planned Unit Development pursuant to Chapter 22.42; Planned Unit Developments. 
C.  Projects for which Tentative Maps have Expired. Unless major changes to a previously approved Final Development Plan are requested (pursuant to subsection B. above), projects within a P-1 Planned Development District with expired tentative maps may reapply for new tentative map pursuant to Title 21; Subdivisions without approval of a new Planned Unit Development pursuant to Chapter 22.42. 
(Ord. No. 1361 C.S., § 1, 2-2-2011)  
CHAPTER 22.22 - RI RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DISTRICTS 
 
22.22.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.7.)  
22.22.020 - Purposes. 
The addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title the RF Recreational Facilities, Districts are included in the zoning regulations to accommodate public and private recreational facilities in a planned and orderly manner. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.0.)  
22.22.030 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  Parks, playgrounds, playfields, picnic areas, golf courses; 
B.  Small craft harbor, fishing pier and related facilities; 
C.  Parking facilities for permitted and conditional uses; 
D.  Minor buildings incidental to the primary use, including offices and storage for the administration, operation and maintenance of a recreational facility and restrooms; 
E.  Grazing of livestock on suitable sites. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.1.)  
22.22.040 - Conditional Uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit in accord with the provisions of Chapter 22.40 of this Title. Commercial uses which are compatible to and supportive of the primary recreational use(s) of the site, for example: 
A.  Concessionaire structures in parks; 
B.  Pro shop, clubhouse, bar and/or restaurant at a golf course; 
C.  Restaurants, coffee shops, marine fueling station, bait and tackle, locker rooms, boat sales, boat brokerage, boat chandlery, boat ways, boat building and repair, boat storage, motor repair, motel, seafood cookeries, on-sale liquor (when operated with a bona fide eating establishment) at a small craft harbor; 
D.  Other uses compatible to and supportive of the primary recreation use(s) and function of the site as may be added to this list by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.2.)  
22.22.050 - Minimum Site Area. 
The area and frontage of the site shall be sufficient for the specific intended use as set forth in the application for rezoning. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.3.)  
22.22.060 - Minimum Yard Requirements. 
The minimum front, side and rear yards required in this district shall be equal to those required in the most restrictive abutting district. On a large site, yard requirements for proposed structures located in excess of 100 feet from the nearest abutting district shall be established by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.4.)  
22.22.070 - Height of Structures. 
Building height and coverage requirements shall be equal to those required in the most restrictive abutting district. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.5.)  
22.22.080 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided on the site of each use as prescribed in the provisions of Chapter 22.36 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,108.6.)  
CHAPTER 22.23 - DOWNTOWN SHORELINE DISTRICT 
 
22.23.010 - Purpose. 
The intent of the Downtown Shoreline District is to provide for a variety of residential uses in an environment that is transitioning from industrial to residential uses. This district serves as a transition area between the urbanized portion of the downtown and the open space of the Martinez Regional Shoreline to the north. The standards and guidelines for this district are intended to protect and enhance the environmentally sensitive areas of the Shoreline, to respect and complement the existing primarily single-family neighborhood immediately to the south, and to contribute to the economic revitalization of downtown, by permitting a sufficient intensity of development to provide an economic incentive for industrial uses to relocate. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.23.020 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the Downtown Shoreline District: 
A.  Single-family dwelling units, including semi-attached (duplex) and fully-attached (townhouse) units. 
B.  Secondary dwelling units, per Section 22.12.080 of the zoning code. 
C.  Multi-family residential structures. 
D.  Home occupations pursuant to the definition established in Section 22.40.240 of the zoning ordinance. 
E.  State authorized, certified or licensed family care, foster care or group home serving 6 or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons. 
F.  Parks and open spaces. 
G.  Accessory uses, incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted use, pursuant to the requirements of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.23.030 - Conditionally Permitted Uses. 
The following uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, in the Downtown Shoreline District: 
A.  Childcare facilities; 
B.  Clubs and lodges; 
C.  Live/work units; 
D.  Bed and breakfast inns; 
E.  Coin-operated laundries; 
F.  Churches and other religious institutions and related facilities; 
G.  Hotels, lodging houses and apartment hotels; 
H.  Parking structures and facilities; 
I.  Public utilities or installations; 
J.  Smaller, self-contained service commercial uses; 
K.  Theaters and community centers. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.23.040 - Prohibited Uses. 
Any use not specifically authorized is prohibited in the Downtown Shoreline District. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.23.050 - Development Standards for the Downtown Shoreline District. 
A.  General. All new multiple residential development in this district shall be processed concurrently with a subdivision map, so that individual units can be offered for sale, and shall meet the requirements for new condominium units as contained in Chapter 21.54 of the Municipal Code (2 parking spaces per unit, storage, etc.) 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum building height in the Downtown Shoreline District shall be 40 feet, or 3 stories, for developments approved for a density of 35 units per acre (see below); otherwise the height limit shall be 30 feet, or 2 stories. In some areas, such as transition areas near existing single-family residential areas, a 2-story maximum height may be determined to be appropriate by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may approve taller buildings by use permit. 
C.  Density. The minimum site area per residential unit shall be 2,500 square feet (17 units per acre). The Planning Commission may approve a reduced site area per unit, down to a minimum of 1,250 square feet per unit (35 units per acre), by use permit. In order to approve a density above the lower end of the density range, the Planning Commission would need to find that in addition to meeting the above minimum requirements, the proposal is superior in terms of 2 or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Assembling all or most of the contiguous parcels into 1 project, and designing the project as a new neighborhood; 
2.  Design and appearance; 
3.  Minimizing impacts on adjacent public lands; 
4.  Providing on-site amenities for the future residents; 
5.  Preserving or creating view corridors from public streets such as Talbart, Buckley, Marina Vista, Carquinez Scenic Drive, Castro and Berrellesa; 
6.  Utilizing green building practices to the maximum extent possible; 
7.  Providing a variety of housing types, including detached single-family residential, where feasible, as a transition in areas near existing single-family neighborhoods; 
8.  Providing a new public street system that improves access to the Regional Shoreline and Alhambra Creek, potentially by extending Alhambra Avenue along the creek, and vacating Berrellesa. In order to approve a density at or near the upper end of the density range, the Planning Commission would need to find that the proposal is superior in terms of all or almost all of the above criteria. 
D.  Other Development Standards. Setbacks, lot standards, coverage etc., shall be as provided in the Downtown Overlay District, Sections 22.13.040 through 22.13.090, inclusive. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.23.060 - Design Standards and Guidelines for the Downtown Shoreline District. 
Design guidelines are found in Section 9.6 of the downtown specific plan. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 4 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 22.24 - ECD ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION DISTRICTS 
 
22.24.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.5.)  
22.24.020 - Purposes. 
The Environmental Conservation Districts are established as companion districts, to be used in conjunction with residential, industrial or undesignated use districts. The combined ECD District shall be subject to the regulations of this Chapter and the regulations prescribed in this Title for the companion (residential or industrial or undesignated) district. In addition to the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title, the ECD Environmental Conservation Districts are included in the zoning regulations to accomplish the following objectives: 
A.  To implement the provisions of the open space, conservation, seismic safety and scenic roadway elements of the General Plan; 
B.  To provide for the accommodation of a level of development consonant with the protection of environmental values in those portions of the City with high natural environmental qualities; 
C.  To protect the health, safety and welfare of residents of the City through the protections and preservation of the community environment. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.0.)  
22.24.030 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted: 
A.  Agricultural, including, horticulture, viticulture and the raising of crops and fruit or nut-bearing trees; 
B.  One single family dwelling on sites up to 20 acres in area; two single family dwellings on sites larger than 20 acres; 
C.  Parks and recreational facilities; trails; picnic areas. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.1.)  
22.24.040 - Conditional Uses. 
Conditional use permits in the environmental conservation districts shall be granted only after preparation of an environmental impact report in accord with the provisions of Section 22.34.020 of this Title and Title 20, and only after the City Planning Commission and/or City Council has made a finding that "no significant adverse impact" will occur as a result of granting the conditional use permit; the following conditional uses may be permitted in the Environmental Conservation District, subject to the environmental impact report findings: 
CONDITIONAL USES TABLE 
	Uses Permitted Upon 
the Granting of a 
District 	Conditional Use Permit 
		
ECD-R-20 	) 	Uses permitted conditionally permitted in comparable R Residential or RR Rural Residential Zone in accord with the provisions of Sections 22.12.080 and 22.12.090 
ECD-RR-20 	) 	
	) 	
ECD-R-40 	) 	
ECD-RR-40 	) 	
	) 	
ECD-R-65 	) 	
ECD-RR-65 	) 	
	) 	
ECD-R-80 	) 	
ECD-RR-80 	) 	
	) 	
ECD-R-100 	) 	
ECD-RR-100 	) 	
	) 	
		
	) 	Uses permitted and conditionally permitted in comparable industrial zone in accord, with the provisions of Sections 22.18.030 through 22.18.060 
ECD-LI 	) 	
ECD-HI 	) 	
ECD-CI 	) 	
	) 	
		
ECD-U 	) 	No conditional uses 
 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.2.)  
22.24.050 - Environmental Impact Reports. 
Environmental Conservation Districts are established only in areas of the community with significant environmental values, where change poses a threat of environmental damage. Environmental impact reports for proposed projects within an Environmental Conservation District shall be prepared in the context of comparing potential impacts of the project to the impacts of a "no project" alternative; i.e., to the existing conditions. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.3.)  
22.24.060 - Other Regulations. 
Regulations pertaining to density, coverage, height of buildings and distance between buildings, yard spaces, open spaces, parking and loading, and any other aspect regulated in the zoning regulations shall be the same as those regulations prescribed for the companion residential, industrial or undesignated zone. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,109.4.)  
CHAPTER 22.25 - MOBILE HOME (MH) OVERLAY ZONE 
 
22.25.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All manufactured housing/mobile homes constructed after 1976 and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 960 C.S., 1982.)  
22.25.020 - Purposes. 
The Mobile Home Overlay Zone is established as a companion zone to be used in conjunction with specified residential zoning districts. 
In addition to the objectives prescribed in Subsection 22.02.010 of this Title, the Mobile Home (MH) Overlay Zone is included in the zoning regulations to accomplish the following objectives: 
A.  To implement the goals of the housing element by promoting affordable housing opportunities where appropriate. 
B.  To preserve existing environmentally sensitive hillside areas. 
C.  To insure that the architectural character and integrity of existing neighborhoods is preserved. 
(Ord. 960 C.S., 1982.)  
22.25.030 - Permitted/Conditionally Permitted Uses. 
A.  All uses permitted and conditionally permitted in the underlying R-Residential or RR-Rural Residential zones in accord with the provisions or Subsections 22.12.080 and 22.12.090. 
B.  Manufactured homes/mobile homes constructed after 1976 and certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
In addition to compliance with Chapter 22.34 of this Title, manufactured homes/mobile homes shall be determined to be compatible with existing residential structures in surrounding neighborhood through compliance with the following design review guidelines: 
A.  It is to be occupied only as a residence; 
B.  It meets all development standards of the applicable zoning district; 
C.  It is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 and any subsequent revisions; 
D.  It is installed on a permanent foundation system approved by the Building Inspector of the City of Martinez; 
E.  Architectural design shall be compatible with residential structures in the surrounding area. 
F.  It is covered with an exterior material compatible with that used on residential structures in the surrounding area; 
G.  The exterior covering material must extend to the ground consistent with the most recent City adopted Uniform Building Code. If a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. No conventional mobile home skirting shall be allowed; 
H.  The roofing material is of a material compatible with that used on residential structures in the surrounding area; 
I.  The roof has eave and gable overhangs; 
J.  The covering material of the garage is consistent with that used on the mobile home unit. 
(Ord. 960 C.S., 1982.)  
CHAPTER 22.26 - M MIXED USE DISTRICTS 
 
22.26.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,110.3.)  
22.26.020 - Purposes. 
The M Mixed Use Districts are established as combining districts, enabling the combination of 2 or more use districts where such combination of districts would serve the objective of implementing the provisions of the General Plan in all its elements, as well as achieving the objectives as prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,110.0.)  
22.26.030 - Permitted and Conditional Uses. 
The permitted and conditional uses in the M districts shall be the permitted and conditional uses of each individual zoning district which has been combined into the Mixed Use District. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,110.1.)  
22.26.040 - Other Regulations. 
Regulations pertaining to density, coverage, height and spacing of buildings, yard spaces, open spaces, parking and loading facilities and any other aspect regulation in this zoning title shall be those of the most restrictive zoning district in the combining district. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,110.2.)  
CHAPTER 22.27 - DOWNTOWN HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
22.27.010 - Purpose. 
The general purpose of the Downtown Historic Overlay District is to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of historic commercial, civic and mixed-use buildings in the Downtown Core and Civic Districts, and to provide for new infill construction consistent with the historic character of the district, consistent with the Downtown Specific Plan. In addition, the Historic Overlay District has 3 specific purposes: 
A.  To establish mandatory provisions for the preservation of buildings individually listed on the National and/or State Register of Historic Places (referred to below as listed buildings), or buildings which become so listed in the future; 
B.  To establish advisory design review guidelines for the rehabilitation of structures and new infill construction in the historic overlay district with particular focus on the 1982 City Historic Resource Inventory; and 
C.  To provide a voluntary option to owners of qualified properties—the more flexible provisions of the State Historical Building Code. The presence of a local historic district also creates the possibility for the City to establish a Mills Act program, which could provide property tax relief for owners who restore and maintain historic properties. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 5 (part), 2006.)  
22.27.020 - Uses, Density and Development Standards. 
Permitted and conditional uses, allowable density and development standards shall be the same as is required for the underlying zone district. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 5 (part), 2006.)  
22.27.030 - Context. 
See Section 6.1.3 of the Downtown Specific Plan for a discussion of the context of this district. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 5 (part), 2006.)  
22.27.040 - Administration. 
All proposals for building demolition, or substantial modification of listed buildings shall be subject to the mandatory criteria below—Section 6.3.1 Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation—in addition to the standards of the individual Specific Plan District and the City's standard design review process, as detailed in Chapter 22.34 of the Zoning Code; and the advisory guidelines of this overlay district. 
All proposals for substantial modification or demolition of other structures, or new construction, in the Downtown Historic Overlay District shall be subject to the standards of the individual specific plan Chapter and the City's standard design review process, as detailed in Chapter 22.34 of the zoning code, and the advisory guidelines of this overlay district. All such proposals shall be referred to the Martinez Historic Society for comments as part of the design review process. Where appropriate, the City may use other resources, such as architectural historians, for supplemental advisory input to the design review process. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 5 (part), 2006.)  
22.27.050 - Design Standards and Guidelines. 
The design standards for listed buildings and advisory guidelines are found in Chapter 6 of the Downtown Martinez Specific Plan. 
A.  Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation are 10 basic principles created to help preserve the distinctive character of a historic building and its site, while allowing for reasonable change to meet new needs. These standards are mandatory for listed buildings. These standards are found in Section 6.3.1 of the Downtown Specific Plan. 
B.  State Historical Building Code. The owner of a listed building, or other qualified structure, may voluntarily choose to utilize the provision of the State Historical Building Code. See Section 6.3.2 of the Downtown Specific Plan for a discussion of the State Historic Building Code. 
C.  Design Review Considerations Applicable to Unlisted Properties. For unlisted structures, as well as new construction, historic considerations will be integrated into the design review process on a case-by-case basis. See Chapter 6 of the Downtown Specific Plan for a summary of existing historic civic and commercial architectural styles in Downtown Martinez, and for the design guidelines of rehabilitation of historic commercial buildings or new construction of buildings in the Downtown Historic Overlay District. 
(Ord. 1328 C.S. § 5 (part), 2006.)  
CHAPTER 22.28 - OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS 
 
22.28.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,111.5.)  
22.28.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of including the open space district in the zoning regulations is to provide an appropriate zoning district for public or privately held lands devoted to open space uses either permanently or by terms of a long-term contract. This zoning district may be distinguished from the recreational facilities district in that recreational facilities, while allowed in the open space district, are expected to be only incidental to the basic purpose of preserving open space areas for visual and aesthetic relief, conservation and preservation of wildlife habitats and environmental values within and adjacent to an essentially urban environment. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,111.0.)  
22.28.030 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in this district: 
A.  Agricultural uses of all natures; 
B.  Pa0rk and recreational uses; trails. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,111.1.)  
22.28.040 - Conditional Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit: 
A.  Structures incidental to a permitted use, including one single-family dwelling on an existing parcel of land; 
B.  Public utility uses such as substations, water reservoirs, pumping stations, etc. which by the nature of their design requirements cannot practically be located on sites not in an Open Space Zone District. 
(Ord. 1045 C.S. § I, 1985: Ord. 822, C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,111.2.)  
22.28.050 - Division of Land. 
No division of land zoned for open space shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,111.3.)  
22.28.060 - Other Regulations. 
All other regulations of the open space district shall be those of the most restrictive abutting zoning district. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code§ 10,111.4.)  
22.28.070 - No Reduction, Exchange, etc., of Open Space Easement Without Vote of People or Four-Fifths Vote of Council. 
A.  As used herein, "open space easement" means (a) any right or interest in real property acquired by or dedicated to the City of Martinez (1) for the purpose of preserving for public use or enjoyment the natural, scenic or open character of such property or (2) for the purposes of preserving those uses described in California Government Code § 65560, or its successor provisions, or (b) any limitation of future use of real property by way of a deed, covenant, servitude, easement, or other property restriction imposed or required by the City of Martinez for the purpose of preserving the natural, scenic or open character of the property which limitation results from the City's (conditional) approval of a plan amendment, zoning change, use permit, subdivision or any other entitlement permit for development. Open space easement shall not include easements described above which have been acquired pursuant to certain specific statutory authorities which provide exclusive termination procedures for easements created pursuant to such authority. 
B.  Open Space Easement. 
No open space easement be terminated, vacated, abandoned, released, reduced, exchanged, relocated or in any other way remitted, either in whole or in part, without either the affirmative vote of four of the members of the City Council or the affirmative vote of a majority of people of the City of Martinez voting at a regular or specially called election. 
(Ord. 1075 C.S. § 2 1986.)  
CHAPTER 22.29 - ALHAMBRA VALLEY DISTRICTS 
 
22.29.010 - Purposes. 
In addition to the purposes prescribed in Sections 22.02.010 and 22.12.020 of this Title, the Alhambra Valley (AV) Districts are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  Preserve the semi-rural atmosphere and the balance of residential and agricultural land uses in Alhambra Valley. 
B.  Allow development that is compatible with existing agricultural, residential and open space uses. 
C.  Preserve and enhance both the natural and man-made environment in Alhambra Valley. 
D.  Restrict development in environmentally sensitive areas. 
E.  Enhance watercourses and associated riparian habitat to their natural state to restore water quality, wildlife diversity, aesthetic values and recreation opportunities. 
F.  Minimize air, water, noise and soil pollution in Alhambra Valley. 
G.  Minimize soil erosion and runoff throughout Alhambra Valley. 
H.  Protect historical and archaeological resources. 
I.  Provide adequate levels of public services within Alhambra Valley. Ensure new public facilities are sensitive to the natural setting. 
J.  Encourage and enhance agriculture and maintain and promote a healthy and competitive agricultural economy in Alhambra Valley. 
K.  Minimize and resolve conflicts between agricultural and urban uses. 
L.  Preserve and protect areas of identified high scenic value including scenic ridgeways, scenic routes (Alhambra Valley Road, Reliez Valley Road and a portion of Vaca Creek Road), and valley gateways (intersection of Alhambra Valley Road and Vaca Creek Road and Reliez Valley Road and Alhambra Valley Road). 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.020 - Applicability. 
This Chapter specifies the regulations that are applicable within the Alhambra Valley Districts. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.030 - Establishment and Purpose of Alhambra Valley Districts. 
The Alhambra Valley Districts are hereby established as set forth below. 
A.  AV/R-20 Single Family District. The purpose of the district is to reserve land for the construction, use and occupancy of detached single-family development. Minimum lot size is 20,000 square feet. 
B.  AV/R-40 Single Family District. The purpose of the district is to reserve land for the construction, use and occupancy of detached single-family development. Minimum lot size is 40,000 square feet. 
C.  AV/A-5 Agriculture District. The purpose of the district is to reserve land for agricultural uses and supporting operations, including detached single-family residential uses. Minimum lot size is 5 acres. 
D.  AV/PD Planned Development District. The purpose of the district is to allow for large-scale integrated residential development with a cohesive design. The Planned Development District is intended to allow diversification in the relationship of various uses, buildings, structures, lot sizes and open space while insuring substantial compliance with the applicable standards and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.040 - Use Regulations. 
A.  Permitted and Conditional Uses. The allowable land uses for the AV/R-20, AV/R-40 and AV/A-5 Districts shall be as specified in Table 1. Uses are designated in Table 1 as follows: 
1.  P Permitted land use; 
2.  UP Subject to use permit as set forth in Chapter 22.40, Conditional Uses - Use Permits; and 
3.  — Not allowed in specified zoning district. 
Uses not listed in Table 1 are prohibited in all Alhambra Valley Districts. 
In addition to the land use permit required by Table 1, special provisions related to certain land uses may apply, and Design Review may also be required for certain uses in compliance with Section 22.29.100, Alhambra Valley Districts - Design Review. Where the last column in Table 1 (Specific Use Regulations) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use. Provisions in other sections of this zoning ordinance may also apply. 
Table 1: Permitted and Conditional Uses (1) 
Uses 	Districts 	Specific Use Regulations 
	AV/R-20 	AV/R-40 	AV/A-5 	
Residential Uses 				
Family day care home 	P 	P 	P 	
Day care, general 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Foster family home 	P 	P 	P 	
Residential congregate care facility 	P 	P 	P 	
One family dwelling 	P 	P 	P 	
  Secondary housing units 	P 	P 	P 	22.12.085 
  Additional one family dwelling 	UP 	UP 	UP 	22.29.050.A 
  Free-standing exterior lighting over seven feet in height 	UP 	UP 	— 	22.29.050.B 
  Home occupation 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
  Wind generator 	UP 	UP 	UP 	22.12.090.N 
Agricultural Uses 				
Agriculture - Large Scale 	— 	— 	P 	
Agriculture - Small Scale 	P 	P 	P 	
Aviaries 	P 	P 	P 	22.29.050.C.1 
Christmas tree farms 	UP 	UP 	UP 	22.29.050.D 
Dog kennels 	— 	— 	UP 	
Horse riding academies and horse riding instruction 	UP 	UP 	UP 	22.29.050.C.3 
Livestock 	P 	P 	P 	22.29.050.C.2 
Services incidental to agricultural uses 	— 	— 	UP 	
Small animal farming 	P 	P 	P 	22.29.050.C.4 
Institutional Uses 				
Community recreation facilities, such as golf, tennis or swimming clubs 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Museums in which objects of historical, artistic, scientific or cultural importance are preserved and displayed 	— 	— 	UP 	
Public and Recreational Uses 				
Publicly owned buildings and structures 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds 	P 	P 	P 	
Other Uses 				
Temporary real estate offices and construction yards 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Pumping stations, power stations, drainage ways and structures, storage tanks, and transmission lines found by the City Planning Commission to be necessary for the public health, safety or welfare 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
 
Note: (1) Allowed Uses within the Planned Development District. Those land uses permitted by an approved final development plan which are in harmony with each other, serve to fulfill the function of the Planned Development District, and are consistent with the General Plan; and a detached one family dwelling unit on each legally established lot and the accessory structures and uses normally accessory to it. 
B.  Allowed Uses within the AV/PD District. The following uses are allowed in the AV/PD District: those land uses permitted by an approved Planned Development Permit, which are in harmony with each other, serve to fulfill the function of the Planned Development District, and are consistent with the general plan; and a detached one family dwelling unit on each legally established lot and the accessory structures and uses normally accessory to it; provided, however, that no use, building or facility that has been authorized by and is consistent with a Planned Development Permit or associated approval, such as a use permit or subdivision map, shall be considered a non-conforming use. 
C.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall not be permitted within the Alhambra Valley Districts: 
1.  Commercial radio and television receiving and transmitting facilities other than broadcasting studios and business offices; 
2.  Hospitals, philanthropic institutions, and convalescent homes; 
3.  Churches and religious institutions and parochial and private schools; 
4.  Medical and dental offices and medical clinics; and 
5.  Commercial nurseries, except for Christmas tree farms. 
6.  Commercial Greenhouses 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.050 - Standards for Specific Land Uses in Alhambra Valley Districts. 
A.  Additional One Family Dwelling. An additional one family dwelling unit shall be allowed, subject to use permit approval and based upon net lot area requirements as follows: 
1.  AV/R-20 district: 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit; 
2.  AV/R-40 district: 40,000 square feet per dwelling unit; and 
3.  AV/A-5 district: 5 acres per dwelling unit. 
B.  Lighting. Installation of free standing exterior light fixtures with a height of seven feet or more above the finished grade of the parcel requires use permit approval, as set forth in Chapter 22.40, Conditional Uses - Use Permits. The following additional finding is required: glare and annoyance to adjacent property owners shall be minimized to the greatest degree possible by sensitive fixture placement, use of shielded and downcast lighting and low wattage lamps. 
C.  Keeping of Animals. 
1.  Aviaries. Aviaries shall be maintained in a sanitary manner as determined by the County Health Department and shall be subject to the setback requirements for Animal Structures within Section 22.29.060.G.1.a. 
2.  Livestock. Livestock may be kept on lots of 40,000 or more square feet in area (with at least 40,000 square feet for each two head of livestock). To be counted in the aggregate minimum lot size requirement, lots must be contiguous and in one fee ownership. 
3.  Horse Riding Academies. The requirements for the keeping of livestock must be met in order to submit an application for a use permit (see Section 22.29.050.C.2 above). 
4.  Small Animal Farming. Within the AV/R-20 and AV/R-40 districts, small animal farming shall be allowed for the primary purpose of home consumption. 
D.  Christmas Tree Farms. A use permit application for a Christmas tree farm shall include a site plan indicating parking areas and circulation, planting and landscaping areas, existing and proposed structures, and plans and elevations to indicate architectural type. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.060 - Alhambra Valley Districts - General Development Standards. 
A.  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum net lot area shall be as specified in Table 2. 
Table 2: Lot Area 
Districts 	Minimum Net Lot Area 
AV/R-20 	20,000 square feet 
AV/R-40 	40,000 square feet 
AV/A-5 	5 acres 
 
B.  Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit. The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be as specified in Table 3, and as further regulated for sites of 10 percent or greater slope, by Section 22.29.080, Hillside Development. 
Table 3: Site Area per Dwelling Unit 
Districts 	Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit 
AV/R-20 	20,000 square feet 
AV/R-40 	40,000 square feet 
AV/A-5 	5 acres 
 
C.  Minimum Lot Depth and Width. The minimum lot depth and minimum lot width (average) shall be as specified in Table 4. 
Table 4: Width and Depth 
Districts 	Minimum Lot Depth 	Minimum Lot Width (Average) 1 
AV/R-20 	120 feet 	120 feet 
AV/R-40 	140 feet 	140 feet 
AV/A-5 	200 feet 	250 feet 
 
1 Average lot width is calculated by dividing the total area of the lot by the depth of the lot. 
D.  Front Yards, Side Yards and Rear Yards. The front yards, side yards and rear yards shall be as specified in Table 5. For setback requirements for animal structures, see Section 22.29.060.G, Animal Structures. 
Table 5: Minimum Yards 
Districts 	Aggregate Minimum Side Yards 	Minimum Side Yard 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 
		Interior 	Corner 	Interior and 
Corner 	
AV/R-20 	35 feet 	15 feet 1 	20 feet 	25 feet 	15 feet 2 
AV/R-40 	40 feet 	20 feet 3 	20 feet 	25 feet 	15 feet 4 
AV/A-5 	40 feet 	20 feet 	20 feet 	25 feet 	15 feet 
 
Notes: 
1 Within the AV/R-20 district, the side yard minimum may be reduced to three feet for an accessory structure, which does not exceed 600 square feet floor area coverage or 15 feet in height, if it is set back at least 65 feet from the front property line. 
2 Within the AV/R-20 district, there shall be a rear yard for accessory structures of at least three feet. 
3 Within the AV/R-40 district, this minimum may be reduced to three feet for an accessory structure, which does not exceed 600 square feet floor area coverage or 15 feet in height, if it is set back at least 75 feet from the front property line. 
4 Within the AV/R-40 district, there shall be a rear yard for accessory structures of at least three feet. 
E.  Maximum Height of Structures. No single-family dwelling or other structure permitted in the Alhambra Valley Districts shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height. 
F.  Off-Street Parking Requirements. Chapter 22.36, Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities, shall apply within the Alhambra Valley Districts, excluding Sections 22.36.082 and 22.36.084, which shall not apply within the Alhambra Valley Districts. Parking requirements for the AV/A-5 district shall be the same as the R-40 district. Each parking space shall be entirely outside the setbacks of the main structure. 
G.  Animal Structures. 
1.  Aviaries shall not be over 12 feet in height nor exceed one square foot in area for each 50 square feet of net lot area per parcel and shall not exceed 1,600 total square feet. Aviaries shall be set back at least 25 feet from the front property line or any street or limit of right-of-way and at least ten feet from any side or rear property line, and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner as determined by the County Health Department. 
2.  Small animal structures shall be set back not less than 60 feet from the front property line or any street or limit of right-of-way, and shall be not less than 40 feet from any side or rear property line. 
3.  Large animal structures shall be set back not less than 100 feet from the front property line or any street or limit of right-of-way, and shall not be less than 50 feet from any side or rear property line. 
4.  Fenced pasture, paddocks, or other enclosed livestock areas shall not be located nearer than ten feet to any property line. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.070 - Alhambra Valley Districts - Street and Subdivision Standards 
A.  Purpose. In addition to the purposes prescribed in Section 22.29.010 for the creation of the Alhambra Valley Districts, the requirements of this Section are intended to promote the stability of the Alhambra Valley's rural residential character by restricting the potential introduction of incongruous urban streets and subdivisions. 
B.  Street Standards. One of the principal features of the rural appearance of Alhambra Valley's existing rural neighborhoods is the manner of existing street improvements; which are generally relatively narrow streets, without curbs, gutters, sidewalks or subsurface storm drains. Retention and continuance of the rural street standards appears to be an essential element in the preservation of Alhambra Valley's rural residential character. Therefore, within the boundaries of the Alhambra Valley Districts, property owners are exempted from the otherwise normal requirement for street and related improvements as prescribed in Sections 21.08.010 through 21.08.180 and 21.08.200. Requirements for subdivisions and street improvements shall generally be limited to the preservation and continuance of the established infrastructure, as deemed necessary for the public health, safety or welfare by the City Engineer. 
C.  Criteria and Standards for Subdivision Approval. The review authority shall consider the Goals and Principals of the Alhambra Valley Design Guidelines, as adopted by separate Resolution of the City Council of the City of Martinez, as well as the criteria and guidelines listed below, in its consideration of a Subdivision application: 
1.  Site Planning and Grading Design. 
a)  In order to conserve the scenic beauty of Alhambra Valley, developers shall generally be required to restore the natural contours and vegetation of the land after grading and other land disturbances. 
b)  Public and private projects shall be designed to minimize damage to significant trees and other visual landmarks. 
c)  Extreme topographic modification, such as filing in canyons or removing hilltops shall be avoided. Clustering and planned development approaches to development shall be encouraged. All future development plans, whether large-scale or small-scale, shall be based on identifying safe and suitable sites for buildings, roads and driveways. 
d)  Hilltops, ridges, rock outcroppings, mature stands of trees, and other natural features shall be considered for preservation, at the time that any development applications are reviewed. 
e)  Development in flood inundation zones shall be avoided and development in Federal Emergency Management Act 100-year flood zones shall be prohibited. 
2.  Public Utilities. 
a)  All new utilities shall be placed underground. New residential development shall be connected to a public sewer or provide a septic system which meets the standards of the County Health Department. All new residential development shall also provide on-site storm drainage and shall pay a fee for off-site drainage improvements, if required. 
b)  Small community well water or septic systems shall not be established to serve proposed subdivisions. 
3.  Scenic Tree Planting. 
a)  As a way to enhance the aesthetic and scenic qualities along the Alhambra Valley/Reliez Valley Road Scenic Corridor, new subdivisions shall be required to plant new specimen trees along their road frontage according to the following: 
i.  Beginning at either end of the parcel's frontage, trees shall be planted at minimum of 50-foot intervals; 
ii.  Trees shall be Live Oaks and shall be a minimum size of 24 inches; and 
iii.  Shall be located approximately 10 feet from the road shoulder area. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.080 - Alhambra Valley Districts - Hillside Development. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate development on hillside areas within the Alhambra Valley Districts, in order to avoid potential geotechnical hazards and to preserve the scenic view from the valley floor. 
B.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any residential development requiring Design Review or Subdivision approval on parcels with any areas of 10 percent slope or greater within the Alhambra Valley Districts, as determined by the applicant's preparation of a Slope and Hazard Area Map as described in Section 22.33.020, Hillside Development Regulations - Maximum Allowable Density Calculations. 
C.  Maximum Allowable Density. The maximum allowable density of residential units on properties governed by this Section shall be as prescribed in Section 22.33.020, Hillside Development Regulations - Maximum Allowable Density Calculations, subject to the Exemptions, Exclusion and Conditions of Section 22.33.30, and the following: 
1.  Residential density in the AV/R-20 district shall not exceed that prescribed in Section 22.33.020 for the R-20 zoning district; 
2.  Residential density in the AV/R-40 district shall not exceed that prescribed in Section 22.33.020 for the R-40 zoning district; and 
3.  Residential density in the AV/A-5 district shall not exceed that prescribed for each of the Slope and Hazard Area Map Site Categories as shown in Table 6. 
Table 6: Allowable Density for AV/A-5 District 
Site Category 	Maximum Units per Gross Acre 
0—10% 	0.20 
10.01—30% 	0.06 
30.01% and over 	0.00 
Hazard Areas 	0.00 
 
4.  The maximum allowable density for parcels within the AV/PD district shall be as specified in the approved final development plan. 
D.  Criteria and Guidelines for Permit Approval. 
1.  Any residential development requiring Design Review or Subdivision approval shall comply with the requirements of Hillside Development Regulations Sections 22.33.030 and 22.33.040. 
2.  The review authority shall also consider the Goals and Principals of the Alhambra Valley Design Guidelines, as well as the criteria and guidelines listed below, in its consideration of a Hillside Design Review or Subdivision application. 
a)  Slope stability shall be a primary consideration in the determination to develop land. Development in landslide areas shall not be allowed unless the area is stabilized through high-quality engineering design approved by the City and peer reviewed by a qualified structural and/or geotechnical engineer as determined by the City. 
b)  Structures shall be designed to blend into, rather than dominate the natural setting, especially on ridgelines. The massing of new dwellings shall be compatible with the natural setting. 
c)  The construction of new structures on the top of scenic ridges or within 50 feet of the ridgeline shall be discouraged. 
d)  When development is permitted to occur on hillsides, structures shall be located in a manner which is sensitive to available natural resources and constraints. 
e)  All new land uses which are to be located below a major scenic ridge shall be reviewed with an emphasis on protecting the visual qualities of the ridge. 
f)  Any new development shall be encouraged to generally conform to natural contours to avoid excessive grading. 
g)  New water tanks that would harm the visual quality of a scenic ridge shall be buried, camouflaged or screened to mitigate their impacts. 
h)  Visual analysis may be required as part of the permit approval process to better determine the effects of new development, grading and landscaping on the built and natural environment, including parklands. 
i)  Hilltops, ridges, rock outcroppings, mature stands of trees and other natural features shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Preservation of such features shall be considered at the time that any development applications are reviewed. 
j)  Any development on slopes which exceed 30 percent is prohibited, subject to the Exemptions, Exclusion and Conditions of Section 22.33.030. 
k)  The City shall not accept dedication of public roads in unstable hillside areas. Private roads which would require an excessive degree of maintenance and repair costs shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.090 - Alhambra Valley Districts - Creek Protection and Enhancement. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate activities within and adjacent to Protected Creekbeds in order to: 
1.  Maintain the ecology and hydrology of creeks and streams and provide an amenity to the public, while at the same time preventing flooding, erosion and danger to life and property. 
2.  Preserve and restore remaining natural waterways which have been identified as important and irreplaceable natural resources. 
3.  Employ alternative drainage system improvements which rely on increased retention capacity to lessen or eliminate the need for structural modifications to watercourses, whenever economically possible. 
4.  Enhance opportunities for public accessibility and recreational use of creeks, streams, drainage channels and other drainage system improvements. 
B.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any parcel with a Protected Creekbed or a creek setback, as shown on Figure 1 (see map following this section), Protected Creeks. Within the Alhambra Valley Districts, Protected Creekbeds are defined as follows: 
1.  Natural Creekbed. A watercourse or waterway which can support its own environment of vegetation, fowl, fish and reptiles, and which appears natural. The intent of this designation is for the retention of exiting creekbed form and riparian habitat. 
2.  Partially-Improved Creekbed. A watercourse whose natural form has been altered. Some creekbanks have been buttressed to prevent erosion, and in some cases, drop structures have been installed in the bottom of channels. Nevertheless, many of the natural riparian features and scenic qualities associated with natural creekbeds are still intact. The intent of this designation is to retain and enhance the riparian habitat and scenic qualities of these creeks consistent with prudent drainage controls and protection of exiting residential development. 
C.  Creek Setbacks. 
1.  Establishing Creek Setbacks. At the time of any permit application for approval to build structures or alter topography, including, but is not limited to, applications for Design Review, Subdivision or Grading Permit approval, the creek setback shall be determined as part of the permit review. The minimum width of the creek setback shall be 50 feet from the centerline of the creek, but as a condition of permit approval, a setback greater than 50 feet may be required to protect the creek or its adjacent riparian habitat, if such is deemed necessary by the City or any other agency with review authority. 
2.  Creek Setback and Net Lot Area. The portion of a lot within a creek setback shall be excluded from the calculation of net lot area when determining conformance to any minimum net lot area requirement standards prescribed by this Chapter. 
D.  Creek Preservation and Enhancement Plan. 
1.  Submittal of Plan Required. In addition to the establishment of a creek setback as required by Section 22.29.090(C), a Creek Preservation and Enhancement Plan is required for all permit applications subject to this Section, and applicants shall provide as a part of permit application submittal, the following: 
a)  Visual materials and a narrative which describes existing creek conditions; 
b)  A description of the methods of protecting and enhancing the creek resource; 
c)  Scaled drawings which show a cross-section of the existing creekbed and creekbank; and 
d)  A creek re-vegetation plan which shall use native riparian vegetation from the local seed stock, where feasible. 
2.  Plan Approval. The Creek Preservation and Enhancement Plan is subject to the approval by the City and or any other applicable agencies' reviewing authority. When alteration of streambanks or streambeds is proposed, the applicable agencies shall be notified in accordance with their authority under State law and/or when their assistance is needed. 
3.  Erosion Prevention and Structural Improvements. Erosion in natural watercourses shall be controlled where creek capacity and bank stability necessitate, while maintaining consistency with the Creek Preservation and Enhancement Plan for that development. Minor structural improvements, e.g. drop structures, may be allowed if consistent with the concepts of the Creek Preservation and Enhancement Plan. 
E.  Criteria and Guidelines for Permit Approval. The applicable review authority shall consider the criteria and guidelines listed below, in its consideration of an application regarding property subject to this Section. 
1.  Existing native riparian habitat shall be preserved and enhanced by new development unless public safety concerns require removal of habitat for flood control or other public purposes. 
2.  Revegetation of a watercourse, if required as a part of the development, shall employ native vegetation, providing the type of vegetation is compatible with the watercourse's maintenance program and does not adversely alter channel capacity. 
3.  Natural watercourses shall be integrated into new development in such a way that they are accessible and provide a positive visual element. 
4.  Where feasible, existing natural waterways shall be protected and preserved in their natural state and channels, which are already modified, shall be restored. 
5.  Proposed drainage discharges into the protected watercourses shall be reviewed to minimize erosion of creekbanks and visual impacts. 
6.  New parcels which are created shall include adequate space outside of the creek setback for pools, patios, and appurtenant structures to ensure that property owners will not place improvements within the areas which require protection. 
7.  Grading, filling and construction activity near watercourses shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize impacts from increased runoff, erosion, sedimentation, biochemical degradation or thermal pollution. 
8.  On-site water control shall be required of major new developments so that no increase in peak flows occurs relative to the site's pre-development condition, unless the City determines that off-site measures can be employed which are equally effective in preventing adverse downstream impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010) 
   
22.29.100 - Alhambra Valley Districts - Design Review. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Design Review for Non-Residential Properties. All applications made for a building permit to construct or alter the exterior of a commercial, recreational, institutional or public structure, or where proposed grading involves the movement of 1,000 cubic yards or more of soil material, shall be subject to the Design Review requirements of this Section, in addition to the Criteria and Standards of Section 22.34.045. 
2.  Design Review for Residential Properties. All applications made for a building permit to build a new or enlarge an existing residential structure, including but not limited to single family residences, accessory buildings (for residential, utility, agricultural or animal use), arbors, pergolas or swimming pools shall be subject to the Design Review requirements of this Section. Building permits that do not involve enlarging a structure, such as siding and window replacement, shall be not subject to the requirements of this Section. 
B.  Application and Approval Required. Applications for Design Review pursuant to this Section shall be made as prescribed by Section 22.34.040, and may be appealed as prescribed by Sections 22.34.050-23.34.070. 
C.  Criteria, Standards and Guidelines. The Design Review approval authority shall render a decision based upon the following Criteria and Standards and shall also consider the Goals and Principals of the Alhambra Valley Design Guidelines, as adopted by resolution of the City Council, in its consideration of a Design Review application. 
1.  Site Plan and Grading. 
a)  The natural contours and vegetation of the land shall generally be restored after grading and other land disturbances so that a naturalistic appearance is maintained. 
b)  Private projects shall be designed to minimize damage to significant trees and other visual landmarks. 
c)  Hilltops, ridges, rock outcroppings, mature stands of trees, and other natural features shall be considered for preservation, at the time that any development applications are reviewed. 
2.  Home and Landscape Designs. 
a)  New home designs shall blend in with the semi-rural character of the area. Buildings on hillsides shall complement the topography of the site. Exterior building materials of wood, wood shingles and brick are preferred and exterior colors shall be earth tone colors. Bright colors shall be avoided. 
b)  New projects shall be designed to blend in with the rural setting of Alhambra Valley as much as possible. The use of fire resistant materials shall be encouraged. 
c)  New buildings which are proposed in highly visible areas, such as on hillsides, shall be sited, designed and landscaped so that supporting columns, piers and building undersides are not visually dominant. 
d)  Energy efficient features in new development shall be encouraged and new additions or remodeling projects shall conform with building code regulations related to energy conservation. 
D.  Findings and Decision. The review authority may approve a Design Review application only after making the following findings. 
1.  The design, layout, size, architectural features and general appearance of the proposed project is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan and with the development standards, design guidelines and all applicable provisions of this code, including this Title and any approved master plan and precise development plan. 
2.  The proposed project would maintain and enhance the community's character, provide for harmonious and orderly development, and create a desirable environment for the occupants, neighbors, and visiting public. 
3.  The proposed development would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; is not materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the vicinity; does not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future developments and does not create potential traffic, pedestrian or bicycle hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.110 - Alhambra Valley Districts - General Provisions and Fences. 
All uses and development applications within the Alhambra Valley Districts shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title, except for: 
A.  Design Review. Design Review shall be as prescribed in Section 22.29.100 of this Chapter; and 
B.  Fences. Notwithstanding the requirements and limitations prescribed in Section 22.34.090, Fences Walls and Hedges, the following exceptions and design standards shall apply: 
1.  Fences up to four feet in height are allowed at the front property boundary and within the front yard setback, but must be of an open-rail design. 
2.  Solid board fences shall be prohibited along Alhambra Valley and Reliez Valley Roads. Only open rail fencing within the front yard setback shall be allowed on all properties fronting these roadways. 
3.  Solid board fencing and walls along side and rear property boundaries are discouraged in or adjacent to agricultural areas. To minimize visual impacts of perimeter lot fencing, fencing on slopes greater than 15 percent shall be open rail or wire. Barbed wire may be used to keep grazing animals from wandering into residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
22.29.120 - Alhambra Valley Districts - Residential and Agricultural Compatibility. 
A.  Purpose. This Section is included in the zoning regulations to enhance and encourage agricultural operations within the Alhambra Valley Districts and provide residents with proper notification of such agricultural uses. Where non-agricultural land uses extend into agricultural areas or exist side by side, agricultural operations can be the subject of nuisance complaints, resulting in detrimental impacts on farming. However, it is intended that through mandatory disclosures, purchasers and users will better understand the impact of living near agricultural operations and be prepared to accept attendant conditions as the natural result of living in or near rural areas. 
B.  Compatibility Standards. 
1.  Agriculture shall be protected from nuisance complaints from non-agricultural land uses. 
2.  Where a discretionary development permit is sought within or adjacent to areas designated for agricultural use, natural or constructed buffers between the agricultural and urban use shall be required. A minimum 60-foot setback shall be required for non-agricultural structures located within or adjacent to cultivated agricultural areas. Such buffers must occur on the parcel for which the discretionary permit is sought. 
3.  An agricultural or equestrian notification statement in the property deeds shall be required for all new residential lots created in or adjacent to planned agricultural districts. The statement shall inform owners regarding the nuisance and hazards associated with nearby agricultural practices. Such concerns may include, but are not limited to, the noise, odors, dust, chemicals, smoke, and hours of operation that may accompany agricultural operations. 
4.  Where unmitigatable conflicts exist between agricultural and residential uses, priority shall generally be given to maintaining the agricultural use. 
C.  Agricultural Standards. 
1.  Grazing areas shall include fencing to contain grazing animals, keep domestic dogs out of grazing areas and deter trespassing. 
2.  The use of toxic and nutritive chemicals by agricultural operators shall be minimized. 
3.  Both public and private infrastructure that supports agriculture shall be promoted. 
4.  Efforts to provide adequate, high quality and fairly-priced water supply for agricultural irrigation shall be supported. 
(Ord. No. 1359 C.S., § 14, 12-15-2010)  
CHAPTER 22.30 - U UNDESIGNATED DISTRICTS 
 
22.30.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,112.4.)  
22.30.020 - Purpose. 
The U Undesignated District is established as a holding zone, to be assigned automatically to annexed property in the absence of zoning hearings simultaneously with the annexation or prezoning hearings in advance of the annexation. The U Undesignated District designation shall be removed in favor of a zoning district consistent with the General Plan following application by the property owner or upon the City Planning Commission's initiative. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,112.0.)  
22.30.030 - Permitted Uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
A.  The only use permitted in the U Undesignated District shall be agriculture, including horticulture, viticulture and the raising of crops and fruit or nut-bearing trees. 
B.  Single family dwellings on existing legal lots. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,112.1.)  
22.30.040 - Conditional Uses. 
There shall be no conditional uses in the U Undesignated District. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,112.2.)  
22.30.050 - Division of Land. 
No division of land zoned U Undesignated shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,112.3.)  
CHAPTER 22.32 - AGRICULTURAL LAND CONSERVATION 
 
22.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the agricultural land conservation provisions of this Title is to provide enabling provisions to allow the City to enter into agricultural land preservation contracts permitted by the California Land Conservation Act. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.0.)  
22.32.020 - Establishment. 
Agricultural preserves may be established within any area of the City designated on its General Plan as being planned for open space used and within any area of the City within the areas identified on the General Plan as "conservation zones." All land within an agricultural preserve shall be subject to a land conservation contract or agreement. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.1.)  
22.32.030 - Standards. 
There shall no minimum size for agricultural preserves in the City provided, however, that the use of the land shall be devoted to agricultural uses as defined in the California Land Conservation Act (Government Code Section 51200 ff. as amended). 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.2.)  
22.32.040 - Contracts. 
Land conservation contracts shall be for a minimum term of ten years, renewable annually in the manner provided in Government Code Section 51244. Land conservation contracts shall include the following: 
A.  Landowner promises to restrict the use of the land to those agricultural and compatible uses allowed by terms of the contract; 
B.  Provisions that, if the landowner fails to comply with the agreement's terms and conditions so as to render the land or portion thereof unfit for further agricultural use, the owner shall pay as liquidated damages to the City a sum equal to the equalized assessment value of the property as established by the County Assessor on the lien date next following the date of breach. This provision shall not be deemed a waiver of other legal or equitable remedies for enforcement of the terms of the contracts; 
C.  Provisions that the contract may be cancelled only by the mutual agreement of the owner and the City pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 51282, 51283(a) and (b), and 51283.3, provided, however, that under no circumstances shall the payment of a cancellation fee provided therein be waived, deferred or made subject to any contingency whatever; 
D.  Provisions that division of the property subject to the agreement into two or more parcels may be construed by the City as a notice of nonrenewal by the property owner upon a finding by the Board of Adjustments that the effect of the division is detrimental to the ultimate preservation of the property for exclusively agricultural use. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.3.)  
22.32.050 - Zoning. 
Land subject to an agricultural land conservation agreement or contract shall be zoned to RF Recreational Facilities District, OS Open Space District or U Undesignated District. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.4.)  
22.32.060 - Application. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, establish rules and procedures for submitting applications for land conservation contracts and for review of the applications by the appropriate City agencies. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,113.5.)  
CHAPTER 22.33 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
22.33.010 - Hillside Development Regulations—Purpose. 
The hills of Martinez are a highly valued natural feature of the community. The Martinez General Plan recognizes the intrinsic value and sensitive nature of the hills and sets as policies and goals the preservation of the hills from overbuilding and visually intrusive development. It is the intent of this Chapter to implement the aims of the General Plan Land Use Element, Hill Residential Areas and the Environmental Goals and Policies of the Open Space Element, by: 
1.  Relating the intensity of development to the limitations imposed by topography, hydrology and geology and avoiding development in areas prone to erosion, flooding and landsliding; and 
2.  Ensuring that the level of development is consistent with the level of services which reasonably can be provided in hill areas; and 
3.  Preserving the natural features, environmental quality and scenic character of the hills while providing creative, innovative and safe residential development with a variety of housing types. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any form of residential development including all sites to be developed as a subdivision or as a planned unit development on properties with any areas of 10% and/or above slope as shown on the Slope Analysis or Seismic and Geologic Hazards Maps of the Open Space, Conservation, Seismic Safety, Scenic Roadway Element of the General Plan or as determined by a slope and hazard area map as described in Section 22.33.020. 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § II, 1994.)  
22.33.020 - Maximum Allowable Density Calculations. 
The maximum allowable density of residential units on properties governed by these sections is calculated by using a slope and hazard area map and the following Table No. 1. The maximum allowable density shall only be permitted where the property design Standards set forth in Section 22.33.040 of this Chapter are met; provided however that the City may determine that a lower density is required to meet the findings, objectives and other criteria as established in this Chapter or that a lower density is required due to the topography, hydrology, geology and/or other physical limitations. 
As part of a complete application for development of property governed by this Chapter, the applicant shall submit a slope and hazard area map of the site upon which development is proposed at a minimum scale of 1 inch per 100 feet, with a minimum contour interval of 10 feet. Percent slope shall be shown on the map as described in the following information. Percent slope is determined by dividing the change in elevation between contours by the horizontal distance between the respective contours. The map shall show site areas of slope in the categories of 1-10 percent, to 10.01-15 percent, 15.01-20 percent, 20.01-30 percent and over 30 percent. The map shall also show Hazardous Areas as discussed in Section 22.33.030C. A tabulation of the site area in acres in each of these slope range categories shall be included. 
See the following sample, Figure 1 which shall be used in showing the information required by this section. Use the following Table No. 1 to find the maximum allowable density. Take each category and move horizontally to the number listed under the zoning designation of the property. This is the maximum number of units per acre allowed in the corresponding zone designation. Multiply this number by the acres of the site (as shown on the map) in this category. Do this for each category. Add up the total allowed in each category for the maximum allowable density. 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § II, 1994.) 
TABLE OF ALLOWABLE DENSITY (MAXIMUM UNITS PER GROSS ACRE) 


Site 	Zoning Districts 
Category 	R-1.5 	R-2.5 	R-3.5 	R-6.0 	R-7.5 	R-10 	R-15 	R-20 	R-40 	R-80 	R-100 


0-10% 	29.0 	17.4 	12.4 	7.3 	5.8 	4.3 	2.9 	2.0 	1.0 	0.5 	0.4 

10-15% 	4.3 	2.6 	2.3 	1.3 	1.3 	1.3 	0.8 	0.5 	0.3 	0.15 	0.12 

15-20% 09 	0.9 	0.9 	0.9 	0.8 	0.8 	0.8 	0.8 	0.5 	0.3 	0.15 	0.12 

20-30% 06 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.6 	0.5 	0.3 	0.15 	0.12 

30% & over 0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 

Hazard areas 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 

TABLE NO. 1 
 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § II, 1994.)  
22.33.030 - Density Calculations—Exemptions, Exclusions, Conditions. 
A.  These regulations are not intended to preclude development on lawfully existing parcels. A parcel of land, lawfully in existence on March 19, 1915, shall be exempted only from the hillside development calculations set forth in Chapter 22.33, when proposed for only one dwelling unit. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary stated herein, such parcel will still be required to meet the Development Standards, set forth in Section 22.33.040, and the Maximum Floor Area Ratio Standards for Hillside Lots, set forth in Section 22.33.060 of this Chapter. 
B.  Construction in areas of over 30% slope requires such extreme alteration of the topography as to severely and unalterably depreciate the scenic quality of the natural landform. Therefore, except as provided below, site areas of greater than 30% slope shall be excluded from development. These areas shall not be developed, except as follows: 
1.  On an existing lot of record development of only one single family house is permitted on slopes of greater than 30% as long as there is no building site for that house on 30% or under slope. 
2.  Roads connecting development areas may pass over areas of over 30% slope, only where such roads cannot be located on 30% or less slopes and such roads are approved by the Planning Commission. Grading shall be limited to that necessary for the road or the minimum amount which will create the most natural appearing contours. 
3.  In either case (B.1. and B.2.), development shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that significant alteration of the topography will be minimized and that hazards to public safety will not be incurred. 
C.  All land areas, regardless of slope, which are hazardous to life and/or property due to soils, geological, seismic or hydrological factors shall be excluded for the purposes of calculating the permitted density of development. Repair of these areas shall not allow them to be counted in the maximum density calculation. Any area of the site which has been excluded from density calculations under this subsection C shall be precluded from further development by a scenic easement, dedication of open space, deed of development rights, or other appropriate method approved by the City. 
D.  No development shall be approved on a visually significant hillside or ridgeline as depicted on the Visual Environment Map in the Open Space Conservation Element of the General Plan. An exception may be granted by the Planning Commission if it makes all the following findings: 
1.  Due to the application of this Chapter and specifically this subsection D, a structure could not otherwise be constructed on the parcel; 
2.  Development is designed to take place is far beneath the visually significant ridge as practicable or in the least visible portion of the visible hillside; and 
3.  The proposed siting, grading, landscaping and architecture are such that the development will not conflict with the standards set forth in Section 22.33.040. 
(Ord. 1211, C.S. § II, 1994.)  
22.33.040 - Development Standards. 
A.  The proposed grading of the property shall be designed to minimize disruption of the natural topography. Grading shall be limited to roads, driveways, garage pads, cuts under the house and cuts on the uphill side of the house which are screened from public view by the house or existing vegetation or as required by sight distance requirements, drainage, and slope stability purposes. All grading shall be designed in such a manner that it presents a finished look of rounded slopes. All exposed graded areas shall be hydroseeded/re-landscaped to minimize erosion. All proposed roads shall follow contour lines, where feasible, to minimize grading. 
B.  Areas of slope instability due to slides, drainage or other geologic hazards shall not be developed. Where these conditions cannot be mitigated by locating development away front the hazard, they shall be repaired as required for the protection of public safety. 
C.  The proposed development shall preserve the appearance of scenic ridgelines and protect natural features on the site in their natural state such as trees, creeks, riparian corridors, stock ponds, hill slopes, knolls, ridgelines, outcroppings and natural habitat areas. Natural features of the site such as trees and rock or land formations shall be used to reduce the development's visibility. 
D.  The proposed development shall maintain a high quality residential design while reflecting any existing residential patterns and character. It shall minimize the impact of new residential development, to the extent feasible, upon existing residents' views and minimize shadows on adjacent properties. The design of the homes including massing, roof lines, exterior materials, colors, and decking shall be designed to complement the terrain. 
E.  The minimum lot area shall not be less than that prescribed by the applicable land use district. However, the required lot areas may be increased above the minimum when the Planning Commission finds that it is necessary to do so because of the physical terrain in order to ensure that there will be a suitable building site for the approved use. In determining whether it is necessary to increase the lot area, the reviewing body shall apply the standards set forth in this section. 
F.  Open space lands within the proposed development shall be left in private ownership with scenic easements restricting development unless public ownership or access is desirable or necessary. 
G.  The character of the natural setting shall be enhanced with natural landscape designs emphasizing native species and retaining existing vegetation. Plant species shall be selected which are drought tolerant and minimize erosion and fire hazard risks to persons and property. 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § 11, 1994.)  
22.33.050 - Maximum Floor Area Ratio for Existing Hillside Lots. 
A.  This regulation is included in this Chapter to limit the size of structures on substandard size hillside lots and to encourage the consolidation of substandard size hillside lots into larger building sites and encourage compatibility with existing homes in the neighborhood, terrain and lot size. 
B.  Where the natural slope of the site under the proposed structure exceeds 20% and the site area is substandard in terms of current zoning and/or slope density site area requirements (Section 22.12.150), a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of .30 shall be allowed for all structures on the site. 
C.  To calculate the allowable floor area for a site subject to FAR regulation, the site area is multiplied by the FAR. The resulting floor area is the maximum gross floor area allowable on the site except in the following instances: 
1.  The floor area of a garage or carport shall be allowed in addition to the maximum floor area resulting from the FAR. 
2.  On a site situated between substandard size sites improved with buildings, the maximum FAR shall be the average FAR on the improved sites adjoining the sidelines of the site, or that of paragraph B above (whichever is greater). 
3.  Where a site is not situated between substandard size sites improved with buildings and where substandard size sites comprising 40% of the frontage on a block are improved with buildings, the maximum FAR shall be the average of the FAR's of existing substandard size sites in the block or that of paragraph B above (whichever is greater). 
4.  The Planning Commission may consider requests for additional floor area beyond that permitted under this section by use permit (Section 22.40 et seq.). 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § II 1974; Ord. 1100 C.S. § 11, 1987.)  
22.33.060 - Definitions. 
A.  "Substandard Size Hillside Lot" means an existing lot which does not meet the site area requirements of the current zoning and/or hillside density calculations set forth in this Chapter. 
B.  "Visually Significant Hillside or Ridgeline" means topographical features which dominate the visual field from both near and far views as shown on the Visual Environmental Map of the Open Space, Conservation, Seismic Safety, Scenic Roadways Element of the Martinez General Plan. 
(Ord. 1211 C.S. § II, 1994.)  
CHAPTER 22.34 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
22.34.010 - Purpose. 
The general provisions and exceptions are incorporated into the zoning title to provide a listing and explanation of provisions and exceptions which are common to more than one or, all zoning districts. The provisions contained herein are to be considered applicable to all zoning districts unless otherwise indicated, the same as if they were separately included under each zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 20, 2-19-2014; Ord. 1328 C.S., § 4 (part), 2006.)  
22.34.020 - Environmental Impact. 
In addition to the requirements of this Title all proposed use changes and/or construction shall be subject to the provisions of Title 20 of this code. As provided therein, the potential environment impact of a proposed use change and/or construction project is required to be evaluated prior to a final determination as to the acceptability of a proposed use, whether listed as a permitted or conditional use in the zoning regulations or not. A decision must be reached as to the applicability of the Environmental Quality Act to a proposed use change and/or construction project and, if applicable, as to the potential environmental impacts of the proposed use change and/or construction project prior to any decisions as to the acceptability of the proposed use change and/or construction project. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.1.)  
22.34.030 - Design Review—Applicability—R and RR Districts. 
Each application made for a building permit to construct or alter the exterior of a structure shall be subject to architectural and site design review by the Planning Department prior to issuance of the permit, except as provided below relative to the R and RR Single Family Residential Districts. 
This section and Sections 22.34.040 through 22.34.070 shall apply to applications for building permits in the R and RR districts only when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The permit site is an undeveloped parcel adjoining one or more additional undeveloped parcels under the same ownership, as shown on the current Tax Assessor's rolls. "Adjoining" for purposes of this section and Section 22.34.030 through 22.34.070 includes parcels separated by public, rights-of-way, including streets and nonexclusive easements. 
B.  The permit site is located in a visually significant area. "Visually significant" areas are those labeled as "visually significant hilltops and ridges," "visually significant hillsides," "visually significant riparian vegetation" and "visually significant skyline vegetation" on the map entitled "visual environment" within the open space and conservation element of the General Plan. 
C.  The permit site is located within a seismic or geologic hazard area. A permit site shall be considered as located within a seismic or geologic hazard area if it appears to lie on a fault trace or on "slopes, twenty (20) to thirty (30) percent having high landslide susceptibility" or on "slopes over thirty (30) percent in grade" as identified on the map entitled seismic and geologic hazards within the open space and conservation element of the General Plan. 
D.  The natural grade of the permit site under the proposed structure has an average slope of ten (10) percent or greater. The method for computing slope shall be that specified in Section 22.12.170. 
(Ord. 845 C.S., 1976: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,114.2(a).)  
22.34.040 - Design Review—Plan Submittal—Action by Planning Director. 
Complete site plans and elevations shall be submitted to the Planning Department showing all proposed structural development, the relationship of existing structures and all other proposed improvements. Such drawings shall be considered by the Planning Director in an endeavor to insure that the architecture and general appearance of the site, structures and grounds will be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood, will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the City, and reflect City development policies and goals. The Planning Director may, at any time, withhold action and refer the, matter directly to the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.2(b).)  
22.34.045 - Criteria and Standards. 
The Community Development Director shall not approve any Design Review application unless the proposed design and use conforms with the following criteria and standards by: 
A.  Complying with all other applicable provisions of the Martinez Municipal Code involving the physical development of buildings, structures and property, including use restrictions; 
B.  Providing desirable surroundings for occupants as well as for neighbors. Emphasis is placed upon exterior design with regard to height, bulk, and area openings; breaks in the facade facing on a public or private street; line and pitch of the roof; and arrangement of structures on the parcel; 
C.  Having a harmonious relationship with existing and proposed neighboring developments avoiding both excessive variety and monotonous repetition, but allowing similarity of style, if warranted; 
D.  Using a limited palette of exterior colors; those colors must be harmonious and architecturally compatible with their surrounding environment; 
E.  Using a limited number of materials on the exterior face of the building or structure. In addition, all interior surfaces normally visible from public property shall be finished; 
F.  Having exterior lighting appropriately designed with respect to convenience, safety, and effect on occupants as well as neighbors; 
G.  Effectively concealing work areas, both inside and outside of buildings, in the case of non-residential facilities; 
H.  Undergrounding all utility boxes unless it can be shown that they can be effectively screened from the view of the general public. 
I.  Designing the type and location of planting with respect to the preservation of specimen and landmark trees, water conservation as set forth in Chapter 22.35, and maintenance of all planting; 
J.  Establishing a circulation pattern, parking layout and points of ingress and egress (both vehicular and pedestrian), designed to maximize pedestrian safety and convenience and to minimize traffic congestion resulting from the impediment of vehicular movement. When applicable, access for handicapped individuals should be considered; 
K.  Ensuring that all signs be designed so that they are in scale with the subject development, and will not create a traffic hazard. Emphasis is placed upon the identification of the use or building rather than the advertising of same; 
L.  Substantially preserving views from nearby properties where this can be done without severe or undue restrictions on the use of the site, balancing the property rights of the applicant and the affected property owner(s). 
The Community Development Director may attach conditions, including requirements for dedications and offsite improvements, to the approval of any Design Review application when necessary to assure compliance with this section. Approval of Design Review shall expire in one year, in the same manner as set forth in Section 22.40.120 for use permits. 
(Ord. 1208 C.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 1195 C.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 1043 C.S. § I, 1985.)  
22.34.050 - Design Review—Appeal to Board of Adjustments. 
The applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning Director to the Board of Adjustments in writing, within 10 days of the rendering of the decision. The Board of Adjustments shall review the staff decision within 45 days of receipt of said appeal and may affirm, modify or reverse the findings of the Planning Director. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.2(c).0)  
22.34.060 - Design Review—Appeal to Planning Commission. 
A.  Within 10 days of an action taken by the Board of Adjustments, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be made in a form prescribed by the Planning Commission and filed with the Planning Department. The Planning Commission may affirm, modify or reverse a decision of the Board of Adjustments. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall hear the matter de novo. Design review approval shall require a majority vote of the members of the Planning Commission voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying design review approval. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 1, 2000; Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.2(d).)  
22.34.070 - Design Review—Appeal to City Council. 
A.  Within 10 days of an action taken by the Planning Commission, the applicant may appeal the decision in writing to the City Council. The appeal shall be made in a form prescribed by the Council and filed with the City Clerk. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse a decision of the Planning Commission. 
B.  The City Council shall hear the matter de novo. Design review approval shall require a majority vote of the members of the City Council voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying design review approval. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 2, 2000; Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.2(e).)  
22.34.080 - Signs. 
Sign regulations for all zoning districts in the City shall be as prescribed in Title 16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.3.)  
22.34.090 - Fences, Walls and Hedges. 
Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding 6 feet in height shall be permitted, except that they may not exceed 3 ½ feet in height within a required front yard area, with the following exceptions: 
A.  In the R Residential Districts, on a site having a natural downslope of 20% or more in the required front yard, a fence, wall or hedge not exceeding 6 feet in height shall be permitted in the front yard; 
B.  In the R, I and PA districts, fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed 3 ½ feet in height anywhere within 50 feet within a street intersection; 
C.  In the C Commercial Districts, fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed 3 ½ feet anywhere within 15 feet of a street intersection. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.4.)  
22.34.100 - Addition of Permitted Uses. 
Upon application, or on its own initiation, the City Planning Commission may add a use to the list of permitted uses prescribed in Sections 22.16.040 through 22.16.070, 22.18.030 and 22.18.040 of this Title if the Commission makes the following findings that: 
A.  The addition of the use to the list of permitted uses will be in accord with the purposes of the district in which the use is proposed; 
B.  The use will be an appropriate addition to the list of permitted uses because the use has the same basic characteristics as the uses permitted in the district; 
C.  The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; 
D.  The use will not adversely affect the character of any district in which it is proposed to be permitted; 
E.  The use will not create more vehicular traffic than the volume normally created by any of the uses permitted in the district; 
F.  The use will not create more odor, dust, dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or any other objectionable influence than the amount normally created by any of the uses permitted in the district. 
When a use has been added to a list of permitted uses in accord with the procedures prescribed in this section, the use shall be deemed to be listed as a permitted use in the appropriate section, and shall be added to the text of this section of this Title when it is next published. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.5.)  
22.34.110 - Conformity With District Regulations. 
A.  No site or structure shall be used or designated for use for any purpose or in any manner other than in conformity with regulations for the district in which the site or structure is located. 
B.  No structure are shall be erected and no existing structure or use shall be moved, altered or, enlarged except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
C.  No yard or other open space surrounding any structure or use shall be used, encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the regulation for the district in which the yard or open space is located. 
D.  No site held in one ownership at that time of the adoption of this Title or at any time thereafter shall be reduced in any manner below the minimum area, frontage, width or depth prescribed for the district in which the site is located. 
(Ord. 822, C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.6.)  
22.34.130 - Yard Spaces. 
No yard space provided about any structure in compliance with the regulation for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to provide a yard space for any other structure, and no yard on one site shall be deemed to provide a yard space for a structure on any other site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.8.)  
22.34.140 - Coverage—Measurement. 
The percent of the site area covered by structures shall be measured by dividing the number of square feet of horizontal area covered by structures, open or enclosed, by the total horizontal area within the property lines of the site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.9.)  
22.34.150 - Yard Requirements—Measurement. 
A.  Required yards shall be measured as the minimum horizontal distance from the property line of the site or street line to a line parallel thereto on the site; provided, that where an official plan line has been set by action of the City Council or any other duly authorized agency or official, required yards shall be measured from the official plan line, and no provision of this Title shall be construed to permit a structure or use to extend beyond such line; and provided further, that where a site abuts on a street having only a portion of its required width dedicated or reserved for street purposes, required yards shall be measured from a line drawn on the boundary of the additional width required for street purposes abutting the site. 
B.  On a site which is not rectangular or approximately rectangular in shape, required yards shall be measured in the manner prescribed by the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.10.)  
22.34.160 - Yard Requirements—Exceptions. 
A.  Architectural features including sills, chimneys, cornices and eaves may extend into a required side yard or a space between buildings not more than 18 inches and may extend into a required front or rear yard not more than 6 feet. 
B.  Open, unenclosed, uncovered balconies, porches, platforms, stairways and landings placed, no part of which is more than 6 feet above the surface of the ground, may extend into a required yard or space between buildings not more than 6 feet. 
C.  Open, unenclosed, uncovered metal fire escapes may project into any required yard or space between buildings not more than 3 feet. 
D.  Swimming pools shall be permitted in any yard except a required front yard. No pump or filter installation shall be located less than 5 feet from a side property line or the rear property line of a reversed corner lot. 
E.  Fences, walls, hedges, walks, driveways and retaining walls may occupy any required yard or other open space, subject to the limitation prescribed in the district regulation. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.11.)  
22.34.170 - Height Limitations-Measurement and Exceptions. 
A.  Method of Measurement. To limit the height of structures and to encourage conformity with the natural grade upon which they are place; the height of a structure shall be measured vertically from any point of the surface of the ground covered by the structure directly over said point. For residential sites (and other sites at the option of the Planning Commission) exceeding 10% existing natural slope for the portion of the site covered by the proposed structure, height shall be measured from the original natural grade. 
B.  Exceptions to Maximum Height Limitations. 
1.  The Planning Commission may consider requests for exceptions to a zoning district's maximum height limitation by use permit (Chapter 22.40 et seq.). 
2.  Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, penthouses, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, scenery lofts, transmission towers, fire towers and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances covering not more than 10% of the ground area covered by the structure, may be erected to a height not more than 25 feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the district in which the site is located. Utility poles and towers shall not be subject to the height limits prescribed in the district regulations. Radio and television aerials may be erected to a height not more than 50 feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the district in which the site is located. 
(Ord. 1335 C.S. § 4, 2007: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.12.)  
22.34.180 - Installation and Maintenance of Landscaped Areas. 
All landscaped areas or nonstructural site development elements other than parking, required under use permits, variances or PUD permits, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Nonstructural site development elements shall include but are not limited to: lighting needed for safety purposes, sprinkler systems, walkways, stairs, ramps, benches, screens, fences, walls or any structure for which a building permit is not required. 
A.  Installation Performance Bond. When landscaping and/or nonstructural site development elements, other than parking are required as a condition of approval, as prescribed in this title, a performance bond, surety bond or cash deposit, in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of materials and installation, shall be posted prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
B.  Maintenance of Landscaped Areas. A landscaped area provided in compliance with the regulations prescribed in this title shall be planted with materials suitable for screening and enhancement of the facility, and plant materials shall be replaced as needed to maintain the site in at least the condition shown on the approved landscape plan. Landscaped areas shall be watered, weeded, pruned, fertilized, sprayed and/or otherwise maintained as may be prescribed by the Planning Department. Performance bonds in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the replacement cost of the landscaping may be required to be posted to guarantee the continued maintenance of required landscaping, for up to a 10-year period, when determined by the Board of Adjustments or Planning Commission to be appropriate or necessary because of the important role of landscaping as a part of the approved overall design concept. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.13.)  
22.34.190 - Dog Fanciers' Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  A dog fanciers' dog license shall be obtained from Contra Costa County animal control only after issuance of a conditional use permit and only in the following land use districts: Residential Districts, except R-1.5 and R-2.5; Commercial Districts; Industrial Districts; Environmental Conservation Districts. Dog fancier's conditional use permits shall not be granted on sites of less than 20,000 square feet. Dog fancier's permits shall limit the number of dogs over six months of age permitted on the site to 4, except that in Residential Districts requiring 20,000 square feet or more minimum lot sizes, the maximum number of dogs permitted shall be fixed by the Board of Adjustments as a condition in granting of a conditional use permit. All dogs maintained by dog fanciers shall be confined on the premises or trained and exercised under the owner's control and shall be enclosed in a building during the hours of darkness. 
B.  Compliance. All dog fanciers within the City shall comply with the regulations of this section within 12 months of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein by the following means: 
1.  Dog fanciers who cannot comply with these provisions due to inadequate site area, improper zoning or other reasons shall not be permitted to renew their yearly dog fanciers' license through Contra Costa County animal control at the expiration of the current license, and the use shall be abandoned thereon. 
2.  Dog fanciers who can comply with these provisions shall do so through the obtaining of a conditional use permit prior to renewal of their yearly dog fanciers' license through Contra Costa County animal control at the expiration of the current license. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.14.)  
22.34.200 - Quarries and Crushing Plants. 
A.  No person shall establish, maintain or operate in the City any rock quarry, sand or gravel pit, rock crushing plant, or any apparatus for the manufacture or production of rock, sand or gravel or for the exportation or importation, or sale of earth fill without first obtaining a land use permit from the Board of Adjustments after due notice and hearing under the procedures set forth in Chapter 22.40 of this Title. 
B.  The Board of Adjustments may approve an application for a quarry or a crushing plant if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the use will not be nor is likely to become a public nuisance, or will be dangerous or detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.15.)  
22.34.210 - Conditional Zoning. 
On the Planning Commission's recommendation, the City Council may impose conditions on the zoning reclassification of property. These conditions shall be those only which the Council determines, after considering the Commission's recommendations, to be necessary to avoid circumstances inimical to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to fulfill public needs reasonably expected to result from the allowable uses and/or development; and the conditions shall be reasonably related to the necessities of each case considering all the relevant facts. 
Further, these conditions shall relate to special problems of the property if rezoned, such as water supply, sewers, utilities, drainage, grading or topography, access, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or proposed physical developments affecting nearby properties. 
The ordinance reclassifying the property shall not be operative until the conditions have been satisfied, or assurance provided by way of contract (with adequate surety), as found and declared by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,114.16.)  
22.34.220 - Limits on Large-Scale Retail Stores. 
For retail stores exceeding 90,000 square feet of gross floor area, no more than 5% of the total sales floor shall be devoted to the sale of non-taxable merchandise. 
(Ord. 1296 § I, 2002.)  
22.34.230 - Homeless Shelters. 
A.  Homeless shelters, emergency may be located within areas of the SC - Service Commercial District or the LI- Light Industrial District, and with the following development and performance standards: 
1.  On-site management and on-site security shall be provided during all hours when the emergency shelter is in operation at a ratio of 1 staff member for every 15 persons utilizing the shelter. One office or cubicle intake area per 10 clients shall be maintained. An indoor onsite waiting area of no less than 275 square feet shall be provided. 
2.  External lighting shall be provided for security purposes as a minimum average of 3 foot candles at ground level. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible with the surrounding area. 
3.  The development may provide 1 or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and staff: 
a.  Central cooking and dining room(s). 
b.  Recreation room. 
c.  Counseling center. 
d.  Child care facilities. 
e.  Other support services. 
4.  Parking and outdoor facilities shall be designed to provide security for residents, visitors, employees and the surrounding area. On-site parking spaces shall be provided as required by Section 22.36.070.A.11, Parking - Miscellaneous Use Table. 
5.  A refuse storage area shall be provided that is completely enclosed with masonry walls not less than 5 feet high with a solid-gated opening and that is large enough to accommodate a standard-sized trash bin adequate for use on the parcel. The refuse enclosure shall be accessible to refuse collection vehicles. 
6.  The agency or organization operating the shelter shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than 180 days in a calendar year. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
b.  Staff and services shall be provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter and income. 
c.  The provider shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents. 
7.  No emergency homeless shelter shall be located within 300 feet of another emergency homeless shelter site. 
8.  The facility shall obtain and shall at all times maintain good standing with any and all Federal, State, County and City licenses as required by each such agencies for the owner(s), operator(s), and/or staff on the proposed facility. 
9.  The maximum number of beds or clients permitted to be served (eating, showering and/or spending the night) shall not exceed 30 persons. 
B.  Homeless shelters, ongoing are subject to the same requirements for emergency homeless shelters in Subsection A above, with the exception of 22.34.230.A.9, as maximum occupancy is to be established by use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 21, 2-19-2014)  
22.34.240 - Reasonable Accommodation. 
A.  Application. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted with the planning application form (no fee) and with a letter to the Planning Division Director and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone numbers. 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made. 
3.  The name of the property owner and owner's written consent or signature on planning application form. 
4.  The current actual use of the property. 
5.  The basis for the claim that the person(s) is considered disabled under the fair housing laws. 
6.  The zoning code ordinance provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested. 
7.  Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the person(s). 
8.  Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the reasonable accommodation. 
9.  Other relevant supportive information as requested by the Planning Division Director or his or her designee, consistent with fair housing laws. 
B.  Decision. Planning Division Director or his or her designee shall render a decision in writing within 30 days after the application is complete, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based on the findings in Subsection C. 
C.  Findings. The Planning Division Director or his or her designee shall approve the application, with or without conditions, if the following findings are made: 
1.  The housing will be used by a disabled person; 
2.  The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available a disabled person; 
3.  The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and 
4.  The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
D.  Appeal. An appeal of the decision by the Planning Division Director or his or her designee may be made pursuant to the appeal procedures in Section 22.06.050. 
E.  Review with other land use applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires other discretionary approval (including but not limited to: design review, variance, conditional use permit, rezoning, general plan amendment, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by Subsection A together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 22, 2-19-2014)  
CHAPTER 22.35 - WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPE 
 
22.35.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and encourage water conservation in landscaping and irrigation for new development projects. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.020 - Application. 
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all applications for architectural and site design review as set forth in Chapter 22.34. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to applications for one (1) single family residence or to that portion of a site used for the irrigation of edible crops, or to that portion of a site on which reclaimed water is exclusively used. A variance from the requirements of this Chapter may be granted pursuant to Chapter 22.44. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.030 - Alternative Water Sources. 
All uses of Water in the common open space of a new development project for ornamental purposes, such as ponds, lakes, or fountains, shall be supplied, operated, and maintained with reclaimed water or other alternative sources of water, to the extent available. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.040 - Plant Selection. 
No less than 90 percent of the plants selected in non-turf areas shall be suited to the climate of the region and require minimal water once established. No more than 10 percent of the plants may be of a non-drought tolerant variety as long as such plants are planted in close proximity to each other and can be irrigated separately from the drought-tolerant plants. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.050 - Turf Selection and Limitations. 
A.  The combined turf and/or water area (such as pools, ponds and fountains) shall be limited to 25 percent of the landscaped areas. 
B.  No turf shall be allowed in median strips in areas less than 8 feet wide, or on slopes greater than 4:1. 
C.  This Section shall not apply to public parks, golf courses, cemeteries, and school and recreation areas. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.060 - Soil Conditioning and Mulching. 
A.  A soils report shall be submitted with landscape plans, showing soil type, soil composition and pH. The soil shall be modified to comport with the recommendation of the soils report. 
B.  A minimum of 2 inches of mulch shall be added in non-turf areas to the soil surface after planting. Non-porous material shall not be placed under the mulch. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.070 - Irrigation. 
A.  Sprinklers and sprays shall not be used in areas less than 8 feet wide. Drip and bubblers that exceed 1.5 gallons per minute per device shall not be used. 
B.  To minimize runoff, no sprinkler head shall be used on slopes exceeding 15 percent or exceeding 10 percent within 10 feet of hardscape, unless such sprinkler head has a precipitation rate of .85" per hour or less. 
C.  Valves and circuits shall be separated based on hydrozones. 
D.  Newly installed trees shall have drip or bubbler irrigation systems. 
E.  Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. 
F.  Serviceable check valves shall be required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage. 
G.  Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage. The system shall be designed for minimum runoff and overspray onto non-irrigated areas. 
H.  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic controller capable of dual or multiple programming Controllers shall have multiple cycle start capacity and flexible calendar program. 
I.  Pop-up sprinklers in lawn areas shall have at least a 4" pop-up height. 
J.  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with automatic rain shutoff devices. 
K.  Irrigation plans shall include: 
1.  Irrigated turf area (in square feet). 
2.  Irrigated non-turf area (in square feet). 
3.  Flow rate in gallons per minute per valve. 
4.  Estimated water use per hydrozone in gallons. The formula for determining the estimated water use per hydrozone is set forth at Section 22.35.100. 
5.  Estimated total water use in gallons (sum of hydrozones). The formula for determining the estimated total water use is set forth at Section 22.35.100. 
L.  Upon completing the installation of the landscaping and irrigation system, a landscape irrigation audit shall be performed by a certified landscape irrigation auditor during the maintenance period. The results of the audit shall be used to produce an irrigation schedule. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.080 - Certification. 
The applicant shall provide a certificate of substantial completion to the City, signed by (1) a licensed contractor and (2) a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, or other licensed or certified professional in a related field. Each of the signatories to the certificate of substantial completion shall certify that they conducted a final field observation prior to signing the certificate. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.090 - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in this Chapter shall have the meaning set forth below: 
A.  "Automatic controller" means a mechanical or solid state timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
B.  "Check valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so as to minimize drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads. 
C.  "Conversion factor" means a number that converts the estimated total water use from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows: 
(325,529 gallons/43,560 square feet) / 12 inches = (0.62) 
325,829 gallons = one acre foot 
43,569 square feet = one acre 
12 inches = one foot 
Gallons per year may be converted to 100-cubic-feet per year (another common billing unit for water) by dividing gallons per year by 748 (748 gallons = 100 cubic feet). 
D.  "Estimated total water use" means the annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy, as determined by the formula set forth at Section 22.35.100. 
E.  "Evapotranspiration" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. 
F.  "Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes and valves (gallons per minute or cubic feet per second) 
G.  "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. For example, a naturalized area, planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a non-irrigated hydrozone. 
H.  "Irrigation efficiency" or "IE" means the measure of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation systems characteristics and management practices. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following factors shall be used: 
Spray heads. (pop-up or riser) 	0.60 
Rotor or impact heads 	0.70 
Bubbler 	0.70 
Drip 	0.76 
 
I.  "Landscape irrigation audit" means a process to perform site inspections, evaluate irrigation systems, and develop efficient irrigation schedules. 
J.  "Landscaped area" means the entire parcel other than the area occupied by the building footprint, driveways, non-irrigated portions of parking lots, and hardscapes, such as decks and patios, and other non-porous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens are not included. 
K.  "Mulch" means any material such as leaves, bark, straw or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. 
L.  "Overspray" means the water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area, which wets pavements, walks, structures, or other non-landscaped areas. 
M.  "Plant factor" or "PF" means a factor that when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the following plant factors shall apply: 
Low water using 	0.1-0.3 
Medium water using 	0.4-0.6 
High water using 	0.7-0.9 
 
These plant factors are based on the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species project (WUCOLS). The project list is intended solely as a guide to help landscape professionals identify irrigation water needs of landscape species. It is not intended to be used as a required, mandatory, approved or master list. The WUCOLS Project is available from the California Department of Water Resources or from the Contra Costa Water District. 
N.  "Reclaimed water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation. 
O.  "Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grasses that is well watered. ETo is used as the basis of determining the estimated total water use so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. ETo for Martinez based on historical averages is 41.8" per year. 
P.  "Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (i.e. the application rate exceeds the infiltration rate) or when water is applied to a severe slope. 
Q.  "Soil Composition" means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt, and slay in the soil. 
R.  "Sprinkler" means a device which sprays water through a nozzle. 
S.  "Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
T.  "Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. This can be either a cool season or warm season grass. 
U.  "Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
22.35.100 - Formula. 
The formula for determining estimated water use and estimated total water use shall, be as follows: 
EWU (hydrozone) 	= (ETo)(PF)(HA)(.62) 
	IE 
	
EWU 	Estimated water use (gallons per year) 
	
ETo 	Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year) (historical average = 41.8) 
	
PF 	Plant factor (see Section 22.35.090) 
	
HA 	Hydrozone area (square feet) 
	
(.62) 	Conversation factor to gallons. (see Section 22.35.090 
	
IE 	Irrigation efficiency (see Section 22.35.090) 
 
EXAMPLE:  Martinez site with 2,500 square feet of turf irrigated with pop-up spray heads, and 7,500 square feet of low water using shrubs and groundcovers irrigated by a drip system. 
EWU (turf) 	= (41.8)(.8)(2,500)(.62) 
0.60 

= 86,386 gallons per year 
	
EWU (shrubs and groundcover) 	= (41.8)(.3)(7,500)(.62) 
0.76 

= 76,725 gallons per year 
	
EWU (total) 	= 86,386 + 76,725 = 163,111 gallons per year 
 
(Ord. 1195 C.S. § 2, 1993.)  
CHAPTER 22.36 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES 
 
22.36.010 - Purpose. 
To alleviate progressively or to prevent traffic congestion and shortage of curb spaces, off-street parking and loading facilities are required to be provided incidental to new land uses and enlargements of existing land uses. The number of parking spaces and loading berths prescribed in this Title or to be prescribed by the Planning Commission shall be in proportion to the need for such facilities created by the particular type of land use. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be laid out in a mariner which will ensure their usefulness, protect the public safety and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from their impact. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.0.)  
22.36.020 - Off-Street Parking Facilities Required. 
A.  At the time of initial occupancy of a site or of construction of a structure or enlargement of a site or structure, or whenever a change in use creates an increase in the number of parking spaces, there shall be provided off-street parking facilities for automobiles in accord with the regulations prescribed in this section. 
B.  If, in the application of the requirements of this Chapter, a fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half or more, and no parking space shall be required for a fraction of less than one half. 
C.  If more than one use is allocated on a site, the number of parking spaces provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in this Chapter for each use. 
D.  Sites and structures located in Martinez Parking District No. 1 shall not be subject to off-street parking facilities' requirements, excepting residential uses, which shall comply with the requirements prescribed in this Chapter. The facilities of the municipal parking lots shall not be deemed acceptable in meeting said requirements for residences. 
E.  All required parking shall be located on the lot containing the use itself; provided, however, in unusual or extraordinary circumstances, the Planning Commission may grant approval through Design Review, Sec. 22.34.040, to allow a portion of all of the required spaces to be located on a lot which is adjacent to the lot containing the use itself. Approval by the Planning Commission shall be based on accessibility and the reasonableness of not requiring all or a portion of the required parking spaces to be provided on the lot containing the use itself. In order to merit favorable consideration by the City, the applicant must provide evidence that a suitable long-term lease or legal agreement can be executed and recorded which would guarantee that the lot containing the use has the irrevocable right to utilize the adjacent lot for off-street parking purposes. 
F.  Parking spaces provided to meet the requirement of this Chapter shall not be reduced in size or number, modified, eliminated, or transferred to another use without City approval. 
G.  Bicycle parking facilities, as set forth in the Design Criteria in Sec. 22.36.080, shall be provided, with a minimum of one bicycle parking space being required for any use having required parking. This shall be in addition to the requirement for automobile parking, as set forth in Sec. 22.36.020. 
H.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be required as follows: 
0— 20 spaces: 	None required 
21— 50 spaces: 	One handicapped space 
51—100 spaces: 	Two handicapped spaces 
 
One handicapped parking space shall be provided for each additional 100 parking spaces. 
I.  For any off-street parking lot or parking area, a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the required parking may be in compact parking spaces. If fewer than ten (10) parking spaces are required, all of the spaces shall be full-size automobile spaces. 
J.  Design Review approval as provided in Sec. 22.34.040 shall be required for any construction, modification or elimination of any parking lots or parking areas. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.1.)  
22.36.030 - Parking—Residential Uses. 
Parking shall be provided for residential development in accordance with the following table: 
RESIDENTIAL USES TABLE 
	Dwelling Type 	Zoning Districts 	Required Parking Spaces Per Dwelling Unit** 
			Covered 	Open 
				
A. 	Single family 	All districts except R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 	2 	0 
				
	Single family 	R—1.5, R—2.5 and R—3.5 	1 	1 
				
B. 	Multiple family* 	All districts except sites included in the Downtown Overlay District 	1 	1 ¼ 
				
C. 	Multiple family* 	Downtown Overlay District (except projects on streets where bike lanes are proposed) 	1 	
				
	 studio 		1 	
	 1 bedroom 		1 	½ 
	 2+ bedrooms 		1 	1 
				
	  Guest Parking: Additional required guest parking spaces shall be ¼ space if there are over 4 units. The required guest spaces shall be additive and rounded off to the higher number. The Planning commission may approve tandem guest spaces if it can be found that residents will not be inconvenienced by this arrangement. 
				
D. 	Lodging houses, apartment hotels, motels and private clubs providing sleeping accommodations. 	All districts 	The greater of 1 space per guest room or 1 space per 2 beds. 
 
Note: Additional off-street parking may be required in amounts to be determined by the Planning Commission. ;b1;*;em;;hg;Garages shall not be used for storage by any outside party nor used for habitation by any party. There shall be at all times in every garage in the City sufficient space to park at least one automobile 
** Off-street, screened and fenced parking for recreational vehicles may be required in amounts to be determined by the Planning Commission for all projects in excess of 10 dwelling units. 
For subsidized or assisted senior citizen housing, there shall be a minimum of .35 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
Driveways shall not be counted as part of any required parking. 
(Ord. 1230 C.S., § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.2.)  
22.36.040 - Parking—Office Uses. 
Parking shall be provided for office development in accordance with the following table: 
OFFICE USES TABLE 
Office Use and Required Parking Spaces (per gross floor area). 
A.  Professional offices excluding medical/dental—1 per 200 square feet. 
B.  Public and private administrative offices—1 per 400 square feet. 
C.  Medical/dental—5 spaces per full-time doctor or dentist. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,115.3.)  
22.36.050 - Parking—Commercial Uses. 
Parking shall be provided for commercial uses in accordance with the following table: 
COMMERCIAL USES TABLE 
Commercial Use Required Parking Space (per gross floor area*). 
A.  Retail stores, business offices, service establishments—1 per 200 square feet. 
B.  Commercial service establishments, repair shops, wholesale establishments, furniture, household appliances and automobile sales—1 per 500 square feet. 
C.  Restaurants, fountains, etc.—1 per 100 square feet plus 1 per 3 employees. 
D.  Establishments whose sales are conducted primarily outside the building—1 per 3 employees plus such additional spaces as may be prescribed by the Board of Adjustments. 
*Except for floor area used exclusively for storage or loading. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,115.5.)  
22.36.060 - Parking—Industrial Uses. 
Parking shall be provided for industrial uses in accordance with the following table: 
INDUSTRIAL USES TABLE 
Industrial Use and Required Parking Space (per gross floor area*). 
A.  Warehouse and storage buildings—1 per 1,000 square feet except for areas used exclusively for truck loading. 
B.  Manufacturing plants and other industrial uses—1 per 600 square feet except for floor areas used exclusively for storage for truck loading. 
* Except for floor area used exclusively for storage or truck loading. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2(part), 1975: prior code § 10,115.5.)  
22.36.070 - Parking—Miscellaneous Uses. 
A.  For uses other than those listed previously, parking shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
PARKING—MISCELLANEOUS USE TABLE 
Use and Required Parking Spaces. 
1.  Parks, playgrounds and other—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Churches, community centers, private clubs and lodges, auditoriums (including school and college auditoriums), theaters, mortuaries and similar places of public assembly—One per each 4 seats; if no fixed seats, 1 space for each 40 square feet. 
3.  Nursing homes, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions; religious institutions providing sleeping accommodations—1 per 5 beds. 
4.  Hospitals and sanitariums—1 per 3 beds. 
5.  Libraries, museums, art galleries, etc.—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
6.  Colleges, for art, craft, music and dancing schools, business, professional, trade schools and colleges—1 per 3 employees plus 1 additional per 5 students. 
7.  Public buildings and grounds other than administrative, offices—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
8.  Public utility structures and installations—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
9.  Bus depots, transit stations, railroad stations, railroad freight stations and yards, airports and heliports—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
10.  Cemeteries, columbariums and crematories—1 per 3 employees plus additional as prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
11.  Homeless Shelters—1 parking space for every 5 beds. 
12.  Other uses not specifically listed above or specific uses which need more parking than the categories listed above, shall furnish parking as required by the Planning Director. In determining the off-street parking requirements for said uses, the Planning Director shall use the above requirements as a general guide and shall determine the minimum number of parking spaces. 
B.  The off-street parking facilities requirements of this Chapter shall be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the prescribed number of spaces for each use in common parking facilities, provided however, that the total number of spaces shall be not less than the sum of the individual requirements and provided further that an attested copy of a contract between the parties concerned setting forth the agreement to joint use of a common parking facility is filed with the application for a certificate of occupancy 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 23, 2-19-2014; Ord. 930 C.S., 1980; Ord. 822 C.S., § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.6.)  
22.36.080 - Parking—Design Criteria. 
A.  Off-street parking facilities provided in compliance with this Chapter shall meet the following design and dimension criteria: 
1.  Each parking space shall be not less than 20 feet in length and 9 feet in width exclusive of aisles and access drives, except that a parking space required to be located in an enclosed garage shall be not less than 20 feet in length and 10 feet in width, exclusive of utility areas. 
2.  Each parking space shall be accessible from a street or alley. 
3.  Entrances and exits shall be provided at locations approved by the City Traffic Engineer and the Planning Department. 
4.  The parking area, aisles and access drives shall be paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water. 
5.  Wheel stops shall be provided only where needed for safety or to protect property. 
6.  Lighting provided in off-street parking areas shall be directed away from adjoining premises and streets such that it does not cause off-site glare and nuisance. The type and location of luminaries shall be approved by the Planning Director. 
7.  Where a parking area adjoins a street or another site, a landscaped strip of not less than 5 feet in depth shall be planted with plant materials not less than 5 feet in height and permanently maintained, except that within 50 feet of a street intersection, the height of plant materials including earth berms, other than trees shall be not more than 3 feet above the curb elevation. 
8.  Parking areas shall be restricted as set forth in subsections (A)(8)(a) and (b) below: 
a.  Restrictions for Nonresidential Properties. For properties in all zoning districts, other than R and RR residential districts, no parking area may be located in a minimum required front yard or minimum required street-side side yard. 
b.  Restrictions for Residential Properties. For properties within R and RR residential districts, and for any property not in an R and RR districts with residential use, no parking area may be located within a front yard, or street-side yard, with the following exceptions and restrictions: 
i.  Driveways. A residential driveway conforming to the requirements of Section 22.36.090, which prescribes a maximum driveway width of 24 feet and that a driveway is not to exceed 30% of the width of any lot; and subject to the limitations prescribed in Section 22.36.082; 
ii.  Parking Pads. A paved area or "pad" parallel to a driveway; and subject to the limitations prescribed in Section 22.36.082. A front yard parking pad may only be located between the driveway and the nearest interior side property line. A parking pad may not be located between the driveway and the secondary street of a corner lot, or between the driveway and the farther of the 2 interior side property lines; and may not exceed a width of 12 feet; 
iii.  Street-Side Side Yards. A paved area or "pad" may be permitted within street-side side yard of a lot, subject to the screening requirements and limitations of Section 22.36.082(C)(1)(c); 
iv.  Deep Front Yards. Notwithstanding the limitation prescribed for parking pads in subsection (A)(8)(b)(ii) above, a parking area or "pad" may be located in front yard areas that are 50 feet, or more, behind the property line; 
v.  Paving Surfaces. For parking areas and pads other than driveways, permitted surfaces may include gravel and/or decomposed granite in addition to concrete and asphalt surfaces. 
9.  No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in a parking area. 
10.  Driveways in all residential districts shall have a minimum length of 20 feet (as measured from the property line unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director and the City Traffic Engineer). Driveway elevation differentials between the garage floor and the street gutter shall not exceed 3 feet in 20 feet without prior approval of the building official. 
11.  Where a driveway adjoins an alley, access easement or undedicated right-of-way, the driveway shall not be less than that distance which together with the alley width, totals 25 feet. 
12.  On-site driveways to single-family residences shall have a minimum width of 8 feet. 
13.  Except as provided in the parking space dimension chart, in subsection 22, the minimum width of a 1-way drive shall be 12 feet. No more than 4 parking spaces may be served with a single-exit, one-way drive. 
14.  Except as provided in the parking space dimension chart in subsection 22, the minimum width of a 2-day drive shall be 18 feet. 
15.  Where parking is designed adjacent to a landscaped area, parking stalls shall be reduced by 2 feet, allowing for vehicular overhang into the landscaped area. 
16.  Parking stalls for the handicapped shall be clearly marked and shall have a minimum width of 12 feet by 20 feet in length. Handicapped parking shall be located as near as possible to the primary entrance of the building and shall be so located that a handicapped individual is not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles other than his or her own vehicle; and provided further that in all cases, said spaces shall comply with all applicable laws and/or administrative regulations of the State of California. 
17.  Parking stalls for compact automobiles shall be clearly marked and shall have a minimum width of 8 feet by 16 feet in length. 
18.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be conveniently located and adjacent to on-site bicycle circulation pedestrian routes. 
19.  Pavement, landscaping, luminaries and all other parking area components shall be maintained to prevent deterioration and safety hazards. 
20.  Luminaries shall be installed and operated at times in accordance with a schedule approved by the Planning Director. 
21.  No parking space shall be located closer than 20 feet of the right-of-way line of a driveway opening. 
22.  Typical parking layout criteria: 
a.  Stall width, parallel to aisle; 
b.  Stall length of line; 
c.  Stall depth; 
d.  Aisle width between stalls; 
e.  Module, interlocking; 
f.  Module, wall-to-wall. 
MINIMUM DIMENSIONS BASED ON 9' × 20' PARKING STALL 
(EXCEPT FOR 0 DEGREES PARKING ANGLE) 
(degree) 	A 
(feet) 	B 
(feet) 	C 
(feet) 	D 
(feet) 	E 
(feet) 	F 
(feet) 
0 	22.5 	22.5 	8.5 	12.0 	29.0 	29.0 
30 	18.0 	20.0 	17.5 	12.0 	39.5 	47.0 
45 	12.5 	20.0 	20.0 	12.0 	46.0 	52.0 
60 	10.5 	20.0 	21.5 	18.0 	56.0 	60.0 
75 	9.5 	20.0 	21.5 	22.0 	63.0 	66.0 
90 	9.0 	20.0 	20.0 	25.0 	65.0 	65.0 
 
B.  Landscaping. 
1.  Landscaping shall be provided, wherever possible, in all parking lots or parking areas. 
2.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an approved irrigation system. 
3.  Vertical landscaping such as trees and shrubs, as well as ground cover, shall be introduced and maintained in all off-street parking facilities. 
4.  Trees shall include a mixture of 5-gallon and 15-gallon size trees to be installed in the following manner: 
a.  One tree per 4 spaces for parking along the perimeter of a site; 
b.  Parking not located along the perimeter of the site, 1 tree per 10 spaces. 
5.  Large areas of parking pavement shall be given visual relief by interspersing of landscaped pockets in unneeded areas, e.g., the ends of parking aisles. Open or carport parking areas shall be divided into areas including no more than 10 abutting spaces with intervening areas landscaped with trees and ground cover. 
6.  When abutting an R district or institutional premises, off-street parking shall be effectively screened by a solid masonry wall or fence of a design approved by the Planning Department. 
7.  Every off-street parking area shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete or comparable material and shall be so graded that it will dispose of all surface water within the area. Design of the pavement section shall be determined on the basis of "R" value and traffic indices as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 7, 2008; Ord. 1147 C.S. §§ I & II, 1990: Ord. 1135 C.S. § 1, 1989: Ord. 994 C.S., 1983: Ord. 930 C.S., 1980; Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.7.)  
22.36.082 - Parking-Where Permitted on Residential Property. 
A.  Parking of Licensed and Operable Vehicles Permitted. Except as limited in subsections B and C below, licensed and operable motor vehicles may be parked in the following areas: 
1.  Driveways. On any approved residential driveway; 
2.  Parking Pads. On a paved area or "pad" parallel to a driveway. Vehicles on such a pad must be parked perpendicular to the street, and such vehicles may not block access to garage; 
3.  Street-Side Side Yards. On a paved area or "pad" within street-side side yard of a lot, subject to the screening requirements and limitations of subsection (C)(1)(c) of this Section; 
4.  Deep Front Yards. On a paved area or "pad" in front yard areas that are 50 feet, or more, behind the property line. 
B.  Parking on Nonpaved Surfaces is Prohibited. Notwithstanding any provision hereof, the parking of vehicles on unpaved surfaces is prohibited. 
C.  Limitations on Parking of Recreational and Commercial Vehicles. 
1.  Front Yards and Street-Side Side Yards. No recreational vehicle or commercial vehicle shall be parked within the front yard or street-side yard of any property zoned R or RR or upon any property with a residential use for more than a 72-hour period, with the following exceptions and restrictions: 
a.  Parking Pads. A single recreational vehicle as defined in Section 22.04.442, may be parked adjacent to the driveway on a permitted paved area or pad, provided that the recreational vehicle is parked a minimum of 5 feet behind the back of sidewalk, or 5 feet behind the front property line in cases where there is no sidewalk. 
b.  Parking in R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 Zoning Districts. In addition to parking on parking pads, a single recreational vehicle may be parked on the driveway of a 2-car garage of a residence in the R-1.5, R-2.5 and R-3.5 zoning district, provided that: (i) such a recreational vehicle does not block access to the 1 required covered parking space within the garage; and (ii) the vehicles meet the setback requirements prescribed above for parking pad use. 
c.  Street-Side Side Yards. Recreational vehicles may be parked within a street-side side yard provided such vehicles are behind a 6-foot-tall solid fence, in locations where such required screening is permitted by Section 22.34.090, "Fences, Walls and Hedges." 
d.  Deep Front Yards. Notwithstanding the limitations set forth herein, recreational vehicles and commercial vehicles may be parked on paved surfaces in front yards areas that are 50 feet, or more, behind the front property line. 
2.  Side and Rear Yards. Recreational vehicles and commercial vehicles may be parked on an approved paved surface or "pad" within side and rear yards. 
3.  Oversized Recreational Vehicles. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, oversized recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 22.04.443, may be not parked within any front yard, or any minimum required side or street-side side yard, nor may an oversized recreational vehicle be parked within 5 feet of a rear property line. 
4.  Unmounted Camper Shells. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, unmounted camper shells, including but not limited to cab-over campers not mounted within pickup truck bed, may be not parked within any front yard, or any minimum required, side or street-side side yard. 
5.  Vehicles for the Transportation of Horses. Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, recreational vehicles used for the transportation of horses may be parked on any portion of a residential property in the RR rural residential zoning districts, provided however, that they shall not be parked in such a manner as to result in a safety hazard or which impedes the site distance of vehicles traveling on public or private streets. 
6.  Occupancy of Recreational Vehicle. No recreational vehicle may be occupied for living, sleeping or any other purposes while parked per the limitations listed above, other than a visitors' recreational vehicle which may be used for the guest's accommodations for not more than 1 week. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 8, 2008.)  
22.36.084 - Parking-72-Hour Time Limit. 
For the purposes of Chapter 22.36, "Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities," a "72-hour time period" shall mean a distinct 72-hour time period, separated by not less than 10 calendar days, in which a recreation vehicle that otherwise could not be parked within a front yard, may be parked within such yard for the purpose of loading and unloading and similar staging activities before or after use of such vehicle. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 9, 2008.)  
22.36.086 - Amortization of Legal Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  In cases where a lawfully issued parking pad permit was issued by the City of Martinez prior to May 2003, the parking of a recreational vehicle regulated under the provisions of this Chapter, pursuant to that lawfully issued parking pad permit shall be considered a legal nonconforming use, subject to the amortization provisions of subsection B below. 
B.  Any parking of a recreational vehicle regulated under the provisions of this Chapter, which is a legal nonconforming use, pursuant to subsection A above, shall be subject to an amortization period expiring upon the occurrence of either of the following: 
1.  The original permit holder sells, transfers, or vacates the subject property; or 
2.  The original permit holder increases the size (length or height) of the originally permitted recreational vehicle. 
Upon the occurrence of subsections (B)(1) or (2) above, any recreational vehicle parked upon the property shall fully comply with all of the parking regulations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 10, 2008.)  
22.36.090 - Regulation of Driveways. 
Placement of curb cuts shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  Width of driveways in a residential district shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 24 feet. Within a P-A, Commercial or Industrial District, the width of driveways shall be a minimum of 15 feet and a maximum of 35 feet. Measurements to determine compliance with this subsection shall be made at the low point of the driveway, excluding the flare. 
B.  Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the width of any lot face shall be utilized for driveways. However, not more than one driveway shall be allowed per 100 feet of frontage, or portion of 20 feet or more thereof. In determining compliance with this provision, the full width of the driveway, including flares shall be considered. 
C.  Driveways shall be located not closer than 5 feet from a curb return on a corner lot, nor closer than 25 feet to the intersection of the curb lines of two intersecting streets. 
D.  A full six inches of a curb height shall be maintained for a distance of not less than three feet from a side property line. 
E.  The distance between driveways whether of the same parcel or on adjacent lots, shall provide a minimum of 22 feet of full curb height in residential districts. In P-A, Commercial or Industrial Districts, the minimum length at full curb height shall be 35 feet. Communal driveways, not exceeding the dimensions specified in Subsection A may be used to serve two parcels in any district. 
F.  Driveway flare, transition from full curb height to driveway depression, shall be a minimum of 3 feet in width. 
G.  Maximum driveway width shall be used where a street has a travel lane immediately adjacent to the curb, or for driveways where the City Traffic Engineer has determined that heavy two-way traffic may be expected 
H.  Driveways for rights-of-way easements shall be subject to all provisions of this section, and shall apply towards corporations under Subsection E for the parcel which the easement traverses. 
I.  Variances from all of the above subsections may be granted by joint approval of the Planning Director and the Traffic Engineer. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.9.)  
22.36.100 - Off-Street Loading Facilities Required. 
A.  At the time of initial occupancy of a site or of construction of a structure or enlargement of a site or structure, or whenever a change in use creates an increase in the number of parking spaces, there shall be provided off-street loading facilities for trucks in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this Chapter. 
B.  Off-street loading berths in addition to those prescribed in this Chapter shall be provided if the Planning Commission finds that such additional berths are necessary to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded or stored on public streets. A finding of the Planning Commission shall be based on an investigation of the anticipated frequency of truck pickups and deliveries and of the truck storage requirements of the use for which the off-street loading berths are required. 
C.  If, in the application of the requirements of this Chapter, a fractional number is obtained, one loading berth shall be provided for a fraction of ½ or more, and no loading berth shall be required for a fraction of less than ½. 
D.  If more than one use is located on a site, the number of loading berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in this section for each use. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980; Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.10.)  
22.36.110 - Loading—Residential Uses. 
Gross Floor Area 	Number of Loading Berths Required 
5,000 to 50,000 sq. ft 	1 
50,001 to 150,000 sq. ft 	2 + 1 addition berth for each additional 150,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 
  
22.36.120 - Loading—Office. 
A.  Public or private administrative offices and business offices: 
Gross Floor Area 	Number of Loading Berths Required 
5,000 to 50,000 sq. ft. 	1 
50,001 to 150,000 sq. ft 	2 + 1 addition berth for each additional 150,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 
 
B.  For professional offices and public buildings other than administrative offices, one off-street loading berth shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.12.)  
22.36.130 - Loading—Commercial and Industrial Uses. 
A.  Off-street loading berths shall be provided for retail stores, commercial enterprises, repair shops, wholesale establishments, storage facilities, manufacturing plants and other industrial uses, if the gross floor area exceeds 5,000 square feet in accordance with the following table: 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES TABLE 
Gross Floor Area 	Number of Loading Berths Required 
5,000 to 12,500 sq. ft. 	1 
12,501 to 20,000 sq. ft. 	2 
20,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. 	3 
30,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. 	4 
50,001 to 75,000 sq. ft. 	5 
75,001 and greater 	5 plus 1 for each additional 75,000 square feet of gross floor area 
 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.13.)  
22.36.140 - Loading—Miscellaneous Uses. 
Loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
LOADING—MISCELLANEOUS 
USES TABLE 
A.  For religious, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions and clubs used for human habitation, nursing homes, hospitals and sanitariums, in addition to spaces for ambulances, one off-street loading berth shall be provided if the gross floor area exceeds 5,000 square feet, but is not more than 50,000 square feet. Two berths shall be provided if the gross floor area exceeds 50,000 square feet, and one additional berth shall be provided for each additional 150,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
B.  For schools, colleges, libraries, museums, art galleries and places of public assembly which require the recurring delivery of goods or equipment by trucks, one off-street loading berth shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
C.  For public utility and public service structures and installations, bus depots and transit stations which require the recurring receipt or distribution of goods or equipment by truck, one off-street loading berth shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
D.  For railroad stations, railroad freight stations and yard, airports and heliports, three off-street loading berths shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
E.  For mortuaries, one off-street loading berth shall be provided if the gross floor area is less than 5,000 square feet, and one additional berth shall be provided for each additional 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
F.  For cemeteries, columbariums and crematories, one off-street loading berth shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
G.  For any other use which requires the recurring receipt or distribution of goods or equipment by truck, one off-street loading berth shall be provided plus such additional berths as may be prescribed by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.14.)  
22.36.150 - Loading—Standards. 
A.  Off-street loading facilities provided in compliance with Section 22.36.100 of this Chapter shall meet the following standards, except when the berths are located in a structure: 
1.  Each loading berth shall be not less than 45 feet in length and 12 feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of not less than 14 feet, except that for mortuaries, cemeteries, columbariums and crematories, a loading berth used exclusively for hearses shall be not less than 24 feet in length and 10 feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of not less than 8 feet. 
2.  Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on the site. 
3.  Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or alley. 
4.  Entrances and exits shall be provided at locations approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Department. 
5.  The loading area, aisles and access drives shall be paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water. 
6.  Water stops shall be provided where needed for safety or to protect property. 
7.  If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from abutting residential sites so as to cause no annoying glare. 
8.  Where a loading area adjoins a street or another site, a landscaped strip not less than 5 feet in depth shall be planted with plant materials not less than 5 feet in height and permanently maintained, except that within 50 ft. of a street intersection the height of plant materials other than trees shall be not more than 3 ½ feet. 
9.  A loading area shall not be located in a required front, side or rear yard in any district. A loading area may be located in a front, side or rear yard other than a required front, side or rear yard provided that the loading area is screened by a solid masonry wall or board fence not less than 6 feet in height, except that in an SC, LI or HI District, a wall or fence, shall not be required. 
10.  No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in a loading area. 
B.  Off-street loading berths located in a structure, provided in compliance with Section 22.36.110 of this Chapter shall comply with the standards prescribed in Subsections 1, 3, 4, 5 and 10 of this section. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,515.15.)  
22.36.160 - Loading—Location. 
Off-street loading facilities prescribed in Section 22.36.110 of this Chapter shall be located on the same site with the use for which the berths are required or on an adjoining site. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.16.)  
22.36.170 - Existing Uses. 
A.  No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities prescribed in this Title or reduced in area to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this Title. 
B.  Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall be provided for a change in use or enlargement of a site or structure, as prescribed in Sections 22.36.020 and 22.36.100 of this Chapter. The number of parking spaces or loading berths provided for a change in use or enlargement of a site or structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the change in use or enlargement, unless the preexisting number is greater than the number prescribed in Sections 22.36.020 and 22.36.100 of this Chapter, in which instance the number in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in calculating the number provided to serve the change in use. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.17.)  
22.36.180 - Reduction of Facilities. 
No off-street parking facility or off-street loading facility provided for a use of land or structure in compliance with Sections 22.36.020 and 22.36.100 of this Chapter shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient additional capacity or additional area being provided to comply with these regulations. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.18.)  
22.36.190 - Facilities to Serve One Use. 
No off-street parking space or off-street loading berth provided for a use of land or a structure in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed to provide an off-street parking space or an off-street loading berth for a use of a structure on another site, except as otherwise provided in Sections 22.36.020 and 22.36.100 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.19.)  
22.36.200 - Safety Features. 
A.  Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, and directional markers shall be provided to assure safety, efficient utilization, protection to landscaping, and to prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private property. 
B.  Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists shall be assured when entering individual parking spaces, when circulating within a parking facility, and when entering and exiting a parking facility. 
C.  Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic direction of all access drives, shall be designed and maintained in accord with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975; prior code § 10,115.20.)  
22.36.210 - Deferral of Required Parking. 
Where the expected need for off-street parking for a particular use is uncertain, due to unknown or unusual operating characteristics of the use and unavailability of comparable data to establish need, the Planning Commission may authorize that construction and provision of not more than 25% of the required spaces be deferred, and may set such conditions as necessary to guarantee provision of such deferred spaces whenever the Planning Director shall determine the need to exist. Land area required for provision of deferred parking spaces shall be maintained in reserve and shall be landscaped pursuant to a plan approved by the Planning Commission demonstrating that ultimate provisions of the deferred spaces will meet all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 930 C.S., 1980.)  
22.36.220 - Parking-Mobile Storage Containers. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, below, no mobile storage container shall be placed or parked on any property located in an R or RR zoning district or upon property upon which is located a residential use for more than a 72-hour period. A mobile storage container may be not placed upon or parked on a residential property more than 4 times in a calendar year. 
B.  Storage may be permitted within side and rear yards, subject limitations prescribed in Section 22.12.265, "Accessory Structures." 
(Ord. 1342 C.S. § 11, 2008.)  
CHAPTER 22.37 - RECYCLING FACILITIES 
 
22.37.010 - General Provisions and Exceptions. 
All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 22.34 of this title. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I, part, 1990.)  
22.37.020 - Purpose. 
This section establishes regulations governing recycling consistent with the requirements of Government Code Section 66787.6 and the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986, Public Resources Section 14500, et seq. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I, part, 1990.)  
22.37.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Recyclable Material" is reusable material including, but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials, but may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Recycling Facility" is a center for the collection of recyclable materials. 
1.  "Small recycling facilities" occupy less than 500 square feet and may include: 
a.  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet; 
b.  Kiosk-type units 
c.  Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
2.  "Large recycling facilities" occupy more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures as well as mobile units, bulk reverse vending machines, and Kiosk-type units. 
3.  "Private on-site recycling facilities" are used solely by a business or other organization for purposes of recycling on-site generated materials; are not located within the public view and are not available for public use. Administrative design review shall be required for facilities not located within an enclosed structure. 
C.  "Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the department of motor vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials, including the bins, boxes, or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers and used for the collection of recyclable materials. (Does not include vehicles used by the City's franchised recycler.) 
D.  "Reverse vending machine" is an automated mechanical device that accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. 
1.  A single-feed revenue vending machine is designed to accept individual containers one at a time. 
2.  A bulk reverse vending machine is designed to accept more than one container at a time and to compute the refund or credit due on the basis of weight. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.040 - Permits—Required. 
No person shall place or permit the placement, construction or operation of any recycling facility, including a reverse vending machine, recycling facility or processing facility, without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the Table presented below. 
Type of Facility 	Zones Permitted 	Permits Required 
		
Reverse vending machine 	NC, CC, TC, CR, SC LI, HI 	Interior-none Exterior-administrative design review 
		
Mobile recycling unit 	NC, CC, TC, CR, SC LI, HI 	Interior-none Exterior-administrative design review 
		
Small Recycling facility 	NC, CC, TC, SC 	Conditional Use Permit, Design Review 
		
	LI, HI 	Design Review 
		
Large Recycling facility 	NC, CC, TC, SC 	Conditional Use Permit, Design Review 
		
	LI, HI 	Design Review 
 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.050 - Approval of Administrative Permit. 
The Community Development Director may administratively approve a permit under the following conditions: applicant shall declare, under penalty of perjury, that a recycling use subject to an administrative permit is and at all times will be maintained to conform with each and every one of the applicable criteria and standards set forth in section 22.37.080 and has been referred to design review. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.060 - Appeal of Decision on Administrative Permit. 
Appeals may be filed after any decision of the Community Development Director regarding the issuance or denial of an administrative permit. Appeals shall follow the procedure set forth in Section 22.34.060 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.070 - Appeal of Planning Commission Decision. 
Appeals of Planning Commission decisions shall follow established procedure set forth in Sections 22.34.070 and/or 22.40.100 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.080 - Criteria and Standards. 
Recycling facilities approved under an Administrative Permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed below and are subject to design review. Recycling facilities permitted with a Conditional Use Permit shall meet the applicable criteria and standards listed below, provided that the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or City Council, may modify such standards as an exercise of discretion, upon a finding that such modifications are reasonable and necessary in order to implement the general intent of this Part and the purposes of this Chapter. The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
A.  Reverse Vending Machines: 
1.  Shall only be established as an accessory use for which the primary use is in compliance with the zoning and building codes of the City of Martinez; 
2.  Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance of the business and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
3.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material and shall be protected by a roof; 
4.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and the identity and phone number of the operator or person responsible if the machine is inoperative; 
5.  Shall have a maximum sign area of four square feet per machine; 
6.  Shall be limited to no more than three machines and one recycling center per business; 
7.  Shall be no more than 50 cubic feet in bulk per machine and not more than 8 feet in height; 
8.  Shall be compatible with adjacent residential uses and other businesses on the site; 
9.  Shall be maintained in a dust-free, litter-free and spill-free condition on a daily basis. 
B.  Recycling Facilities 
1.  Shall only be established as an accessory use for which the primary use is in compliance with the zoning and building codes of the City of Martinez. The Community Development Director may consider an exception for the placement of newspaper bins or other recycling facilities operated in conjunction with a non-profit institution such as a school or church. 
2.  Shall have containers constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof and rustproof material and shall be covered, secured and maintained in good condition; 
3.  Shall have containers clearly marked to identify the type of recyclable or recyclables which may be deposited; 
4.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator, the hours of operation and display a notice indicating that no materials shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers; 
5.  Shall be maintained in a dust-free, litter-free and spill-free condition on a daily basis; 
6.  Shall be placed on a site so as not to obstruct on-site or off-site pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
7.  Shall be setback at least 20 feet from any street property line and 15 feet from a side or rear property line. The setbacks may be modified upon review and approval of the Planning Commission if there are mitigating circumstances, such as existing landscape screening, which meet the intent of this ordinance; 
8.  Shall not reduce or impair the landscaping or parking spaces required for the site and uses in conformance with the Municipal Code or any permit issued thereto; 
9.  Shall not include power-driven processing equipment except for bulk reverse vending machines; 
10.  Shall conform to the following sign standards: 
a.  Unattended container not over 50 cubic feet in bulk and not over 8 feet in height may have a maximum sign area of 20% of the surface of the side of the container or six square feet whichever is greater; 
b.  Other containers or units may have one flat-mounted sign per side of container or wall of enclosure of 20% of the surface of the side or six square feet, whichever is greater; 
11.  Shall have minimum average site illumination of ½ foot candle during business hours; 
12.  Shall not be used at any time for collection of refuse or hazardous waste unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission; 
13.  Shall operate attended facilities only during the hours of operation of the primary business; 
14.  Shall conform to all development regulations for the zoning district of the property; for an attended facility, a minimum of one parking space per attendant shall be provided; 
15.  Shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking when mobile recycling facilities are used; 
16.  Shall utilize design and colors which are compatible with other businesses on the site. Improvements which may be required to ensure compatibility, include but are not limited to landscaping, screening, trailer skirting and parking lot repairs; 
17.  A large recycling facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code; 
18.  Such other relevant facts as the Planning Commission and/or City Council may be determined prior to filing of an application, by resolution as advisable or necessary. 
19.  Shall be appropriately screened as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.090 - Adhering to Criteria and Standards and Denial of Permit. 
The criteria and standards provided herein shall be deemed conditions of approval for the appropriate type of recycling facility. It shall be unlawful to violate said criteria and standards and shall be grounds for revocation. Any permit may also be denied or revoked if it is found that the individual facility would be detrimental to the public health, safety and well being of the citizens of Martinez. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.100 - Site Clean-up Required. 
The operator and host business of any recycling facility shall, on a daily basis, remove any and all recyclable materials or refuse which has accumulated or is deposited outside the containers, bins or enclosures intended as receptacles for such materials. Failure to remove such materials or refuse after notice by the City shall constitute grounds for permit revocation in accordance with Chapter 1.12 and 22.06.080 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.110 - Non-Conforming Uses. 
A non-conforming use which does not occupy a permanent structure and is accessory to a primary use shall be discontinued within 90 days from the effective date of this Title. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.120 - Annual Report. 
All recycling operators shall submit an annual report to the City Manager or his or her authorized representative on the amount, by category, of recycables collected. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.130 - Fees. 
Fees for this ordinance shall be set by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
22.37.140 - Business License Required. 
Operators of recycling facilities shall obtain a City business license in accord with Title 5 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1149 C.S. § I (part), 1990.)  
CHAPTER 22.38 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 
 
22.38.010 - Purpose—Nonconforming Use and Structure Defined. 
A.  A "nonconforming use" is a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of this Title, but which, under this Title, does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. While permitting the continuation of nonconforming uses, subject to certain exceptions, this Title is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement and their reestablishment after abandonment and by prohibiting the alteration of the structures they occupy and their restoration after destruction. 
B.  A "nonconforming structure" is a structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this Title, but which, under this Title, does not conform with the standards of coverage, yard spaces, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. While permitting the use and maintenance of nonconforming structures, this Chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered or enlarged so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this Title and by prohibiting their restoration after destruction. 
C.  A "non-conforming lot" is a site or lot having an area, frontage, width or depth less than the minimum prescribed for the district in which the site is located, which is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map, or for which a deed or valid contract of sale was of record prior to the adoption of the provision of this Title which made the lot non-conforming, which had a legal area, frontage, width and depth at the time that the subdivision map, deed, or contract of sale was recorded, and which has not been changed since its creation in any way which would increase the degree of non-conformity or decrease the usable site area (such as granting an access easement across the lot). The provisions of this Chapter are intended to allow the reasonable use of these lots while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare by reasonable restrictions. 
(Ord. 1106 C.S. § 4, 1987: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.0.)  
22.38.020 - Use and Structure Deemed Nonconforming When. 
A.  A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of this Title or of amendments thereto, which does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  A structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of this Title or of amendments thereto which does not conform with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained except as otherwise provided herein. 
C.  Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or site, the use of which is nonconforming, and on a nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.1.)  
22.38.030 - Alterations and Additions to Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  No structure, the use of which is nonconforming, shall be moved, altered or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconforming use, except that a structure housing a nonconforming residential use located in a R or a PA District may be moved, altered or enlarged, provided that the number of dwelling units is not increased. 
B.  The Board of Adjustments is empowered to impose conditions requiring exterior painting, repair, landscaping and other improvements as may be necessary or appropriate to the building or property as a condition of approval of a new nonconforming use of an existing structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.6.)  
22.38.040 - Alterations and Additions to Nonconforming Structures. 
No nonconforming structure shall be moved, altered, enlarged or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards of coverage, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.3.)  
22.38.050 - Change of Use. 
The nonconforming use of a structure or site shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, without prior approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.4.)  
22.38.060 - Abandonment of Nonconforming Use. 
Whenever a nonconforming use has been abandoned, discontinued or changed to a conforming use for a continuous period of 1 year, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished without prior approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.5.)  
22.38.070 - Institution of New Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  The Board of Adjustments is empowered to approve by conditional use permit, the institution of new nonconforming uses in existing structures when it is found that: 
1.  The existing structure has a useful remaining life; 
2.  The new use would not require exterior alterations or major interior alterations; 
3.  The new use will be compatible with and not a burden to the neighborhood in which it is located. 
B.  The Board of Adjustments is empowered to impose conditions requiring exterior painting, repair, landscaping and other improvements as may be necessary or appropriate to the building or property as a condition of approval of a new nonconforming use of an existing structure. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.6.)  
22.38.080 - Restoration of a Damaged Structure. 
A.  Whenever a structure, the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, or a structure which does not comply with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, shall be destroyed by fire or other calamity or by act of God or by the public enemy to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or less, the structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion. 
B.  Whenever a structure, the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, or a structure which does not comply with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be destroyed by fire or other calamity or by act of God or by the public enemy to a greater extent than fifty percent (50%), or shall be voluntarily razed or shall be required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. 
C.  The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction, to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.7.)  
22.38.090 - Elimination of Nonconforming Uses. 
The following nonconforming uses and structures shall be discontinued and removed from their sites within three years from the effective date of this Title: 
A.  A nonconforming use which does not occupy a structure; 
B.  A nonconforming use occupying a structure having an assessed valuation of less than $500.00. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.5.)  
22.38.100 - Elimination of Nonconforming Structures. 
A structure having an assessed valuation of less than $500.00 which does not comply with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height of structure or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located shall be removed from its site within three years from the effective date of this Title, except that if the structure is altered to comply with such standards, the provision shall not apply. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.9.)  
22.38.110 - Time When Use of Structure Becomes Nonconforming. 
Whenever a use or a structure becomes nonconforming because of a change in zoning district boundaries or a change of regulations for the district in which the site is located, the period of time prescribed in Section 22.38.090 and 22.38.100 for the elimination of the use or the removal of the structure shall be computed from the effective date for the change of district or regulations. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,116.10.)  
22.38.120 - Keeping of Animals. 
The keeping of livestock or other animals shall not be considered a nonconforming use except that in RR (Rural Residential) Districts the keeping of up to five horses or split hoofed animals shall be considered a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 1207 C.S. § I, 1993; Ord. 1096 C.S. § I, 1987.)  
22.38.130 - Use of Non-conforming Lots. 
Non-conforming lots shall be governed by the following regulations: 
A.  A non-conforming lot may be used for any permitted use but shall be subject to all other regulations of the district in which the site is located and all other development requirements specified by law. 
B.  A non-conforming lot to be used for residential purposes shall be subject to the density requirements of the zoning district and General Plan designation in which it is located. However, one single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be permitted on any non-conforming lot in any zone district in which a single-family dwelling is permitted, provided the single-family dwelling shall conform to the design standards and regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, the provisions of this Chapter, and all other development requirements specified by law 
C.  Lots or sites which do not meet the requirements of this Title for non-conforming lots, such as lots which did not meet legal requirements when created, or lots which have been changed since they were created, may not be used unless consolidated with other lots to meet the current requirements of this Title. 
(Ord. 1106 C.S. § 5, 1987.)  
22.38.140 - Enlargement of Non-conforming Lots. 
A non-conforming lot may be enlarged by lot line adjustment or subdivision, even though the requirements of Section 22.12.120 et seq. (Slope Density) are not met, provided that the Planning Commission grants a use permit for the proposal under Chapter 22.40. 
(Ord. 1106 C.S. § 6, 1987.)  
CHAPTER 22.39 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
22.39.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the orderly development of wireless telecommunication transmission facilities and installation of antennas. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety, community welfare and the aesthetic quality of Martinez as set forth in the goals, objectives and policies of the City's General Plan. It is also the intent to provide the community with the benefits of this technology and to not unduly restrict wireless telecommunications providers from providing these benefits to the City and its citizens. It is also the intent of this Chapter to build a procedural framework which provides a public forum to insure a balance between public concern and private interest in establishing telecommunication facilities. It is also the intent to provide incentives for well designed and well placed facilities and to pursue additional benefit from the facilities to the public by encouraging the leasing of publicly owned properties, where feasible, for the development of wireless communication facilities. This Chapter seeks to accomplish the following goals: 
A.  Protect the visual character of the City from potential adverse effects of telecommunication facilities and their development; 
B.  Ensure against the creation of visual blight within or along the City's commercial and residential corridors; 
C.  Protect the citizens of Martinez from possible adverse health effects associated with exposure to high levels of NIER (non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation); 
D.  Protect the environmental resources of Martinez; 
E.  Ensure that the broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications infrastructure are provided to serve the community; 
F.  Streamline the process for obtaining necessary planning entitlements for tele-communication facilities while concurrently protecting the legitimate interests of the City's citizens; 
G.  Provide for the charging of reasonable, competitively neutral, non-discriminatory fees for planning, entitlements and other associated materials, improvements and securities. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.020 - Applicability. 
This Chapter specifies the regulations which are applicable Citywide to the entitlement, location and design of all telecommunication facilities including satellite, cellular, PCS, paging and other wireless telecommunication technologies that require granting of licenses from the Federal Communications Commission and/or the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this Section: 
A.  "Amateur (HAM) Antenna" means an antenna operated by a person holding a written authorization from the Federal Communications Commission to be the control operator of an amateur station. 
B.  "Amateur Radio Service" means a non-commercial telecommunication facility which is operated solely for non-commercial purposes or operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service which existed at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
C.  "Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the interior or exterior of a structure. Antennas shall include devices having elements extending in any direction, and directional beam type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be part of the antenna. Antennas shall include Mobile Telecommunications Transmitting Facilities. 
1.  "Antenna - building mounted:" Any antenna, other than an antenna with its supports resting on the ground, directly attached or affixed to an existing or proposed building or structure, other than a telecommunication tower, and which does not protrude above the highest point of the existing improvements on the property. 
2.  "Antenna - directional:" Also known as a "panel" antenna, transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than 360 degrees. 
3.  "Antenna - ground mounted:" Any antenna with its base, single or multiple posts or poles, placed directly on the ground or a mast not more than fifteen (15) feet tall. 
4.  "Antenna - omni-directional:" Transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a 360 degree radial pattern. 
5.  "Antenna - parabolic:" Typically known as a "satellite dish", a parabolic antenna is any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or a bar configuration that is shallow dish, cone, horn, bowl or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional pattern. This definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs and satellite microwave antennas. 
6.  "Antenna - pole mounted:" See "Antenna - ground mounted". 
7.  "Antenna - portable:" Any device used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional pattern, located on a portable or moveable base designed to be placed either for temporary or long-term use at a given site. 
8.  "Antenna - roof mount:" Any antenna which is attached to a mounting mast, is installed on a building or structure, and protrudes above the highest point of the existing improvements located on the property. 
9.  "Antenna - tower mounted" means an antenna mounted on a telecommunications tower. 
D.  "Co-location:" A telecommunication facility comprised of a single telecommunications tower or building supporting one or more antennas, dishes or similar device(s) owned by more than one public or private entity. 
E.  "Direct Broadcast Satellite Service (DBS):" A system in which signals are transmitted directly from a satellite to a small (not exceeding 18") home receiving dish. DBS competes with cable television. 
F.  "Equipment building, shelter or cabinet:" A cabinet or building used to house equipment used by telecommunication providers to house equipment at a facility. 
G.  "Inhabited area:" Any residence or other structure regularly occupied by people, or any outdoor area used by people on a regular basis. 
H.  "Lattice tower:" A self supporting support structure, erected on the ground, which consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment. 
I.  "Mobile Services:" Radio service between radio stations at a fixed location and one or more mobile stations, or between mobile stations. 
J.  "Mobile Telecommunications Transmitting Facility:" A mobile telecommunication transmitting facility such as cell site on wheels (COWs) and cellular on light trucks (COLT's) facilities; as well as dispatch carriers for Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR) services, and Enhanced SMR (ESMR). 
K.  "NIER:" Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (i.e., electromagnetic radiation primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic spectrum). 
L.  "Public service use or facility:" A use operated or used by a public body or public utility in connection with any of the following services: water, waste water management, public education, parks and recreation, fire and police protection, solid waste management, transportation or utilities. 
M.  "Public way:" Includes all public streets and utility easements, now and hereafter owned by the City, but only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities. 
N.  "Receive-only" means an antenna neither designed nor used to transmit electromagnetic waves. 
O.  "Satellite Dish" means any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that is shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals. This definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO's and satellite microwave antennas. 
P.  "Satellite Dish Antenna" means a device or instrument, designed or used for the reception of television or other electronic communications signal broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite. It may be a solid, open mesh or bar-configured structure, typically up to 12 feet in diameter, in the shape of a shallow dish or parabola. 
Q.  "Shared location:" A telecommunications facility location comprised of multiple telecommunications towers or buildings supporting one or more antennas owned or used by more than one public or private entity. 
R.  "Supervisory control:" A system operating with coded signals over communication channels so as to provide control of remote equipment. 
S.  "Radio frequency radiation:" See "NIER" 
T.  "Telecommunication facility:" A facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, and other types of equipment for the transmission of such signals, telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking area and other accessory development. 
U.  "Telecommunication tower:" A mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free-standing tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. A ground or building mounted structure greater than fifteen feet (15') tall supporting one or more antenna, dish(es), arrays, etc. shall be considered a telecommunications tower. 
V.  "Telemetry station" means a remote station for the measurement and transmission of data by radio to a receiving station for recording, analysis or other use. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.040 - Exceptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the regulations stated in this Chapter; however, each of the following uses is required to comply with all other City zoning and other regulations applicable thereto: 
1.  A single ground or building mounted receive-only radio or television antenna, or citizens band antenna including any mast, for the sole use of the owner or tenant occupying a parcel on which the antenna is located. 
2.  A ground, building or tower mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service. 
3.  A single ground, pole or building mounted receive-only radio or television satellite dish antenna, not to exceed forty-eight inches (48") in diameter, for the sole use of the owner or tenant occupying a parcel on which the antenna is located. Satellite dish height shall not exceed the height of the roof ridge of the primary structure on the parcel. 
4.  All citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio, operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service which lawfully existed at the time this ordinance was adopted. (July, 1997). 
5.  Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature. 
6.  City government owned and operated receive and/or transmit telemetry station antennas for supervisory control and data acquisition, or other health and safety devices which require antennas. 
7.  Mobile Telecommunications Transmitting Facilities necessary for emergency communications or for facilities required on a temporary basis not to exceed two weeks per year. Emergency services are permitted as necessary for emergency communications. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.050 - Permit and Review Requirements. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 22.39.040, telecommunication facilities may not be established, installed, used or erected in the City of Martinez without a permit first applied for and granted pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.) 
TYPE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED. No wireless telecommunication facility shall be permitted unless it is first approved as follows: 
1.  ADMINISTRATIVE DESIGN REVIEW. Applications for wireless telecommunications facilities which meet all of the following criteria may be granted by administrative Design Review approval given by the Community Development Director pursuant to Section 22.34.040. 
A.  The facility is in conformance with the current version of the City Standards and Criteria for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, adopted pursuant to Section 22.39.060. 
B.  The facility is compatible with all, lawful, existing uses on the property and adjacent to the property. 
C.  The facility is located in an area zoned for Commercial uses (N-C, C, CC, TC, SC, R-B); Industrial uses (LI, HI, CI, W-3); Professional uses (PA); or Governmental Facilities (GF). 
D.  The telecommunication facility is not located on residential properties, on lands designated open space and conservation areas, or on lands designated as visually significant in the Martinez General Plan. 
E.  The antennas and equipment are (i) building mounted, (ii) a co-location on an existing telecommunications facility, or (iii) roof mounted, ground mounted, or part of a shared facility which are screened, painted or located so they are effectively unnoticeable from off site as determined by the Community Development Director and there is no other visual impact resulting from the facility listed in this category (iii). 
Notwithstanding the above, the Community Development Director may refer any such application for review under Section 22.34.040 to the Planning Commission where, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, such review is warranted due to unique factors associated with the proposed facility. 
2.  USE PERMIT AND DESIGN REVIEW APPROVAL BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Wireless telecommunications facilities which meet all of the following criteria require Use Permit and Design Review approval which may be granted by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Chapter 22.40 and Section 22.34.040 of the Zoning Regulations. 
A.  The facility is in conformance with the current version of the City Standards and Criteria for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities adopted pursuant to Section 22.39.060. 
B.  The facility is compatible with the existing uses on the property and adjacent to the property. 
C.  1.  The telecommunication facility is located in an area within the City of Martinez zoned for Commercial uses (N-C, C, CC, TC, SC, R-B); Industrial uses (LI, HI, CI, W-3); Professional uses (PA); or Governmental Facilities (GF); the telecommunication facility is not located on residential properties, on lands designated open space and conservation areas, or on lands designated as visually significant in the Martinez General Plan, and the antennas are roof-mounted, ground-mounted or part of a shared location facility. 
2.  The telecommunication facility is located in an area within the City of Martinez zoned other than Commercial uses (N-C, C, CC, TC, SC, R-B); Industrial uses (LI, HI, CI, W-3); Professional uses (PA); or Governmental Facilities (GF), and the antennas are either building-mounted or a co-location on an existing telecommunication facility. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning Administrator may refer any such application to the Planning Commission for decision under Chapter 22.40 and Section 22.34.040 if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, such review is desirable. 
3.  USE PERMIT AND DESIGN REVIEW APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION. Wireless telecommunication facilities which cannot be acted upon or granted pursuant to or do not meet the criteria for Administrative Design Review (Section 22.39.050(1)) or Zoning Administrator Approval (Section 22.39.050(2)), require Use Permit and Design Review by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 22.40 and Section 22.34.040 of the Zoning Regulations. All such applications shall be in conformance with the adopted Standards and Criteria for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities pursuant to Section 22.39.060. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.060 - Standards and Criteria for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. 
Except as provided in Section 22.39.040, all wireless telecommunications facilities shall meet and comply with the criteria and standards adopted by separate resolution from time to time by the City Council, and no application for a permit for any such facility shall be granted unless the facility for which said application is submitted meets and complies with said standards and criteria. Said standards and criteria shall be known as the "Standards and Criteria for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities." 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.070 - Appeals. 
The discretionary actions provided for in Section 22.39.050 may be appealed by the procedures described in Chapter 22.40 and Section 22.40.040 of the Martinez Municipal Code as applicable. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
22.39.080 - Business License Required. 
Telecommunications carriers establishing facilities within the City of Martinez shall obtain a City Business License in accord with Title 5 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1244 C.S. § 1 (part), 1997.)  
CHAPTER 22.40 - CONDITIONAL USES—USE PERMITS 
 
22.40.010 - Purposes. 
In order to give the district use regulations of this Title the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010, in certain districts conditional uses are permitted, subject to the granting of a use permit. Conditional uses include certain types of community facilities, institutions and public utility installations appropriately located in residential, professional and administrative offices, commercial and industrial districts, certain types of light industrial uses appropriately located in commercial service districts, certain types of heavy industrial uses appropriately located in light industrial districts and certain types of nuisance industries appropriately located in heavy industrial districts. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration, so they may be located properly with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve these purposes, the Board of Adjustments is empowered to grant and to deny applications for use permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of use permits, subject to review by the Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.0.)  
22.40.020 - Powers of Board of Adjustments. 
The Board of Adjustments may grant use permits for such conditional use in such districts as are prescribed in the district regulations of this Title subject to review by the Board of Appeals in accord with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.1.)  
22.40.030 - Application and Fee. 
A.  Application for a use permit shall be made to the Board of Adjustments on a form prescribed by the Board which shall include the following data: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner; 
3.  Address or description of the property; 
4.  Statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each of the applicable provisions of this Title, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit as prescribed in Section 22.40.070 of this Chapter. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by the following plans and drawings: 
1.  An accurate scale drawing of the site and surrounding area for a distance of at least 500 feet from each boundary of the site showing the existing location of streets and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties shown on the drawing; 
2.  An accurate scale drawing of the site showing the contours at intervals of not more than 5 feet and existing and proposed locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and landscaped areas. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the Board of Adjustments sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application as prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.2.)  
22.40.040 - Public Hearing—Notice. 
A.  The Board of Adjustments shall hold at least one public hearing on each application for a use permit within forty-five (45) days of the date when the application was filed. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing in the manner prescribed by the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.3.)  
22.40.050 - Public Hearing—Procedure. 
At the public hearing the Board of Adjustments shall review the application and the statements and drawings submitted therewith and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated, or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 22.40.070 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.4.)  
22.40.060 - Investigation and Report. 
The Zoning Administrator shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report, thereon which shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.5.)  
22.40.070 - Action by Board of Adjustments. 
A.  The Board of Adjustments may grant an application for a use permit as the use permit was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Board makes the following findings: 
1.  The proposed location of the conditional use is in accord with the objectives of this Title, and the purposes of the district in which the site is located; 
2.  The proposed location of the conditional use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; 
3.  The proposed conditional use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this Title. 
B.  A use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period or may be granted subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe. 
C.  The Board may deny an application for a use permit. 
D.  A use permit shall become effective upon the expiration of 10 days following the date on which the permit is granted unless an appeal has been taken to the Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.6.)  
22.40.080 - Appeal to Board of Appeals. 
A.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Board of Adjustments on a use permit application, the decision may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by the applicant or by any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board of Adjustments and shall be filed with the Planning Department. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Board of Adjustments or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
B.  Within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Appeals the use permit application, the scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area and all other data filed therewith, the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator, the findings of the Board of Adjustments and its decision on the application. 
C.  The Zoning Administration shall give to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) the time when the appeal will be considered by the Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall also notify all property owners to whom notices of the Board of Adjustments' hearing were mailed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code 10,117.7.)  
22.40.090 - Action of the Board of Appeals. 
The Board of Appeals shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Board of Adjustments. Approval of the use permit shall require a majority vote of the members of the Board of Appeals voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying the use permit. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 3, 2000.)  
22.40.100 - Appeal to City Council. 
A.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Board of Appeals on a use permit application, the decision may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or by any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
B.  Within 5 days of the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the City Clerk the use permit application, the scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area, and all other data filed therewith, the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator, the findings of the Board of Appeals and its decision on the application. 
C.  The City Clerk shall give to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) the time when the appeal will be considered by the City Council. The City Clerk shall also notify all property owners to whom notices of the Board of Appeals' hearing were mailed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.9.)  
22.40.110 - Action of City Council. 
A.  The City Council shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Board of Appeals. Approval of the use permit shall require a majority vote of the members of the City Council voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying the use permit. 
B.  In the case of an appeal concerning a use permit for a planned unit development, the City Council shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm or may reverse or may modify a decision of the Planning Commission. Approval of the use permit shall require a majority vote of the members of the City Council voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying the use permit for the planned unit development. 
C.  A use permit which has been the subject of an appeal to the City Council shall become effective 3 days following the date on which the use permit is granted by the City Council. 
D.  A fee shall be required of the appellant, said fee to be established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. Payment of the appeal fee shall be made at the time of the filing of an appeal. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 4, 2000; Ord. 865 C.S. § 1, 1977: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.10.)  
22.40.120 - Lapse of Use Permit. 
A use permit, unless otherwise limited, shall lapse and shall become null and void 1 year following the date on which the use permit became effective, unless a building permit is issued, and construction commenced on the site. A use permit may be renewed for an additional period of 1 year provided that prior to the expiration of 1 year from the date when the permit originally became effective, an application for renewal of the use permit is filed with the Board of Adjustments. The Board may grant or deny an application for renewal of a use permit. Within 10 days of the date of a decision by the Board denying an application, the decision may be appealed to the Board of Appeals which shall render a decision on the application for renewal. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.11.)  
22.40.130 - Pre-existing Conditional Uses. 
A.  A conditional use established prior to enactment of this Title shall be permitted to continue. Alteration or expansion of a conditional use established prior to enactment of this Title shall be permitted upon the granting of a use permit, provided that a use permit shall not be required for accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for or incidental to the operation of a pre-existing conditional use. 
B.  A use permit shall be required for the reconstruction of a structure housing a conditional use established prior to enactment of this Title if the structure is destroyed by fire or other calamity or by act of God or by the public enemy to a greater extent than 50%. 
C.  The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction, to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.12.)  
22.40.140 - Revocation. 
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title or, if granted subject to a condition or conditions, upon failure to comply with the condition or conditions, a use permit shall be suspended automatically, the Board of Adjustments shall call a public hearing within 60 days in accord with the procedure prescribed in Section 22.40.040 and, if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, may revoke the use permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision or condition. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.13.)  
22.40.150 - New Application. 
Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within 1 year from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.14.)  
22.40.160 - Use Permit to Run With the Land. 
A use permit granted pursuant to the provision of this Chapter or Chapter 22.42 of this Title, shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,117.15.)  
CHAPTER 22.41 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES AND CULTIVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1380, § 5, adopted May 7, 2014, amended the Code by renaming Ch. 22.41. 
 
22.41.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the City by prohibiting the use of residential districts for medical marijuana dispensaries and restricting the operation of medical marijuana dispensaries to specific commercial zones that permit uses most close approximating those of medical marijuana dispensaries. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.020 - Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
A "medical marijuana dispensary" ("dispensary") is a facility where marijuana is made available for medical purposes in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Proposition 215). 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.025 - Cultivation of Medical Marijuana. 
"Cultivation of medical marijuana" shall mean the growing of marijuana for medical purposes pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, by any person, including but not limited to a qualified patient, person with an identification card or primary caregiver. Cultivation includes the cultivation and possession of both female and male plants at all stages of growth, mature or immature, clones, seedlings, and germinating seeds. "Qualified patient," "primary caregiver," "person with an identification card" and "identification card" shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
(Ord. No. 1380 C.S., § 6, 5-7-2014)  
22.41.030 - Effect on Federal Law. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall counteract the substance, interpretation, effect, or application of any federal law, statute, regulation, act, administrative or judicial court decision, departmental directive, or guideline promulgated or authorized by any body of the federal government respecting the distribution, use, sale, cultivation or furnishing of marijuana. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.040 - Nonconforming Use. 
No use which purports to have distributed, sold or provided marijuana to persons covered by the definitional categories listed in Proposition 215 prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of this Code and such use shall not to be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status pursuant to Sections 22.38.010 and 22.38.020. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.050 - Conditional Use Permit Required. 
A.  No person shall operate or allow or suffer the operation of a medical marijuana dispensary except in compliance with a Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to Chapter 22.40. 
B.  The application for such Conditional Use Permit may be filed by the operator of the medical marijuana dispensary and shall be countersigned by the owner of the subject lot or parcel, or by the authorized agent of the owner, pursuant to the requirements of Section 22.40.030. 
C.  All property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed marijuana dispensary shall be noticed of the conditional use public hearing as described in Section 22.40.040(B) of this Code. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.060 - Allowed Districts. 
Medical marijuana dispensaries may be permitted only in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District, Central Commercial (CC) District, Service Commercial (SC) District, and Thoroughfare Commercial (TC) District. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.065 - Outdoor Cultivation of Marijuana—Restrictions. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no person owning, renting, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel of real property in the City shall cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of medical marijuana of any kind or type outdoors, or within public view, within any zoning district in the City. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no person owning, renting, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel of real property in the City shall cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana plants of any kind or type, outdoors, or within public view, within any zoning district in the City. Cultivation includes the cultivation and possession of both female and male plants at all stages of growth, mature or immature, clones, seedlings, and germinating seeds. 
(Ord. No. 1380 C.S., § 7, 5-7-2014)  
22.41.070 - Standards for Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. 
A.  No dispensary shall be located less than 1,000 feet from any park, elementary or secondary school; child daycare center or church which includes a elementary or secondary school or child daycare center, 300 feet from property used for residential purposes. 
B.  Distance shall be measured from the building which contains the dispensary to the property line of the enumerated use using the most direct vehicular or pedestrian access route, whichever is shorter. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.080 - Findings for Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  The Planning Commission or City Council, on appeal, shall grant a Conditional Use Permit for a dispensary located a permissible distance from each of the sites listed in Section 22.31.070 only if the applicable criteria specified in Section 22.41.070 are met and each of the findings specified in subsection B of this Section can be made as to the proposed dispensary. 
B.  In addition to the findings required pursuant to Section 22.40.070, a Conditional Use Permit for a medical marijuana dispensary shall be granted only if the Planning Commission, or the City Council, on appeal, makes all of the following additional findings of fact: 
1.  The medical marijuana dispensary, as proposed and at the location requested, will not create a potentially adverse impact on surrounding uses; and 
2.  The medical marijuana dispensary, as proposed and at the location requested, will be compatible with the adjacent zoning districts; and 
3.  The proposed medical marijuana dispensary will not result in the substantial aggravation of crime problems or make law enforcement unduly difficult. 
C.  The Planning Commission, or City Council, on appeal, shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at the public hearing fails to satisfactorily substantiate each such finding. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
22.41.090 - Conditions. 
In addition to any conditions imposed pursuant to Chapter 22.40, a Conditional Use Permit for a medical marijuana dispensary shall include such of the following additional conditions: 
A.  The use shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
B.  No persons under the age of 18 shall be permitted in the dispensary at any time. 
C.  No retail sales of any products other than medical marijuana are permitted at the dispensary. 
D.  The dispensary shall be operated in strict compliance with regulations adopted by the Chief of Police: 
1.  The regulations shall address, but are not limited to, such issues as record keeping, proper identification for patients, storage of marijuana on the site, on-site cultivation, delivery and maximum amount dispensed in any single transaction; 
2.  The regulations may be amended from time to time by the Chief. The dispensary shall be operated in strict compliance with the most currently adopted regulations sent by registered mail to the operator of the dispensary. 
E.  All transactions shall occur at the dispensary and all medical marijuana shall be dispensed directly to the patient or the designated caregiver. No employee, owner or volunteer of the dispensary may provide medical marijuana to any patient or designated caregiver at any location other than inside the building of the dispensary. 
F.  Cultivation of medical marijuana on-site is only allowed if specifically authorized by the Conditional Use Permit. 
G.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 7 days a week. 
H.  The operator and/or property owner shall be required to report any illegal activity occurring on the site or associated with the dispensary. 
I.  Each dispensary shall display in a manner legible and visible to its clientele: 
1.  Notice that persons under the age of 18 are not allowed in the dispensary; and 
2.  Notice that all illegal activity will be reported to the police; and 
3.  A request that there be no smoking of medical marijuana in the vicinity of the dispensary. 
(Ord. 1277 C.S. § 2 (part), 2000.)  
CHAPTER 22.41A - CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS 
 
22.41A.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Subject to certain exceptions, the purpose of this Chapter is to expressly prohibit: 
1.  The establishment of commercial cannabis uses in the City; and 
2.  The indoor cultivation of cannabis. 
B.  The City Council finds that prohibitions on the cultivation of cannabis and on commercial cannabis activity are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. The prohibition of such uses is within the authority conferred upon the City Council by State law and is an exercise of its police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
22.41A.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply. 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" includes cannabis that is used for medicinal, non-medicinal, or other purposes. 
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
"Cannabis" also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11018.5, which said definition provides: 
"Industrial hemp" means a fiber or oilseed crop, or both, that is limited to types of the plant Cannabis sativa L. having no more than three-tenths of 1 percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained in the dried flowering tops, whether growing or not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin produced therefrom. 
B.  "Cannabis accessories" means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which is intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body. 
C.  "Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
D.  "Commercial cannabis activity" means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis product for medicinal, non-medicinal, or any other purpose and includes: 
1.  The production of hashish oil and the distillation or extraction of cannabidiol ("CBD") from industrial hemp having more than three-tenths of 1 percent THC contained in the dried flowering tops; and 
2.  The activities of any business licensed by the State or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of State law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses. 
E.  "Concentrated cannabis" means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate 1 or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate. 
F.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
G.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform. 
H.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time. 
I.  "Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a space within a building that complies with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 15.04 (Building Code) of the Martinez Municipal Code, and has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through 1 or more lockable doors. Walls and roof must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through, and must be constructed with non-transparent material. Plastic sheeting, canvas, vinyl, or similar products or materials, regardless of gauge, are not considered solid materials. A fully enclosed and secure structure must be an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the parcel on which that private residence is situated. 
J.  "Indoors" means inside a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a private residence. 
K.  "Luminaire" means a complete lighting unit consisting of lamp(s) and the parts that distribute the light, position and protect the lamp(s), and connect the lamp(s) to the power supply. 
L.  "Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, dilute or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
M.  "MAUCRSA" means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
N.  "Medicinal cannabis" means cannabis used for medical purposes as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
O.  "Outdoors" means any location within the City that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a private residence. 
P.  "Primary caregiver" means the individual described in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d). 
Q.  "Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, condominium, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence. 
R.  "Qualified patient" means an individual who is entitled to the protections of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
S.  "Solid fence" means a fence constructed of substantial material, such as wood or metal, that prevents viewing the contents from one side to the other side of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
22.41A.030 - Prohibited Uses and Activities. 
A.  Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is prohibited in all zones, specific plan areas, and overlay zones of the City. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow, or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. To the extent that this prohibition conflicts with any other provision of this Municipal Code and/or City ordinance, policy or regulation, this prohibition will control. 
B.  A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City. 
C.  The indoor commercial and non-commercial cultivation of cannabis for any purpose, whether or not for profit, is prohibited in all zones, specific plan areas, and overlay zones of the City. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow, or engage in the indoor cannabis cultivation anywhere within the City. To the extent that this prohibition conflicts with any other provision of this Municipal Code and/or City ordinance, policy or regulation, this prohibition will control. 
D.  A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in cannabis cultivation activity to occupy real property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in cannabis cultivation activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City. 
E.  Subsections A and C above shall prohibit, among other things, all activities for which a State license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. The City shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 26070.5. 
F.  To the extent not already prohibited by subsection A above, all commercial and non-commercial deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products for medicinal and/or non-medicinal purposes, to or from any location are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any commercial and non-commercial delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products for a medicinal or non-medicinal purpose, which delivery either originates or terminates within the City. This subsection shall not prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the City for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the City, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
22.41A.040 - Exceptions. 
A.  Notwithstanding Section 22.41A.030 above, and to the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age or older from: 
1.  Possessing, processing, transporting, using, ingesting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis; 
2.  Possessing, processing, transporting, ingesting, obtaining or giving away to persons 21 years of age or older, without compensation whatsoever, up to 8 grams of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis; 
3.  Smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products except as prohibited by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.3, and/or applicable provisions of this Code; 
4.  Possessing, transporting, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away cannabis accessories to persons 21 years of age or older without compensation whatsoever; 
5.  Engaging in the cultivation of six or fewer live cannabis plants within an approved single private residence and/or a fully enclosed and secure structure pursuant to and in accordance with Section 22.41A.050. In no case shall the total number of live cannabis plants being cultivated for medicinal or non-medicinal purposes within a single private residence (and/or fully enclosed and secure structure) and/or upon the grounds of that single private residence (and/or fully enclosed and secure structure) exceed six at any given time. In no instance may personal cultivation occur on vacant property. 
B.  Notwithstanding Section 22.41A.030 above, and to the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, a primary caregiver may possess, store, transport, donate or provide medicinal cannabis in quantities permitted by State law on behalf of or to qualified patients residing in the city for whom he or she is the primary caregiver. 
C.  Notwithstanding Section 22.41A.030 above, and to the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, a person 18 years of age or older but less than 21 years of age who is a qualified patient or primary caregiver, may cultivate indoors up to 6 live cannabis plants for medicinal purposes within an approved single private residence and/or a fully enclosed and secure structure pursuant to and in accordance with Section 22.41A.050. In no case shall the total number of live cannabis plants being cultivated for medicinal or non-medicinal purposes within a single private residence (and/or fully enclosed and secure structure) and/or upon the grounds of that single private residence (and/or fully enclosed and secure structure) exceed 6 at any given time. In no instance may personal cultivation occur on vacant property. 
D.  This Chapter shall also not prohibit any commercial cannabis activity that the City is required by State law to permit within its jurisdiction pursuant to the MAUCRSA. 
E.  To the extent the exceptions set forth in this Section conflict with any other provision of this Municipal Code and/or City ordinance, policy or regulation, these exceptions will control. 
F.  This Chapter shall also not prohibit any person, who, at the time the ordinance adding this Chapter is introduced by the Council, has an application pending with the City for permission to establish and operate a medicinal cannabis dispensary pursuant to Municipal Code Chapter 22.41, from establishing and operating said medicinal cannabis dispensary, provided that said application and/or any substitute application and/or amendment thereto (1) includes provisions for security, audits, the payment of fees, appropriate payments to the City and other conditions and elements which the City finds necessary and acceptable, and (2) is approved by final decision of the City; and provided further, that all conditions precedent to the establishment and operation of the dispensary - as stated in the final decision - have been fully satisfied; and provided further, that Section 22.41A.030 shall apply to said proposed medicinal cannabis dispensary unless and until it is approved by final decision of the City and (i) said decision expressly exempts the dispensary from this Chapter or (ii) the conditions precedent to exemption from this Chapter as set forth in the said decision have been fully satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
22.41A.050 - Indoor Cultivation Standards. 
A.  Indoor Cultivation in Private Residence. The indoor cultivation of cannabis on a parcel with an approved private residence shall only be conducted within a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a residence. Such cultivation shall be in conformance with the following minimum standards: 
1.  The primary use of the property shall be for a residence. Cannabis cultivation is prohibited as a home occupation. 
2.  All areas used for cultivation of cannabis shall comply with Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the Martinez Municipal Code, as well as applicable law. 
3.  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,000 watts per luminaire, and shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the City. 
4.  The use of gas products (CO 2 , butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for cultivation of cannabis is prohibited. 
5.  Any fully enclosed and secure structure or residence used for the cultivation of cannabis must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that complies with the applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by Chapter 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
6.  A fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis shall be located in the rear yard area of the parcel, and must maintain a minimum 10-foot setback from any property line. The yard where the fully enclosed and secure structure is maintained must be enclosed by a solid fence at least 6 feet in height. This provision shall not apply to cultivation occurring in a garage. 
7.  Adequate mechanical locking or electronic security systems must be installed as part of the fully enclosed and secure structure or the residence prior to the commencement of cultivation. 
8.  Cannabis cultivation shall be limited to 6 cannabis plants per private residence, regardless of whether the cannabis is cultivated inside the residence and/or in a fully enclosed and secure structure. The limit of 6 plants per private residence shall apply: 
a.  Regardless of how many individuals reside at the private residence; 
b.  Regardless of how many residents are qualified patients, persons with an identification card or primary caregivers; and 
c.  Regardless whether some or all of the cannabis plants are being cultivated for non-medicinal purposes. 
9.  The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for cannabis cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping and bathing. 
10.  Indoor cultivation of cannabis shall only take place on impervious surfaces. 
11.  From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring on the parcel. 
12.  Cannabis cultivation areas, whether in a fully enclosed and secure structure or inside a residence, shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years of age (unless the person is a qualified patient or primary caregiver, in which case access is permissible by these persons but the cannabis can only be used for medicinal purposes). 
13.  Written consent of the property owner to cultivate cannabis within the residence or in a fully enclosed and secure structure shall be obtained and shall be kept on the premises, and available for inspection by the building official or his/her designee. 
14.  A portable fire extinguisher, that complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in the fully enclosed and secure structure used for cultivation of cannabis. If cultivation occurs in a residence, the portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room as where the cultivation occurs. 
B.  Disposal of Waste. The following regulations apply to the disposal of cannabis waste on residential property: 
1.  Cannabis and cannabis infused products must be disposed in a secure waste receptacle located on the residential property. 
2.  Cannabis plants and products must be rendered unusable and unrecognizable by grinding and incorporating cannabis waste with any non-consumable solid waste with a resulting mixture of at least 50 percent non-cannabis waste. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
22.41A.060 - Violation and Penalty. 
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this Chapter 22.41A of the Martinez Municipal Code, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this Chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this Chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Chapters 1.12 and 1.15 of the Martinez Municipal Code, no provision of Chapters 1.12 and 1.15 or this Chapter 22.41A authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71, et seq. or Section 11362.1, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under Chapters 1.12 and 1.15 of the Martinez Municipal Code and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1411 C.S. , § 2, 11-15-2017)  
CHAPTER 22.42 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDS)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, adopted September 15, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 22.42, §§ 22.42.010—22.42.090, and adding a new Ch. 22.42. Former Ch. 22.42 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 10,118.0.—10,118.8; and Ord. 822 C.S. of 1975. 
 
22.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this Chapter are to: 
A.  Implement the objectives of the General Plan in a manner that will provide for greater flexibility in the design of integrated developments than otherwise possible through strict application of zoning regulations. 
B.  Encourage the design of well-planned facilities which offer a variety of housing or other land uses through creative and imaginative planning. 
C.  Ensure orderly and through planning and review procedures, that will result in high quality urban design. 
D.  Encourage variety and avoid monotony in development. 
E.  Conserve superior natural features 
F.  Encourage the preservation of serviceable existing structures determined by the City to be of historic value by providing the opportunity for imaginative re-use, rehabilitation and where appropriate expansion. 
G.  Encourage the assembly of properties that might otherwise be developed in unrelated increments to the detriment of surrounding neighborhoods. 
H.  Provide more desirable public and private open space and encourage allocation and improvement of common open space in residential areas. Provide for maintenance thereof at the expense of those who will directly benefit from it. 
I.  Provide a mechanism for considering mixes of uses that can be made compatible by application of careful and imaginative treatment of interrelationships of activity. 
J.  Encourage the provision of superior amenities in development. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.020 - General Provisions. 
A.  General Criteria and Intent. In administering the provisions of this Chapter, the extent to which the proposed planned unit development (PUD) generally promotes the purposes of this Chapter shall be taken into consideration. 
1.  It is intended that this Chapter be utilized for developments capable of achieving the distinct characteristics intended by the PUD criteria set forth in this Chapter, among them the following types of development: 
(a)  Residential. Residential subdivision developments which may include a variety of housing types and site plans, accessible open "green spaces," or common recreational areas and other features of substantial benefit to a viable and balanced community. 
(b)  Residential - Mixed Use Development. Mixed residential-commercial developments combining among other things, residential, retail, hotel, office, commercial recreation facilities, or other compatible uses grouped in a well-designed and coordinated site development. 
(c)  Industrial Development. Well-designed and controlled groupings of research, service, or light industrial uses within an area containing visual and operational amenities and features, such as selective occupancies, setbacks, landscaping, and bulk and building material controls. 
B.  Limitations on Use of PUD. It is not intended that this Chapter: 
1.  Encourage or permit a property owner to increase the development potential of his or her property merely by increasing the density of his or her project, contrary to the regulations imposed by the base zoning applicable to the property. 
2.  Be used solely to create a development potential for small or difficult parcels of property created or remaining as a result of subdividing, freeway construction, or other contributing factors. 
3.  Be applied to projects of less than 1 acre in size, except projects within the boundaries of either the Downtown Specific Plan or Central Martinez Specific Area Plan, in which case the minimum size project for a PUD application is 7,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.030 - PUD District. 
A.  Application—Procedure—Notice—Fees . A zoning amendment to rezone property to a PUD Overlay District may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, or by the City. If initiated by the property owner and the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join in the application, and a map showing the extent of the ownerships shall be submitted. The PUD zoning designation shall be adopted or removed in the same manner as a rezoning as set forth in this title. An application for a PUD zoning designation shall be subject to application fees as set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  Areas in Multiple Ownership . The PUD designation of property that is not all in the same ownership may only be initiated by a petition submitted on behalf of the owners of all of the property within the area. 
C.  Effect of PUD Designation. A PUD designation constitutes an overlay zoning district. The PUD designation appearing on the official zoning map indicates that the property within such overlay zone is subject to the requirements and restrictions set forth in this Chapter in addition to the indicated underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.040 - PUD Plan. 
No land use entitlement or development for property located within a PUD Overlay Zone shall be approved until a PUD Plan for the property subject to the Overlay has been approved by the City Council in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.050 - Required Contents of PUD Plan. 
A.  The approval of a PUD Plan shall constitute a rezoning of the property and zoning text amendment applicable to the property and shall establish the specific requirements for development and use of the site consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan. In approving a PUD Plan, the City Council may modify zoning regulations prescribing development standards, including but not limited to those relating to maximum building height, minimum yard, open space area and lot size requirements, parking and loading, and other provisions of this title otherwise applicable to the property, excepting those prescribed by the Hillside Development Regulations; Chapter 22.33,which include but are not limited to Maximum Allowable Density Calculations; Section 22.33.020. 
B.  The PUD Plan shall contain a schematic plan and development standards applicable to development within the PUD and shall include specific details, elements, conditions and restrictions as the council may deem warranted to carry out the purpose of this Chapter, including conditions and restrictions related to size, timing and sequence of development. 
C.  The PUD Plan shall at a minimum contain: 
1.  Allowable Density Standards . The allowable density and intensity of development , including: the total number and type of dwelling units that may be allowed for residential development (attached or detached and product type) and or the total square footage, maximum floor area ratios and building massing requirements for nonresidential development. Maximum allowable density shall not exceed the maximum density permitted by the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan and the underlying zoning district in which the property is located. 
2.  Allowable Land Uses . The allowable land uses, including accessory uses, and any subsequent land use permit requirements that shall apply after the approval of the PUD Plan. 
3.  Streets and lots . The proposed street and lot pattern. The creation of lots is subject to compliance with the subdivision ordinance. 
4.  Lot Size and Coverage Requirements . Minimum lot sizes and site coverage requirements. 
5.  Setbacks and Height Limits . Minimum setback requirements and structure height limits. 
6.  Parking . Off street parking requirements and identification of the location for required off street parking. 
7.  Landscaping . Landscaping requirements. 
8.  Sign Program. If signs are proposed, an integrated consistent sign program. 
9.  Such other information required by the review authority. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.060 - Effect of Approval, and Administration of Approved Plans. 
After the PUD Plan approval, the land uses allowed on the site and the proposed development shall comply with: 
A.  The standards of the PUD Plan to the extent that those provisions differ from the standards of this title, and 
B.  The provisions of this title where the PUD Plan is silent on any aspect of land use or development that is otherwise regulated by this title. 
C.  In any case where a PUD Plan is silent on an aspect of land use or development otherwise regulated by this title, the allowable land use requirements and development standards of the underlying zoning district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.080 - PUD Plan Application and Approval Procedures. 
PUD Plans shall be prepared, filed, processed, and approved or disapproved as follows. 
A.  Application Filing and Processing . An application for PUD Plan approval shall be filed and processed as an amendment to the zoning text and map in compliance with this title. The PUD Plan application shall include the following information and materials. 
1.  Graphic documents (one or more maps or drawings) accurately drawn to scale and sufficiently detailed to show: 
(a)  Boundaries and area of the site; 
(b)  A site plan for the conceptual and completed project showing each type of land use and the maximum allowable density or building intensity identified, areas designated for open space, all buildings/structures, streets, parking, pathways, patios, decks, pools, accessory buildings, fences, walls and similar improvements; 
(c)  Preliminary utility plan including storm drainage system; 
(d)  Topography, with existing and proposed contours shown at a minimum interval of 10 feet; 
(e)  Site slopes, calculated and classified as per Section 22.33.020; Hillside Development Regulations, Maximum Allowable Density Calculations; 
(f)  All existing structures and improvements on the site; 
(g)  All water areas (ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, and drainage ways); 
(h)  Contiguous properties, their zoning and existing uses and structures and other improvements; 
(i)  Surrounding street pattern, with design capacities and current traffic counts; 
(j)  Either: 1) conceptual architectural floor plans and elevations, sufficiently detailed to show conceptual height, bulk, and their relationship to the topography and indicating materials and colors of all building types proposed to be developed, or 2) comprehensive design standards and guidelines, as to be applied to all development with in the PUD, prescribing the maximum building envelope for each structure; and minimum standards for and/or limitations on ranges of exterior materials, landscaping, fencing and any other applicable limitations on site development, including but not limited to grading or tree removal. 
(k)  Designation of projected density and/or intensity of development. Density in gross and net figures for residential uses and, lot and building coverage, and total square footage of floor area for nonresidential uses; 
(l)  Geologic map graphically identifying areas of potential geologic problems or hazards; 
(m)  Opportunities and constraints map, showing visual focal points, view potential and existing utilities; 
(n)  Subdivision proposals with minimum lot sizes and lot pattern; 
(o)  Comprehensive landscape plans including the location, trunk diameter and type of all existing trees more than three inches in diameter measured 24 inches above ground level within the development area noting which, if any, are to be removed. These plans shall also show areas to be planted with trees, shrubs, groundcover, and hydroseeding and whether such trees or shrubs are to be evergreen or deciduous and shall include visual design including such elements as fencing, pathways, lighting, and other features; 
(p)  A comprehensive grading plan with a contour interval of at least five feet, showing area, height and slope of all cut or fill banks, earth quantities of import or export, street and lot layout; 
2.  Written development standards and statements as they apply to the following subjects: 
(a)  Density/intensity of development proposed including: the total number and type of dwelling units that may be allowed for residential development (attached or detached and product type) and or the total square footage, maximum floor area ratios and building massing requirements for nonresidential development; 
(b)  The proposed allowable land uses, including all accessory uses and approximate land area and square footage of floor areas and number of bedrooms for residential uses; 
(c)  Provisions dealing with ongoing physical development or use limitations such as, minimum lot size, height limitations for structures, required yard areas, maximum fence heights, coverage limitations, maximum floor area ratios, accessory structures, home occupations, parking requirements, landscaping requirements and signs; 
(d)  A description of subsequent land use permit requirements that shall apply after the approval of the PUD plan; 
(e)  Professional analysis and report on soils, flooding, geologic hazard, seismic hazard, wildlife, vegetation, noise, traffic safety, historic or archeological considerations; 
(f)  Utilities plan (gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer, telephone. storm drainage); 
(g)  Public services (police, fire, schools, mail); 
(h)  Public conveniences (solid waste, TV, newspapers); 
(i)  Public facilities (streets, library, public transportation and parks); 
(j)  traffic analysis (auto, bike, pedestrian, equestrian), including trip generation figures for vehicular traffic (auto/truck/service); 
(k)  Parking computations and ratios (per unit for residential and per square foot in nonresidential); 
(l)  If the project is in a high fire hazard area, as determined by the Fire District, then a fire management plan shall be included. the fire management plan shall describe the terrain, vegetation, fire service, access, and water availability and proposed method to reduce fire hazards, including long-term maintenance standards and management practices and identification of the responsible party and funding source; 
(m)  Any proposed exceptions to development standards of this code; 
(n)  Management plans including standards for maintenance of any open space, common areas, scenic easements, or other non-developerd areas, and all waterways or wetlands including identification of responsible party and long-term funding source for maintenance activities; and 
(o)  Information provided as required by the director to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act). 
3.  A list of all property owners included on the PUD Plan and a map depicting the parcel ownership. 
B.  Design Review Committee Recommendation on Site Plan Required . Prior to review by the Planning Commission, PUD Plans shall first be reviewed by the Design Review Committee for a site plan design recommendation. Design Review Committee recommendations shall be advisory and shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission with the staff evaluation. The Planning Commission shall consider the staff evaluation and the Design Review Committee's recommendation in making its findings and recommendations to the council on the PUD Plan. 
C.  Commission Action on PUD Plan. Following a public hearing in compliance with this title, the commission may recommend that the council approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the PUD Plan. The commission may recommend approval of a PUD Plan only after first making all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed PUD Plan development is in conformance with the applicable goals and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
2.  The proposed PUD Plan development can be adequately, conveniently, and reasonably served by public conveniences, facilities, services, and utilities; 
3.  Streets and pedestrian facilities adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development; 
4.  The proposed PUD Plan development concepts are reasonably suited to the specific characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood and the site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed, adequate in shape and size to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other features required by this title; 
5.  The proposed PUD Plan would produce a comprehensive development of superior quality (e.g., appropriate variety of structure placement and orientation opportunities, appropriate mix of land uses and structure sizes, high quality architectural design, increased amounts of landscaping and open space, improved solutions to the design and placement of parking facilities, etc.) than might otherwise occur from more traditional development applications; 
6.  The location, access, density/building intensity, size and type of uses proposed in the PUD Plan are compatible with the existing and future land uses in the surrounding neighborhood. 
D.  Council Action on PUD Plans. 
1.  After a commission recommendation for the approval of a PUD Plan, or an appeal of a commission disapproval of a PUD Plan, council shall review the PUD Plan in a noticed public hearing in compliance with this title. 
2.  Following the public hearing, the council may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the PUD Plan. The council may approve the PUD Plan only after first making all of the findings required by subsection (C) of this section. 
3.  Disapproval shall be by motion. Approval or conditional approval shall be by the adoption of an ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.090 - Council Action Required for Applications Integral to PUD Plan. 
Applications for development entitlements made concurrently with an application for approval of a PUD Plan, including but not limited to a request for approval of a subdivision map, variance to the provisions of the Hillside Development Regulations (Chapter 22.33) and Design Review (pursuant to Section 22.42.100.B below), the Planning Commission will make its recommendation to the Council on such applications, who will take action to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such applications concurrently with its consideration of the PUD Plan pursuant to Section 22.42.080.D 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.100 - Design Review Approval and Issuance of Building Permits. 
A.  Design Review Approval Subsequent to Council Action No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure within the boundaries of property zoned PUD overlay until a Design Review application, per Section 22.34.030-070, has been approved for the finalized architectural and landscape plans, and it is determined by the Planning Commission that the plans conform to either the: 1) conceptual architectural floor plans and elevations or 2) comprehensive design standards and guidelines adopted for the PUD. No building or structure within a PUD may be occupied until an inspection of the project has been made by the Community Development and Economic Director to see that all conditions of the plan review have been complied with. Modifications to previous Design Review approvals may be subject to Design Review Committee and/or Planning Commission review per Section 22.34.030-070. 
B.  Design Review Application may be Concurrent with Council's approval of PUD . Notwithstanding Section 22.42.080.B and 22.42.090.A, an applicant may choose to apply for Design Review approval concurrently with the application for a PUD. In such cases, Design Review Committee's site plan review, as required by Section 22.42.080.B, will be expanded to include a review of finalized architectural and landscape plans as normally required by Sections 22.34.030-070. The Design Review Committee's recommendation will be made to the Planning Commission, who will make its recommendation to the Council, who will take action as provided in Section 22.42.090 above. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.110 - Amendments to an Approved PUD Plan. 
Any proposed deviation from an approved PUD Plan, other than those limited to Design Review approval(s) per Section 22.42.090, are to be considered a potential amendment to the PUD Plan. Amendments to a previously approved PUD Plan may be applied for by the property owner or the City. The authority of the commission and council to act upon a PUD Plan amendment application is limited to considering and taking action with respect to only: (i) the changes in the plan proposed by the amendment; (ii) the direct and indirect effects on the balance of the plan caused by said amendment; and (iii) the environmental consequences of, and any necessary mitigation measure applicable to said changes. The commission and council shall follow the same procedures as were required for the City's consideration and action on the original (or previously amended) PUD Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.120 - Revocation of an Approved PUD District and Plan. 
An application to revoke a previously approved PUD District and Plan may be applied for by the property owner or the City. Reasons for such an application may include, but are not limited to, the expiration of a concurrently approved tentative map or the failure of a property owner(s) to acquire neighboring parcel(s) for concurrent development as envisioned by the approved PUD Plan. The commission and council shall follow the same procedures as were required for the City's consideration and action on the original (or previously amended) PUD District Plan. The approval of the requested revocation will remove the PUD Overlay District, and the land use and development regulations of the underlying base zoning district would apply. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
22.42.130 - Map of Approved PUDS 
The City shall prepare and maintain on file in the planning division a map which delineate the designated PUD's in the City. 
(Ord. No. 1356 C.S., § 1, 9-15-2010)  
CHAPTER 22.44 - VARIANCES 
 
22.44.010 - Purposes. 
The Board of Adjustments is empowered to grant variances in order to prevent or to lessen such practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the objectives of this Title as would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain of the regulations prescribed therein. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape or dimensions of a site, or the location of existing structures thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the site, or from population densities, street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity. Cost to the applicant of strict or literal compliance with a regulation shall not be the sole reason for granting a variance. The power to grant variances does not extend to use regulations because the flexibility necessary to avoid results inconsistent with the objectives of this Title is provided by the conditional use provisions. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.0.)  
22.44.020 - Powers of Board of Adjustments. 
The Board of Adjustments may grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this Title with respect to fences and walls, site area, width, frontage, depth, coverage, front yard, rear yard, side yard, height of structures, distances between structures, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities in accord with the procedure prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.1.)  
22.44.030 - Application and Fee. 
A.  Application for a variance shall be made to the Board of Adjustments on a form prescribed by the Board, which shall include the following data: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner; 
3.  Address or description of the property; 
4.  Statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship, inconsistent with the objectives of this Title which would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of a specified zoning regulation, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a variance, prescribed in Section 22.44.070 of this Chapter. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing of the site and any adjacent property affected showing the contours of intervals of not more than 5 feet and all existing and proposed locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, and landscaped areas. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the Board of Adjustments sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application as prescribed in this Chapter. 
D.  The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He shall give notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be considered by the Board and he may give notice of the time to any other interested party. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.2.)  
22.44.040 - Public Hearing—Notice. 
The Board of Adjustments shall hold a public hearing on an application for a variance within forty-five (45) days of the date when the application was filed. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing in the manner prescribed by the Board. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.3.)  
22.44.050 - Public Hearing—Procedure. 
At the public hearing the Board of Adjustments shall review the application and the statements and drawings submitted therewith and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 22.44.070 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.4.)  
22.44.060 - Investigation and Report. 
The Zoning Administrator shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.5.)  
22.44.070 - Action of Board of Adjustments. 
A.  The Board of Adjustments may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed by this Title with respect to fences and walls, site area, width, frontage, depth, coverage, front yard, rear yard, side yard, height of structures, distance between structures or landscaped areas as the variance was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application, the report of the Zoning Administrator, and the evidence submitted, the Board makes the following findings: 
1.  Strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of this Title; 
2.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the property which do not apply generally to other properties classified in the same zoning district; 
3.  Strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties classified in the same zoning district; 
4.  The granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same zoning district; 
5.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
B.  The Board of Adjustments may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed by this Title with respect to off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities, as the variance was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application, the report of the Zoning Administrator, and the evidence submitted, the Board makes the findings prescribed in Subdivisions 1 through 5 of this Section and the following additional findings: 
1.  Neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably required strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation; 
2.  The granting of a variance will not result in the parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets; 
3.  The granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this Title. 
C.  A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe. 
D.  The Board of Adjustments may deny a variance application. 
E.  A variance shall become effective upon the expiration of 10 days following the date on which the variance was granted by the Board. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.6.)  
22.44.080 - Appeal to Board of Appeals. 
A.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Board of Adjustments on a variance application, the decision may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board and shall be filed with the Planning Department. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Board or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
B.  Within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Appeals the variance application, the scale drawing of the site and all other data filed therewith, and the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator, the findings of the Board and its decision on the application. 
C.  The Zoning Administrator shall give to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) the time when the appeal will be considered by the Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall also notify all property owners to whom notices of the Board of Adjustments' hearing were mailed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.7.)  
22.44.090 - Action of the Board of Appeals. 
A.  The Board of Appeals shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Board of Adjustments. Approval of the variance at issue shall require a majority vote of the members of the Board of Appeals voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying the variance. 
B.  A variance which has been the subject of an appeal to the Board of Appeals shall become effective 10 days following the date on which the variance is granted by the Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 5, 2000; Ord. 865 C.S. § 1 (part) 1977: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.8.)  
22.44.100 - Appeal to City Council. 
A.  Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Board of Appeals on a variance application, the decision may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Board or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
B.  Within 5 days of the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the City Clerk the variance application, the scale drawing of the site and all other data filed therewith, and the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator, the findings of the Board and its decision on the application. 
C.  The City Clerk shall give to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) of the time when the appeal will be considered by the City Council. The City Clerk shall also notify all property owners to whom notices of the Board of Appeals hearing were mailed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.9.)  
22.44.110 - Action of City Council. 
The City Council shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm, or may reverse or modify the decision of the Board of Appeals. Approval of the variance at issue shall require a majority vote of the members of the City Council voting on the matter. A tie vote shall have the legal effect of denying the variance. An appeal fee shall be required per Section 22.40.110, Section D. 
(Ord. 1275 C.S. § 6, 2000.)  
22.44.120 - Lapse of Variance. 
A variance shall lapse and shall become null and void 1 year following the date on which the variance becomes effective, unless prior to the expiration of 1 year, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced on the site, or a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector for the site or structure which was the subject of the variance application. A variance may be renewed for an additional period of 1 year, provided that prior to the expiration of 1 year from the date when the variance originally became effective, an application for renewal of the variance is made to the Board. The Board may grant or deny an application for renewal of a variance. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.11.)  
22.44.130 - Revocation. 
A variance granted subject to a condition or conditions shall be revoked by the Board of Adjustments if the condition or conditions are not complied with. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.12.)  
22.44.140 - New Application. 
Following the denial or revocation of a variance application, no application for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within 1 year of the date of denial or revocation of the variance. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,119.13.)  
CHAPTER 22.46 - AMENDMENTS 
 
22.46.010 - Purposes. 
This Title may be amended by changing the boundaries of any district or by changing any district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirements, general provision, exception or other provision thereof in accord with the following procedure as set out in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.0.)  
22.46.020 - Conformity with General Plan. 
In accordance with the requirements of State law, zoning ordinances and zoning district boundaries shall be consistent with the City General Plan. The various land uses authorized by the ordinance shall be compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified therein. For any amendment or change in district boundaries, the Planning Commission shall make a finding that the amendment or change in a district boundary is consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.1.)  
22.46.030 - Initiation. 
A.  A change in the boundaries of any district may be initiated by the owner of the property within the area for which a change of districts is proposed, or the authorized agent of the owner filing an application for a change in district boundaries, on a form prescribed in Section 22.46.040 of this Title. If the area for which a change of district is proposed is in more than one ownership, all the property owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. 
B.  A change in boundaries of any district or a change in a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision may be initiated by resolution of the City Planning Commission or by action of the City Council in the form of a request to the Commission that it consider a proposed change, provided that in either case the procedure prescribed in Sections 22.46.050 through 22.46.100 of this Title shall be followed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.2.)  
22.46.040 - Application and Fee. 
A.  A property owner desiring to propose a change in the boundaries of the district in which his property is located, or his authorized agent, may file an application with the City Planning Commission for a change in district boundaries on a form prescribed by the Commission which shall include the following data: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  Statement that the applicant for which the change in district boundaries is proposed, or the authorized agent of the owner; 
3.  Address or description of the property. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least 500 feet from each boundary of the site showing the location of streets and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties shown on the drawing. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Planning Commission sufficient to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.3.)  
22.46.050 - Public Hearing—Notice. 
The City Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application for a change in district boundaries, and on each proposal for a change in district boundaries, or of a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this Title initiated by the Commission or the City Council within forty-five (45) days of the date when the application was filed or the proposal was initiated. Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and in such other manner as may be prescribed by the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.4.)  
22.46.060 - Public Hearing—Procedure. 
At the public hearing, the City Planning Commission shall review the application for a change in a district boundary or of a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provisions of this Title and may receive pertinent evidence as to why or how the proposed change is necessary to achieve the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.5.)  
22.46.070 - Investigation and Report. 
The Zoning Administrator shall make an investigation of the application for a change in a district boundary or a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this Title, and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the City Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.6.)  
22.46.080 - Action of City Planning Commission. 
Within forty-five (45) days following the public hearing, the City Planning Commission shall make a specific finding as to whether the change in the district boundary or of the district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this Title is required to achieve the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010. The Commission shall transmit a report to the City Council recommending that the application be granted or denied, or that the proposal be adopted or rejected, together with one copy of the application, resolution of the Commission, or request of the Council, the scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area, and all other data filed therewith, the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator and the findings of the Commission. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.7.)  
22.46.090 - Action of City Council. 
A.  Upon receipt of the resolution or report of the City Planning Commission, the City Council shall review the application for a change in a district boundary of the proposal, for a change in a district boundary or a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this Title and shall consider the resolution or report of the Commission and the report of the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  The City Council shall make a specific finding as to whether the change in the district boundary or of the district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this Title is required to achieve the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010. If the Council finds that the change is required, it shall enact an ordinance amending the zoning map or an ordinance amending the regulations of this Title, whichever is appropriate. If the Council finds that the change is not required, it shall deny the application or reject the proposal. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.8.)  
22.46.100 - Change Zoning Map. 
A change in a district boundary shall be indicated on the zoning map with a notation of the date and number of the ordinance amending the map. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.9.)  
22.46.110 - New Application. 
Following the denial of an application for a change in a district boundary, no application for the same or substantially the same change shall be filed within one year of the date of denial of the application. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.10.)  
22.46.120 - Annexed Territory. 
All territory annexed to the City shall be placed in the U Undesignated District, unless prezoned in accordance with the intent of the General Plan, until duly amended by the Planning Commission in conformance with this Chapter. The Planning Commission may, at any time deemed appropriate, make a study of the annexed territory and initiate a change of zone compatible with the General Plan and the objectives prescribed in Section 22.02.010 of this Title. The owner of annexed property, or the authorized agent of the owner, may initiate similar action at any time by filing an application for a change in district, as prescribed in Section 22.46.020. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.1.)  
22.46.130 - Appeal. 
A.  Within ten (10) days following the date of a decision of the Board of Adjustments on a rezoning or zoning amendment, the decision may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board of Adjustments and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Board or wherein its decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
B.  Within five (5) days of the filing of an appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the City Clerk the zoning amendment application, the scale drawing of the site, and all other data filed therewith, the minutes of the public hearing, the report of the Zoning Administrator, the findings of the Board, and its decision on the application. At its next meeting, the City Council shall set a hearing date. 
C.  The City Clerk shall give notice to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) of the time when the appeal will be considered by the City Council. The City Clerk shall also notify all property owners to whom notices of the Planning Commission hearing were mailed. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.2.)  
22.46.140 - Construction Upon the Granting of a Change in District Boundaries. 
Upon the granting of an application for a change in a district boundary, the owner of the property affected shall proceed with the construction of building or buildings on the property which was subject of the Planning Commission's action. Substantial progress shall be made by the owner during the one-year period immediately following the granting of the change in district boundaries. At any time prior to the end of this one-year period, the owner may apply for an extension of the period herein provided for. In no event shall an extension be granted for a period longer than one year. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.12.)  
CHAPTER 22.47 - HISTORIC RESOURCE PROVISIONS 
 
22.47.010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Historic Resources Provisions." 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.020 - Purpose. 
The intended purpose of this Chapter is to establish a framework for the preservation of structures and districts which significantly contribute to the cultural and architectural heritage of the City. Historic preservation will safeguard the heritage of the City by providing for the protection of significant landmarks and areas, enhance the visual character of the City by encouraging compatible architectural styles which reflect unique and established architectural traditions, foster public appreciation of the historic character of the City, and strengthen the local economy by preserving, enhancing and unifying the City's historic attractions to residents, tourists and visitors. 
This Chapter is not intended to be an impediment to healthy economic growth, but rather a part of an overall economic development program which encourages the orderly expansion of commerce and respects the historical integrity of the City of Martinez. 
This Chapter shall apply to any area within the City of Martinez. 
(Ord 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983  
22.47.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Alterations" shall mean any exterior change or modification, through public or private action, of any cultural resource or of any property located within an historic district. 
B.  "Contributing structure" shall mean an edifice within an historic district which retains the scale, mass and other architectural characteristics, or imparts a strong historical tie to the development of the City, to the degree that it contributes to the sense of time and place of the immediate area and the district. Contributing structures may reflect interior modifications if the modifications do not irreparably detract from the character of the building. 
C.  "Cultural or historic resources" shall mean improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features, sites, places, areas or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historic significance to the citizens of the City. 
D.  "Historic District" shall mean any area containing improvements which have a special character, historic interest or aesthetic value, or which represent one or more architectural periods or styles typical to the history of the City, and which improvements constitute a distinct section of the City that has been designated an historic district pursuant to this ordinance. 
E.  "Improvements" shall mean any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall, work of art, or other object constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
F.  "Maintenance" shall mean any construction effort given to a structure to provide for its general upkeep and which does not affect the historic character of the improvement. 
G.  "Preservation" shall mean the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of cultural resources. 
H.  "Restoration" shall mean any construction effort given to an improvement to effect its retention of historic or architectural characteristics. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.040 - Martinez Planning Commission—Historic Functions. 
The City of Martinez Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") shall have particular historic preservation duties in addition to its current responsibilities. 
A.  Staff Composition 
In its deliberations, the Commission shall obtain the assistance and advice of qualified City personnel and/or outside support staff. Qualified City staff shall have demonstrated interest and expertise in architecture, architectural history or historic preservation. Should City staff possess insufficient qualifications to assist the Commission in its preservation duties, local outside assistance may be requested from qualified historians and/or architectural historians. Recommendations regarding Commission actions on historic preservation shall be solicited from the Martinez Historical Society. 
B.  Responsibilities 
The Commission shall have the responsibility of preserving the architectural heritage of the City of Martinez. It may conduct surveys of structures of historic or architectural significance, maintain a register of cultural or historic resources, and adopt guidelines for the designation of these resources. It may render advice, upon the request of the property owner or occupant on the restoration, alteration, or maintenance of any designated historic structure or any contributing structure to a designated historic district within the City, or regarding the design compatibility of any new construction within historic districts. Finally, the Commission shall adopt prescriptive standards to be used in reviewing applications for permits to alter, remove, or destroy an historic or cultural resource, or contributing structure to an historic district. The Commission shall use current Design Review and urban design standards in approving and disapproving applications for permits issued pursuant to Sections 22.47.050 and 22.47.060 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.050 - Cultural Resource Designation and Procedures. 
A.  Individual Structures. 
Individual structures possessing significant architectural or historical importance to the City may be designated as cultural resources. Any resident of Martinez may request such designation by contacting and applying to the Martinez Historical Society. Based on its findings, the Historical Society shall recommend, for City Council approval, those structures worthy of recognition and preservation. 
B.  Historic Districts. 
Application for the designation of an historic district may be made by the City, or an occupant or owner of property within the proposed district. If, after a preliminary determination based on staff evaluation with the assistance of the Historical Society, the Planning Commission considers the request appropriate, a public hearing will be held. The Commission will then recommend approval, in whole or in part, or disapproval of the application. Final approval and subsequent designation of the area as an historic district shall be contingent on action by the City Council and confirmation by two-thirds of the property owners within the proposed district. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.060 - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, demolish, construct, alter, or remove any improvement or portion thereof which has been designated a cultural resource or which lies within an historic district without obtaining a permit in the manner outlined in this section. 
All work or alterations in improvements or buildings lying within designated historic districts must be approved by the Planning Commission. Decisions regarding permits shall be made pursuant to established Design Review procedures described in Sections 22.34.010 through 22.34.040 of the Municipal Code. Standard Design Review process will be undertaken by the Commission with the Urban Design Manual providing the basic guidelines for the Commission action. 
In the event of an application for a permit allowing demolition of a designated historic structure or a contributing structure to an historic district, the Commission may require a 120-day waiting period, during which time the owner may be encouraged to take such actions, including the sale of the property or negotiation with the Commission, as may save structure from demolition. The 120-day waiting period may be extended an additional 120 days by the City Council. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.070 - Appeals. 
Appeals may be filed after any decision of the Commission regarding designation of historic structures or districts and permit issuance. Appeals shall follow established procedure set forth in Sections 22.34.060 and 22.34.070 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
22.47.080 - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and adopted this Chapter and each section, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 990 C.S. § 1 (part), 1983.)  
CHAPTER 22.48 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
22.48.010 - Purposes. 
To ensure that each new or expanded use of a structure or site and each new structure or alteration of an existing structure complies with all applicable provisions of this Title and, in order that the City may have a record of each new or expanded use of a structure or site, a certificate of occupancy is required before any structure or site may be occupied or used. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,120.0.)  
22.48.020 - Certificate Required. 
No structure or site shall be occupied or used after the effective date of this Title until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,121.1.)  
22.48.030 - Application. 
Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be filed with the Building Inspector prior to the erection, moving, alteration or enlargement of any structure and prior to the commencement of a new use or a change in use of any structure or site. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,121.2.)  
22.48.040 - Issuance. 
The Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon receipt of written notice that the structure or site is ready for occupancy or use and after he has inspected the structure or site, provided that the structure or site and the intended use thereof conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located and all other applicable provisions of this Title. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,121.3.)  
CHAPTER 22.49 - CHILD CARE FACILITIES 
 
22.49.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the Child Care Component of the Community Facilities Element of the Martinez General Plan. It is the policy of the City to assist and encourage the development of adequate, affordable and quality child care. The City recognizes the need to provide infant and after-school care and thus encourages the development of facilities to address these two age groups. The City acknowledges that the provision of child care requires a partnership between public and private participants and that the role of the City is to establish land use policies and ordinances to promote the establishment of child care facilities in this City. It is recognized that it is the developer's responsibility to address child care needs associated with his/her development and that the establishment of such child care facilities will help satisfy the child care infrastructure requirements associated with new growth. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Child Care Facility" or "facility" means an existing or proposed child day care facility and related improvements and structures as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 1596.750. 
Such facility includes the building, indoor and outdoor equipment, landscaping, and other site development costs, and any accessory structures and programs licensed by the State for direct child care services providing but not limited to shelter, food and educational and play opportunities for less than 24 hours per day. 
B.  "Project" means any new residential development resulting in the addition of more than one bedroom, and any new non-residential development resulting in more than 2,500 gross square feet and any subdivision which is granted an extension of time for which to file the final or parcel map except buildings or improvements related to the following: 
1.  Day Care Centers 
2.  Schools 
3.  Churches 
4.  Secondary Residential Units, as defined in Section 22.04.441 of the Municipal Code 
5.  Repair and reconstruction of any building damaged by flood, fire or other disaster 
6.  Senior housing project 
7.  Subdivisions for which, during the five year period prior to this ordinance becoming effective (which date is May 10, 1990), a final or parcel map has been recorded. 
8.  Subdivisions, the applications for which were deemed complete on or before February 3, 1990, the date notice of this ordinance was given per Section 66474.2 (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1156 C.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.030 - Permitted Use. 
Any child care facility provided as part of a project shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts except those designated as industrial. Child care facilities not a part of a project as defined by this Chapter shall be subject to the City's regulations and zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
21.49.040 - Child Care Requirement. 
A.  Child Care Needs Assessment. 
Staff will determine each project's child care needs based on generation rates and percent of working mothers. 
B.  Response Program. 
An application for a project, including building permits (with the exceptions as noted in Section 22.49.020 of this Chapter), as defined herein shall include a response program identifying how the needs as identified in Section 22.49.040 (A) shall be met within the City of Martinez. The response program shall include the manner in which the establishment of child care services and the use of child care facilities will be assured by the availability of qualified care providers and related resources. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.050 - Facility Repaired. 
A.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for any project defined herein, applicant shall provide or guarantee through bonding or development agreement, a facility or participant in the construction and establishment of facilities as required to mitigate the project's child care impacts. 
B.  In certain circumstances, the Planning Commission or City Council may consider payment in lieu of the facilities requirement. In-lieu fees shall be made according to the standards and formula contained in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.060 - Standards and Formula for Facilities. 
The applicant and/or developer shall provide a facility to serve the project residents and/or employees. The size of the facility required shall be as follows: 
Residential Development. 
Size of facility = number of children generated in need of child care × square feet of facility required per child 
Non-Residential Development. 
Size of facility = number of employees × percent of women in the workforce with children aged 0-12 × square feet of facility required per child 
The child care facility standards shall equal those that are required for State licensing for the provision of child care as follows: 
110 square feet of land per child 35 square feet of building per child (excluding bathroom, kitchen, crib space and storage space). 
(Ord. 1156 C.S. § 2, 1990: Ord. 1148 C.S. § l (part), 1990.)  
22.49.070 - Formula for Fee in Lieu of Facility. 
Should the provision of a facility prove to be infeasible due to the size of the project or other special circumstance as determined by the Planning Commission and/or City Council, the applicant shall, in lieu of providing the facility, pay a fee equal to the value of land and construction costs as prescribed in Section 22.49.060 and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.49.080. Projects which do not require City Council or Planning Commission action shall pay fees. The fee is to be used for a local facility which will serve the project residents and/or employees. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.080 - Amount of Fee in Lieu of Facilities. 
When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of facilities, the amount of the fee shall be based on the estimated fair market value of land for residential development or non-residential development as appropriate for the type of project for which an application has been submitted and the estimated cost of construction, (including site development, landscaping and indoor and outdoor equipment) and the number of children generated by the development in need of child care. This fee shall be set annually by Council resolution. 
(Ord. 1156, C.S. § 3, 1990: Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.090 - Integration with Other Facilities. 
To the extent possible, child care facilities shall be integrated with other facilities. Cooperative efforts with public and private schools shall be encouraged as the preferred method to provide off-site child care. Coordinated use of recreational or common areas within projects, with churches, parks or community facilities is to be fostered as a secondary method to provide child care facilities. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
22.49.100 - Deed Notification and Restrictive Covenants. 
The developer shall provide in the deed or Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions to all purchasers or lessees of units or buildings in the project that a child care facility may be located at or on any residential unit or lot or in any common area or facility within the project. 
(Ord. 1148 C.S. § 1 (part), 1990.)  
CHAPTER 22.50 - BUILDING LINE SETBACKS 
 
22.50.010 - Declaration of Policy. 
The City Council declares that the City, through the City Planning Commission and the City Council, is engaged in developing a master plan of streets and specific plans for streets within the City for the purpose of assuring ample transportation facilities for the present and future; that the magnitude of the undertaking precludes such plans being completed in their entirety in time to fully guide the rapid development occurring within the City; that the surveys, hearings, map preparation and requirements of law governing such matters necessitate such detailed plans being developed progressively; that to conserve the public interest and to assure economies and public safety and welfare, it is imperative that necessary rights-of-way for streets within the City be protected against encroachment by permanent physical improvements, the existence of which would make unnecessarily difficult or make impractical the retention or creation of thoroughfares, adequate in alignment, dimensions and vision clearance to serve the public needs, safety and welfare; that to deal effectively with the practical problem thus presented; it is necessary to establish certain minimum building line setbacks on a City-wide basis. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,500.)  
22.50.020 - Specific Plan. 
Whenever a specific plan for a street, based upon the master plan, has been adopted by the City Council, a copy of the specific plan, sufficient to accurately indicate the location of the street on parcels of land to be traversed or otherwise occupied by the street when constructed, shall be given to the Director of Building Inspection and Housing Development by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,501.)  
22.50.030 - Effect on Issuance of Building Permit. 
Before issuing a building permit, the Director of Building Inspection and Housing Development or his authorized deputy, shall examine the specific plan. If he finds that the building or structure proposed to be erected will be within the boundaries of the specific plan, or within the setback lines of the existing zoning regulations affecting the land as measured from the boundaries of the specific plan, he shall grant the permit if the cost of the proposed building or structure is $500.00 or less. Otherwise, he shall refuse the permit and notify the applicant for the permit of the reason for refusal. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,502.)  
22.50.040 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit may appeal to the City Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall grant the permit only if all of the following are true: 
A.  There are special circumstances or conditions attached to the property upon which the proposed building, structure or other improvement is sought to be placed; 
B.  The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; 
C.  Balancing the interests of the public in preserving the integrity of the master plan of streets against the interest of the owner of the land in using his property, the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
(Ord. 822 C.S..§ 2 (part), 1975: prior code 10,503.)  
22.50.050 - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed a condition precedent to the acquisition of rights-of-way by purchase or by proceedings in eminent domain. 
B.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to restrict the right of any person to seek declaratory relief, or to avail himself of any other legal or equitable remedy applicable to his particular case. 
C.  No zoning regulation is to be construed as permitting a building line setback or any building within the bed of a proposed street, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part), 1975: prior code § 10,504.)  
CHAPTER 22.52 - PENALTIES 
 
22.52.010 - Designated. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the election of the City and/or its prosecuting official. A misdemeanor offense shall be punishable by a fine off not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or by both a fine and imprisonment. An infraction shall be punishable in the same manner as is prescribed in Section 1.12.010(A)(2) of this Code. A person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of, this Title is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
B.  Any structure erected, moved, altered enlarged or maintained or any use of a site contrary to the provisions of this Title is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may institute necessary legal proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and may take such other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends, and may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will remove or abate the structure or use and restrain or enjoin the person, firm, corporation or organization from erecting, moving, altering or enlarging the structure or the site contrary to the provisions of this Title; provided, however, that such action by the City Attorney is authorized under Chapter 1.13 of the this Code. 
C.  All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. 1273 C.S. § 3, 2000: Ord. 1084 C.S. § 3 part, 1986: Ord. 822 C.S. § 2 (part),1975: prior code § 10,122.2.)  
CHAPTER 22.54 - INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY FOR DISCRETIONARY APPROVALS 
 
22.54.010 - Indemnification of City for Discretionary Approvals. 
A.  At the time of submitting an application for a discretionary approval which is the subject of this Title, and/or for environmental clearance under the California Environmental Quality Act, the applicant shall agree, as part of the application, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers, attorneys and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding brought against the City or its agents, officers, attorneys or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul any such approval of the City, or an action taken to provide environmental clearance under the California Environmental Quality Act by its advisory agencies, appeal boards, or City Council, which action is brought within the applicable statute of limitations. The indemnification shall include damages awarded against the City, if any, cost of suit, attorney's fees, and other costs and expenses incurred in connection with such action whether incurred by the applicant, the town, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such action. 
B.  Also at the time of submitting such an application, the applicant shall agree, as part of the application, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its agents, officers, employees and attorneys for all costs incurred in additional investigation of or study of, or for supplementing, redrafting, revising, or amending any document (such as an EIR, Negative Declaration, Specific Plan, or General Plan Amendment) if made necessary by said action and if the applicant desires to pursue securing such approvals, after initiation of such litigation, which are conditioned on the approval of such documents. 
C.  In the event that a claim, action or proceeding described in Subdivision A, above, is brought, the City shall promptly notify the applicant of the existence of the claim, action or proceeding and the City will cooperate fully in the defense of such claim, action or proceeding. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any claim, action or proceeding. In the event that the applicant is required to defend the City in connection with any said claim, action or proceeding, the City shall retain the right to (i) approve the counsel to so defend the City, (ii) approve all significant decisions concerning the manner in which the defense is conducted, and (iii) approve any and all settlements, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The City shall also have the right not to participate in said defense, except that the City agrees to cooperate with the applicant in the defense of said claim, action or proceeding. If the City chooses to have counsel of its own defend any claim, action or proceeding where the applicant has already retained counsel to defend the City in such matters, the fees and expenses of the counsel selected by the City shall be paid by the City. 
(Ord. 1166 C.S. § 1, 1991.)  
CHAPTER 22.55 - IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
 
22.55.010 - Purpose. 
This Chapter requires that impact mitigation fees be charged as a condition of approval of a development project in order to defray the cost of public services, facilities, improvements and amenities, the need for which was generated by the development project. The cost of developing and administering the City's impact mitigation fee program established to implement this Chapter may be included as a component of the fee amounts, which are established by Council resolution. This Chapter is not intended to and does not apply to: regulatory and processing fees; fees required under a development agreement; funds collected under a reimbursement agreement; or assessment district proceedings, assessments or taxes; or fees specified in California Government Code Section 66477. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "City" means the City of Martinez, including its future boundaries. 
B.  "Developer" means the person(s) or legal entity(ies), who also may be the property owner, who is developing a particular project in the City. 
C.  "Development" means the construction, alteration, extension, enlargement or addition of any building or structure within the City. "Development project" shall have the same meaning as specified in Cal. Government Code Section 66000(a). 
D.  "Director" or "Community Development Director" means the Director of the Department of Community Development or his or her designee. 
E.  "Industrial development" or "industrial" means warehouse, industrial, manufacturing and research and development ("R&D") buildings. 
F.  "Impact mitigation fee" or "IM Fee" means any one of the five impact mitigation fees established pursuant to Section 22.55.030 of this Chapter. 
G.  "Impact mitigation fee technical report" or "technical report" refers to the current and subsequent "technical reports" to be undertaken in order to establish, justify and update IM fee amounts, which are approved by City Council resolution. 
H.  "Multi-family dwelling" means any building or portion thereof which is occupied, or intended for occupancy, as the same residence of 2 or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in such building, including, but not limited to, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, flats, condominiums and townhouses. "Multi-family dwelling" also includes secondary housing units created on a lot with a primary single-family dwelling. 
I.  "Office development" or "Office" means professional, medical and administrative office buildings. 
J.  "Public facility or Facility(ies)" means public facilities as defined in subsection (d) of Section 66000 of the California Government Code, and also includes, but is not limited to, capital improvements for transportation and transit facilities, parks and recreation facilities, public safety facilities and such other facilities as may be identified in the technical report. 
K.  "Retail development" or "retail" means retail stores, commercial service shops and hotel buildings. 
L.  "Single-family dwelling" means an attached or detached single-family residential dwelling occupied or intended for occupancy by one household. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.030 - Impact Mitigation Fees-Requirement Established. 
A.  General. There is hereby established, re-established and imposed as part of the City's approval of every development project the requirement and condition that the development's developer pay to the City an impact mitigation fee (IM Fee) for the purposes and in the amounts specified herein below. The amount and the calculation of each IM fee shall be established by City Council resolution and shall be based upon the following principles: 
1.  Each type of development will pay only for construction of those public facilities where there is a reasonable relationship between the facilities funded and needs for the public facility created by the development. 
2.  Each type of development shall contribute to the funding of the facilities made necessary, in whole or in part, by that development in proportion to the need for the facilities created by that type of development. 
B.  Categories of Public Facilities for Which Fees are Required. Pursuant to the considerations of this Section, and in amounts that shall be established by Council resolution, an IM fee shall be paid for each and all of the 5 categories of public facilities listed below: 
1.  Transportation; 
2.  Parks and recreation facilities; 
3.  Cultural facilities; 
4.  Police facilities; 
5.  Child care (facilities in lieu fees) as required by Chapter 22.49 of the Martinez Municipal Code. 
C.  Type of Development. The categories of land uses and types for which IM fees will be imposed are: 
1.  Single-family dwelling; 
2.  Multi-family dwelling; 
3.  Retail development; 
4.  Office development; 
5.  Industrial development. 
The IM fee shall, in part, be based on the estimated level of facilities needed by each type of development. 
D.  Fee Unit. 
1.  Residential. A specific IM fee amount, established for each type of residential development, shall be charged for each new dwelling unit. 
2.  Retail, Office and Industrial. A specific IM fee amount, established for each retail, office and industrial development, shall be charged for each retail, office and industrial development, respectively. 
E.  Public Facilities Improvements. The amount of the IM fee applicable to each type of development shall be based on the percentage of the cost of the public facilities improvements attributable to new residential, retail, office and industrial development as determined in the technical report. The improvements included in the total costs upon which the IM fee shall be based shall be set forth in that report and shall not include the costs of improvements needed to alleviate existing deficiencies in the City's public facilities, if any exist. 
F.  Amount of Impact Mitigation Fees-Formula. The amount of each impact mitigation (IM) fee shall be established by Council resolution and may be amended from time to time. The fee shall be determined as follows, as reflected in the technical report: 
1.  Estimate total public facilities costs attributable to each type of new residential, retail, office and industrial development. 
2.  Divide the cost attributable to new single-family development by the total number of new single-family dwelling units expected under buildout. The result is the IM fee to be charged on the development of each new single-family dwelling unit in the City. 
3.  Divide the cost attributable to new multi-family development by the total number of new multi-family dwelling units expected under buildout. The result is the IM fee to be charged on the development of each new multi-family dwelling unit in the City. 
4.  Divide the cost attributable to new retail development by the total number of new retail building square feet expected under buildout. The result is the IM fee to be charged on the development of each new square foot of retail development in the City. 
5.  Divide the cost attributable to new office development by the total number of new office building square feet expected under buildout. The result is the IM fee to be charged on the development of each new square foot of office development in the City. 
6.  Divide the cost attributable to new industrial development by the total number of new industrial square feet expected under buildout. The result is the IM fee to be charged on the development of each new square foot of industrial development in the City. 
G.  Amount of Impact Mitigation Fees-Adjustments. Fee amounts shall be included in the technical report, and shall be updated periodically to reflect changes in construction costs, development schedules, availability of other funds and other factors. The Council's fee resolution may require that fees be automatically adjusted each year to reflect changes the cost of the public facilities, based on a widely accepted regional cost index. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.040 - Impact Mitigation Fees-When Applicable. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the impact mitigation fees required hereunder shall be payable with respect to: 
A.  All development within the City for which building permits, development permits or other entitlements for development are issued on or after the effective date of this Chapter; and 
B.  All development within the City for which a development permit issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter for which said development permit was granted or issued subject to a condition requiring the developer to pay impact mitigations fees to be imposed upon all new residential, office, retail and/or industrial development, as the case may be, within the City and the fee remains unpaid or is not otherwise satisfied prior to the effective date hereof. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.050 - Fee Exemptions. 
The following development projects shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the requirement to pay impact mitigation (IM) fees: 
A.  Any alteration or addition to an existing residential unit, except in cases where a residential unit or units are added to single-family residential unit(s) or to an existing multi-family residential unit; 
B.  Except as provided in California Government Code Section 66011, any replacement or reconstruction of an existing residential structure that has been destroyed or demolished provided that the building permit for reconstruction is obtained within 1 year after the building was destroyed or demolished unless the replacement or reconstruction increases the square footage of the structure 50% or more; 
C.  Except as provided in California Government Code Section 66011, any replacement or reconstruction of an existing non-residential structure that has been destroyed or demolished provided that the building permit for reconstruction is obtained within 1 year after the building was destroyed or demolished unless the replacement or reconstruction increases the square footage of the structure 500 square feet or more; 
D.  Any development projects exempt pursuant to state or federal law; 
E.  Development projects governed by a development agreement in which development impact fees are specifically delineated, calculated or imposed in lieu of the IM fees required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.060 - Time of Payment. 
Pursuant to and as permitted by California Government Code Section 66007(b), the time for payment of impact mitigation (IM) fees shall be either the issuance of a building permit, grading permit, or approval of a final subdivision map, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.070 - Notice to Applicant of Fee Requirement. 
At the time of approval of a development project or at the time of the imposition of the IM fees, the City shall provide to the project applicant a statement of: 
A.  The amount of the IM fee and the public facilities that the fee will be used to finance (Government Code Section 66006(f)); and 
B.  Notification that the 90-day period in which the applicant may protest has begun (Government Code Section 66020(d)). 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.080 - Use and Reimbursement of Fees. 
A.  The revenues raised by payment of the impact mitigation (IM) fee shall be placed in a separate City fund. Separate and special accounts within this fund shall be used to account for such revenues, along with any interest earnings on each account. The revenues (and interest) shall be used for the following purposes: 
1.  To pay for the costs of implementing the facilities and programs and/or the costs of design, engineering, right-of-way or land acquisition and construction of the facilities and reasonable costs of outside consultant studies related thereto; 
2.  To the extent permitted by law, to reimburse the City for the facilities constructed or programs implemented by the City from other funds; 
3.  To reimburse developers or City who have designed and constructed facilities or implemented programs which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity; and/or 
4.  To the extent permitted by law, to reimburse costs of program development and/or implementation and ongoing administration of the fee program. 
B.  Fees in these accounts shall be expended only for the facilities and only for the purpose for which the fee was collected. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.090 - Fee Credits. 
A.  Where a developer and the City Council agree that in connection with the approval of a development project certain facilities shall be constructed by the developer, the total amount of the IM fee otherwise payable by the developer shall be reduced in accordance with the construction cost of the facilities as agreed between the developer and the City Council. Said agreement may provide for reimbursement to the developer of construction costs in excess of the fee otherwise applicable. No credit shall be allowed for the cost of construction of improvements, which are not, identified facilities. In the event the City and the developer agree that the developer shall construct certain facilities, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the City providing for the construction of such improvements based upon plans and specifications prepared by the developer and approved by the City Engineer and providing adequately therefore. The foregoing shall not limit the right of the City to require the construction and/or dedication of improvements which the City otherwise may require under any other ordinance, resolution, rule or policy of the City of Martinez, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, or other federal, state or local rule or ordinance. 
B.  Where development occurs within an assessment district, fee benefit area, community facilities district, or an area which is otherwise subject to an assessment fee or special tax collected specifically to defray the costs of providing or constructing certain facilities, programs or public improvements as identified herein, some or all of which the developer of said development constructs as part of his/her development, the developer shall be entitled to a credit in an amount equal to that portion of the construction cost of the facilities included in such assessments, fees or special taxes which will be contributed by the developer. 
C.  In no event shall a developer be entitled to a credit in excess of the fee otherwise payable pursuant to this Chapter. 
D.  In no event shall a developer be entitled to more than 1 credit for the construction of the same facility. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.100 - Annual Review. 
The impact mitigation fees established by this Chapter and the implementing Council resolution(s), the accumulated fee funds and their appropriation and supporting documentation, may be reviewed annually by the City Council in a manner which conforms with applicable laws. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.110 - Termination of Fee Requirement. 
The City shall not collect an impact mitigation fee established by this Chapter once funds sufficient to construct residential, retail, office and industrial development's share of all facilities described in the then current technical report and its appendices have been collected. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.120 - Fee Adjustment, Waiver or Finding of Exemption. 
A.  The developer of a development project subject to an IM fee under this Chapter may apply to the Community Development Director for an adjustment to or waiver of that fee or for a finding that the project is exempt from the fee. The waiver or adjustment of an IM fee shall only be granted if the developer establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the City, in establishing and/or imposing the challenged IM fee, failed to comply with applicable state law and/or this Chapter. Additionally, in the case of new residential development providing low and/or moderate income housing, the City Council may grant a waiver of all or a portion of the IM fee if the developer demonstrates that the development would not be economically feasible and could not be built with the imposition of the full fee. 
B.  The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Community Development Director no later than 60 days after the time of the development project's approval or later than the time of the issuance of a building permit, whichever is to occur first. The application shall state completely and in detail both the applicant's factual basis and legal theory for adjustment or waiver, and compare its proposal with the analysis set forth in the technical report prepared for the fee being challenged. The Community Development Director may refuse to consider factual assertions or legal theories not set forth in the written application. 
C.  The Community Development Director shall consider the application at an informal hearing, which may be continued from time to time, and which shall be held within 60 days after the filing of the complete application. The decision of the Community Development Director is appealable under Section 22.55.140. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.130 - Developer's Acknowledgement of Fee Adjustment, Waiver or Exemption. 
The Community Development Director may require as a condition of adjustment, waiver or a finding of exemption that the developer provide a recordable document in a form acceptable to the Director acknowledging the factual basis of such adjustment, waiver or exemption and further acknowledging that a subsequent change of facts may result in the requirement that additional IM fees be paid. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.140 - Appeal Procedure. 
The Community Development Director is responsible for administering, collecting, crediting, adjusting and refunding development fees. The Director's administrative decision(s) regarding the above is appealable in accordance with Section 22.06.050. A person appealing under this Section shall have first sought a fee credit under Section 22.55.090, or an adjustment or waiver, or a finding of fee exemption under Section 22.55.120. A person seeking judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 shall first complete an appeal under this Section and shall pay all City charges for that appeal. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.150 - Payment Under Protest. 
A developer seeking to proceed with his or her development project during the pendency of an application for adjustment or waiver or a finding of exemption or during the pendency of an appeal may do so by following the procedures set forth in Section 66020 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
22.55.160 - Refund of a Mitigation Impact Fee. 
The Community Development Director shall refund an IM fee where: 
A.  The building permit expires and no extensions have been granted for a development for which the IM fee requirement under this Chapter has been collected, provided that the claim for such refund is filed no later than 1 year after the expiration date of the building permit or any extension thereof as may be approved by the City, as the case may be; or 
B.  A refund is specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 66001(d). Such amounts shall be refunded by the City to the then current record owner or owners of the development on a pro-rated basis. The City may effect such refunding by direct payment, by providing a temporary suspension of IM fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code Section 66001. 
C.  A decision regarding refund of a fee is appealable under Section 22.55.140. 
(Ord. 1310 C.S. § 3 Exh. A (part), 2004.)  
CHAPTER 22.56 - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
22.56.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this Chapter shall have the following respective meanings: 
A.  "Community Development Director" shall mean the director of the City's department of community development or his/her authorized representative. 
B.  "Developer" shall mean a person who has a legal or equitable interest in real property, and who applies for a development agreement for a project on that property pursuant to the procedures specified in this Chapter, and who executes and is bound by the terms of the development agreement. 
C.  "Development agreement" shall mean a development agreement entered into between the City and a developer pursuant to Government Code Sections 65864-65869.5 and this Chapter. 
D.  "Person" shall mean an individual, group, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust, governmental agency, governmental official, administrative body, tribunal or any other form of business or legal entity. 
E.  "Project" shall mean the development project that is the subject of a development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.020 - Forms and Information. 
A.  The Community Development Director shall prescribe the form of each application, notice, and document required for the consideration and implementation of a development agreement. 
B.  The Community Development Director may require a developer to submit such additional information and supporting data as the Community Development Director, City Council and/or other City agency considers necessary to properly process the application. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.030 - Fees. 
The City Council shall by separate resolution fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document provided for or approved under this Chapter, including annual reviews, and administration of approved development agreements. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.040 - Parties to a Development Agreement. 
The Community Development Director shall require a developer to submit evidence of the nature of the developer's interest in the property and of the authority of the Developer to apply for the development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.050 - Application for a Development Agreement. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a proposed development agreement on the City's then standard form of development agreement, and shall include any specific proposals for changes in or additions to the language of the standard form. Any proposed development agreement shall contain the provisions required under this Chapter and shall also include any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.060 - Review of Application. 
A.  The Community Development Director shall review each application to determine whether it is complete and accurate. If the application is found to be incomplete or inaccurate, the Community Development Director shall reject the application and inform the applicant of the items necessary to properly complete the application. The Community Development Director shall reject any application where the development agreement clearly would be inconsistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, zoning or any other land use regulations applicable to the subject property. If the application for a development agreement is submitted in conjunction with an application for other land use approvals, the proposed development agreement shall be reviewed for consistency with the existing and, separately, the proposed land use approvals. 
B.  If the Community Development Director determines that the application is complete and accurate, copies of the application shall be forwarded to each appropriate City department and after consultation with each department, and after performing all other tasks necessary to the processing of land use applications (including but not limited to, environmental review), the director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.070 - Contents of Development Agreement. 
A.  A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the property thereunder, the density and/or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes, and requirements for construction and maintenance of on-site and off-site improvements or payment of fees in lieu of such dedications or improvements. 
B.  A development agreement may also include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions but the mere inclusion of some shall not affect the developer's responsibility to obtain all land use approvals required by the Martinez Municipal Code. 
C.  A development agreement may include conditions and restrictions imposed by the City with respect to the project including those conditions and restrictions proposed in an environmental impact report applicable to the project prepared and certified under the California Environmental Quality Act, and the City's regulations with respect thereto, in order to eliminate or mitigate adverse environmental impacts of the project. 
D.  A development agreement may provide that the project be constructed in specified phases, that construction shall commence within a specified time, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time. 
E.  If the development agreement requires applicant financing of necessary public facilities, it may include terms relating to subsequent reimbursement over time for such financing. 
F.  All development agreements shall contain an indemnity and insurance clause requiring the developer to indemnify and hold the City harmless against claims arising out of the development process including any approvals granted in connection therewith, including all legal fees and costs. 
G.  A development agreement is a contract that is negotiated and voluntarily entered into by City and developer and may contain any additional or modified conditions, terms or provisions agreed upon by the parties, including sanctions for failure to meet requirements. 
H.  A development agreement may include conditions relating to financial guarantees for performance of obligations thereunder. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.080 - Planning Commission and City Council Hearings. 
All development agreements shall be considered at public hearings before the Planning Commission and the City Council. Notice of the Planning Commission's and the City Council's intention to consider adoption of a development agreement shall be given as provided in Section 22.56.130. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.090 - Required Findings for Approval by Planning Commission. 
After the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The recommendation shall include the Planning Commission's determination whether or not the proposed development agreement: 
A.  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  Complies with the zoning for the real property in question; 
C.  Is consistent with and complies with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and State Subdivision Map Act, if applicable; 
D.  Ensures provision of public facilities in a manner consistent with the City's general plan. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.100 - Ordinance; Public Hearing. 
Adopting of a development agreement is a legislative act and shall be approved by ordinance only after a public hearing before the City Council. The ordinance shall refer to and incorporate by reference the text of the development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.110 - Conduct of Council Hearing. 
At the hearing, the City Council shall consider the Planning Commission's recommendation together with any additional public testimony, and may approve, disapprove or modify any recommendation of the Planning Commission. If public testimony is presented on an issue which was not considered by the Planning Commission, the City Council may, but need not, refer the issue back to the Planning Commission for further hearing and recommendations. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.120 - City Council Approval. 
If the City Council finds that the development agreement is consistent with the Martinez General Plan and any applicable specific plan, and that the agreement will promote the public health, safety and general welfare, it may, but is not required to, approve the development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.130 - Notice. 
A.  The Community Development Director shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement in addition to such other notices as may be required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement. 
B.  The notice of intention shall contain: 
1.  The time and place of the hearing; 
2.  A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the area affected; and 
3.  Other information required by specific provisions of this Chapter or which the Community Development Director considered necessary or desirable. 
C.  The time and manner of giving notice is as specified in Government Code Section 65867 or applicable successor code provision. Such publication and mailing shall be done at least 10 days prior to any hearing. 
D.  The Planning Commission may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law. 
E.  The notice requirements referred to in this Section are declaratory of existing law. If state law is subsequently amended to prescribe a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.140 - Rules Governing Conduct of Hearings. 
All the public hearings under this Chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and the time limits specified for the conduct of zoning hearings in accordance with the Municipal Code, except that hearings conducted under Section 22.56.150 are not to be held only before the City Council and noticed as such. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.150 - Annual Review. 
A.  Time For and Initiation of Review. The City Council shall review the development agreement annually in order to ascertain the good faith compliance by the developer with its terms. The developer shall initiate the required annual review by submitting a written request at least 60 days prior to the review date specified in the agreement. The developer shall also provide evidence as determined by the City Council to demonstrate good faith compliance with the provisions of the development agreement. 
B.  Public Hearing. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing at which the developer must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof by substantial evidence of compliance is upon the developer. 
C.  Findings Upon Public Hearing. The City Council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the developer has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
D.  Procedure Upon Findings. 
1.  If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded. 
2.  If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the City Council may without consent of the developer modify or terminate the agreement in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.56.160(b). 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.160 - Modification or Termination. 
A.  Modification or Termination by Mutual Consent. Any development agreement may be modified or terminated by mutual consent of the parties, but only in the manner provided in California Government Code Section 65868 which requires that any proposal to modify or cancel a development agreement be heard and determined in accordance with the procedures specified by this Chapter for approval of a development agreement. 
B.  Modification or Termination after Non-Compliance. If, upon a finding under Section 22.56.150(d)(2), the City Council determines to proceed with modification or termination of the development agreement, the City Council shall give notice to the developer of its intention so to do after public hearing. The notice shall contain: 
1.  The time and place of the hearing; 
2.  A statement as to whether or not and in what respects the City Council proposes to terminate or to modify the development agreement; 
3.  A statement of the reasons for the proposed modification or termination, and if any of said reasons constitute a breach of and/or an event of non-compliance with the development agreement, a statement of the terms of curing the default or remedying non-compliance and a reasonable time for the developer to effect said cure and/or meet the terms of compliance; and 
4.  Other information which the City Council considers necessary to inform the developer of the nature of the proceeding. 
The procedures specified in Section 22.56.160(a) shall govern proceedings conducted under Section 22.56.160(b). 
C.  Hearing on Modification or Termination. At the time and place set for the hearing on modification or termination, the developer and all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard. After the public hearing, the City Council shall terminate or modify the development agreement, or rescind its finding of non-compliance or breach and issue a finding of compliance. The City Council may impose those conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the City. The decision of the City Council is final. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.170 - Rights of the Parties After Termination. 
A.  In the event that a development agreement should be terminated, all rights of the developer or successor in interest under the development agreement shall terminate. The City may, in its sole discretion, determine to retain any and all benefits, including reservations or dedications of land, and payment of fees, received by the City. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above paragraph, any termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the developer from completing a building or other improvements authorized pursuant to a valid building permit, but the City may take any acting permitted by law to prevent, stop or correct any violation of law occurring after termination of the development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.180 - Separate Procedure. 
All development agreements entail and consist of a separate procedure from other land use planning procedures and shall not take the place of the zoning ordinance, the general plan, conditional use permit, subdivision approval, building permit or any other city planning function. To the extent practicable, public hearings on a proposed development agreement should be held concurrently with the public hearings on related land use approvals. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.190 - Execution and Recordation of Development Agreement, Amendment or Cancellation. 
A.  Within 10 days after the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the City Manager shall execute the development agreement on behalf of the City, and the City Clerk shall record the development agreement with the County Recorder. 
B.  If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest cancel or modify the development agminates or modifies the development agreement as provided in Government Code Subsection 65865.1 and this Chapter for failure of the developer to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Clerk shall, after such action takes effect, record notice of such action with the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
22.56.200 - Enforcement of a Development Agreement. 
The procedures for enforcement, modification or termination of a development agreement specified in this Section are non-exclusive. A development agreement may be enforced, modified or terminated by any manner otherwise provided by law or by the terms of the development agreement. 
(Ord. 1239 C.S. § 1, 1997.)  
CHAPTER 22.57 - DENSITY BONUS 
 
22.57.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for density bonuses and incentives to developers who comply with California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 (State Density Bonus Law). 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014)  
22.57.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, the definitions found in State Density Bonus Law shall apply to the terms contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014)  
22.57.030 - Applicability. 
This Chapter shall apply to all zoning districts that permit housing at a prescribed density by the General Plan Land Use Designation and/or zoning district. Where the density allowed under the zoning district is inconsistent with the density allowed under the General Plan Land Use Designation, the Land Use Designation density shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014)  
22.57.040 - State Density Bonus and Incentives. 
A developer of a housing development in the City may be permitted a density bonus and incentives in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 (State Density Bonus Law). 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014)  
22.57.050 - Application Requirements and Review. 
A.  An application for a state density bonus, incentive or concession, waiver or modification of a development standard, or a revised parking standard in accordance with Section 22.57.040, shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a housing development and shall be processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the City and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  A site plan showing the total number and location of all proposed housing units and the number and location of proposed housing units which qualify the housing development for density bonus housing units. 
2.  The manner in which the applicant shall satisfy the affordability requirements for the housing units which qualify the housing development for density bonus units. 
3.  A description of any requested incentives and concessions, waivers or modification of development standards, or modified parking standards. For all incentives and concessions, except mixed use development, the application shall include evidence deemed sufficient by the City that the requested incentives and concessions result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. For waivers or modifications of development standards, the application shall include evidence deemed sufficient by the City that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and that the development standard from which a waiver or modification is requested will have the effect of precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to this Chapter and with the concessions and incentives permitted by this Chapter. 
4.  If a density bonus is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the conditions pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 (g)(2)(A through H) are met. 
5.  If a density bonus or incentive or concession is requested for a child care facility pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 (h), the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and provide evidence that the community lacks adequate child care facilities. 
B.  Review and Consideration. An application for a density bonus, incentive or concession, waiver or modification of a development standard, or revised parking standard shall be considered and acted upon by the City body with review authority for the housing development. 
C.  Approval. Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive or concession, or waiver or modification of a development standard, the approval body shall make the following findings: 
1.  If the density bonus is based all or in part on a donation of land, the conditions of Government Code Section 65915 (g)(2)(A through H) are met. 
2.  If the density bonus, incentive or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a child care facility, that the conditions included in Government Code Section 65915 (h)(2)(A) and (B) are met. 
3.  If the incentive or concession includes mixed use development, the finding included in Government Code Section 65915 (k)(2) are met. 
4.  If a waiver or modification of a development standard is requested, the developer has demonstrated, for each requested waiver or modification, that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and that the development standards from which a waiver or modification is requested will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development at the densities to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to this Chapter or with the concessions and incentives permitted by this Chapter. 
D.  The approval body may deny a concession or incentive if it makes a written finding based upon substantial evidence of either of the following: 
1.  The concession or incentive is not required to provide for affordable rents or affordable housing costs as required by this Chapter. 
2.  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon public health or safety or the physical environment or on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to lower, very low or moderate income households. For purposes of this subsection, "specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application was deemed complete. 
E.  The approval body may deny a waiver or modification of a development standard only if it makes a written finding based upon substantial evidence or either of the following: 
1.  The waiver or modification would have a specific adverse impact upon health, safety or the physical environment and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to lower, very low or moderate income households. For purposes of this subsection, "specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application was deemed complete. 
2.  The waiver or modification would have an adverse impact on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
F.  If a density bonus or concession or incentive is based on the provision of child care facilities, the approval body may deny the density bonus or concession or incentive if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the City already has adequate child care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014)  
22.57.060 - Density Bonus Housing Agreement. 
A.  Density Bonus Housing Agreement. An applicant requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into an affordable housing agreement ("agreement") with the City in the City's standard form of agreement. Execution of the agreement shall be made a condition of approval for any discretionary planning permit for housing developments pursuant to this Chapter and shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcels on which the housing units which qualify the housing development for a density bonus will be constructed. 
B.  Recording of Agreement. The agreement shall be recorded prior to the final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Contents of the Agreement. Each agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A description of the residential development, including whether the housing units which qualify the housing development for a density bonus will be rented or owner-occupied; 
2.  The number, size and location of the housing units which qualify the housing development for a density bonus; 
3.  Provisions and/or documents for resale restrictions, deeds of trust, right of first refusal or rental restrictions; 
4.  Provisions for monitoring the ongoing affordability of the housing units which qualify the housing development for a density bonus, and the process for qualifying prospective resident households for income eligibility; and 
5.  Any additional obligations relevant to the compliance with this Chapter. 
D.  Owner-Occupied Agreements. The purchaser of each owner-occupied housing unit which qualified the housing development for a density bonus shall execute the City's standard form agreement, to be recorded against the parcel, and which includes such provisions as the City may require to ensure continued compliance with this Chapter. 
Agreements for Child Care Facilities and Land Donations. Density bonus housing agreements for child care facilities and land dedications shall ensure continued compliance with all conditions included in Government Code Section 65915 (h)(2)(A) and (B) and Government Code Section 65915 (g)(2)(A through H), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 1379 C.S., § 24, 2-19-2014) 
TITLE 22 FOOTNOTES 
1.  For statutory provisions pertaining to planning in general, see Gov. Code § 65000 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to regulate the use of land and buildings, see Gov. Code § 65850; for statutory provisions requiring a City to adopt a General Plan, see Gov. Code § 65300; for provisions regarding underground utilities see Ch. 13.28; for sign provisions, see Title 16, for environmental control, see Title 20. 
2.  Flexibility provision permitting office and retail commercial to develop in C-R zones. 
