Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING
Title 18 REVISED COMMUNITY GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
FEE SCHEDULES

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.06 CITY SEAL AND LOGO
Chapter 1.08 ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.11 CIVIL PENALTIES
Chapter 1.12 ARREST PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “Manteca Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “Manteca Municipal Code.” (Ord. 804 § 1, 1988)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Manteca Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Manteca Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Manteca Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Manteca Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 804 § 2, 1988)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Manteca, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 804 § 3, 1988)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 786, passed January 4, 1988. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 786, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 787, 788, 789, 790, 791, 792, 793, 794, 795, 796, 797, 798, 799 and 800; also to be included, Ordinances 236 and 241. (Ord. 804 § 4, 1988)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Manteca Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Manteca, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 804 § 5, 1988)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 804 § 6, 1988)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 804 § 7, 1988)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part of portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 804 § 8, 1988)

 

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Manteca Municipal Code” becomes effective. (Ord. 804 §9, 1988)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereto, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 804 § 10, 1988)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Code designation and citation.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated “the code of the city of Manteca, California” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Manteca Municipal Code.” (Amended during 1988 codification; prior code § 1-1)

 

1.04.020 Definitions—Interpretation of provisions.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

1.     City. “The city” or “this city” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Manteca.”

2.     Code. “The code” or “this code” means the code of the city of Manteca, California.

3.     Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

4.     Council. Whenever “council” is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the city of Manteca.

5.     County. “The county” or “this county” means the county of San Joaquin.

6.     Day. A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

7.     Daytime, Nighttime. “Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

8.     Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

9.     In the City. “In the city means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

10.   Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

11.   Month. “Month” means a calendar month.

12.   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

13.   Oath. “Oath” includes an affirmation.

14.   Officers, Departments, Etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this code means officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city of Manteca, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

15.   Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city.

16.   Or—And. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

17.   Owner. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

18.   Person. “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

19.   Personal Property. “Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section.

20.   Preceding, Following. “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

21.   Process. “Process” includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

22.   Property. “Property” includes real and personal property.

23.   Real Property. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

24.   Shall—May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

25.   Signature or Subscription by Mark. “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

26.   State. “The state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the state of California.

27.   Tenant or Occupant. “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

28.   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

29.   Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

30.   Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

31.   Year. “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Prior code § 1-2)

 

1.04.030 Continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1-3)

 

1.04.040 Repeal of ordinance—Not to revive provisions.
A.    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

B.     The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Prior code § 1-4)

 

1.04.050 Catchlines.
The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Prior code § 1-6)

 

1.04.060 Severability.
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. (Prior code § 1-5)

Chapter 1.06 CITY SEAL AND LOGO
1.06.010 Adoption of seal and logo.
The official seal of the city shall be in the form and face as set forth below:



The general design and details of the official emblem of the city, excluding colors, shall be in the form as set forth in this section. (Ord. 1542 § 1, 2014)

 

1.06.020 Definition.
Whenever the word “person” is used in this chapter it shall include a person, firm, association or corporation, and whether acting as a principal agent, employee or otherwise. (Ord. 1542 § 1, 2014)

 

1.06.030 Use of city seal and logo.
A.    The city seal and the city logo are the property of the city of Manteca. Both share the same image but are used for different purposes. The seal is used for purposes of certifying official records and instruments of the city of Manteca. The logo is a graphic symbol used to identify city programs, initiatives, partnerships and sponsorships.

B.     The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the official seal for the city.

C.     The city manager or designee is the official custodian of the official logo of the city.

D.    The city clerk or designee is authorized to use the city seal on any ordinance, resolution, proclamation, commendation, certificate or other instrument approved by the city council or executed by the mayor or other city officers or officials; and to authenticate official documents in the conduct of official city business.

E.     It is unlawful for any person to make or use the city seal, the city logo, or any cut, facsimile or reproduction thereof, or make or use any design, symbol, emblem, insignia or similar device that is an imitation of the city seal or the city logo, or that may be mistaken therefor, that is designed, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public, for private or commercial purposes, or for any purpose other than for the official business of the city, its council, officers or departments, without the express consent of the city manager or designees under the authority granted by the city council.

F.     No person shall use the city logo or city seal, or any facsimile thereof, for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any city or other public office of him or herself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such city logo on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This shall not be applicable to writings issued by the city of Manteca. Per California Government Code Section 34501.5(a), “Any person who uses or allows to be used any reproduction of facsimile of the seal of the city in any campaign literature or mass mailing, as defined in Section 82041.5, with intent to deceive the voters, is guilty of a misdemeanor.”

G.    The city council has approved the use of city seal and logo policy. The city manager is authorized to implement and administer said policy for use of the city logo, including without limitation use in multi­ communication mediums by authorized outside entities. Any person granted consent to use the city logo shall fully comply with such policies and guidelines.

H.    Every person who uses or allows to be used any reproduction or facsimile of the seal or logo of the city of Manteca, except city departments for official business, in any manner whatsoever without the written consent of the city manager, or designee, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1542 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 1.08 ELECTIONS
1.08.010 General elections—Date.
Pursuant to Section 36503.5 of the Government Code, all general municipal elections held in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in each even-numbered year, consolidating with the statewide general election. (Prior code § 2-3.7)

 

1.08.020 General elections—Notice to voters.
Within thirty days after this chapter becomes effective, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be mailed to all registered voters informing the voter of the change in the election date. The notice shall also inform the voters that as a result of the change in the election date, elected city office-holders’ terms in office will be extended and no terms shall be decreased. (Prior code § 2-3.8)

 

1.08.030 General elections—Statutory authority.
The provisions of this chapter provide that the election consolidation be governed by Section 36503.5 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 2-3.9)

 

1.08.040 General elections—Operative date.
This chapter shall take effect thirty days after its final passage providing it has been approved by the San Joaquin County board of supervisors. (Prior code § 2-3.10)

Chapter 1.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
Article I. Code Enforcement—Administrative Provisions
1.10.010 Declaration of purpose.
A.    The city council finds that the enforcement of the Manteca Municipal Code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public’s health, safety, and quality of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system requires a variety of judicial and administrative remedies to enforce violations of this code and applicable state codes. The city council also finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for administrative enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this code. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law includes: adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing process and an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously, and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative enforcement action. The city attorney is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating to the qualifications, appointment, and compensation of hearing officers, hearing officer powers, hearing procedures, scope of the hearing, subpoena powers, and other matters relating to administrative enforcement hearings.

B.     The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or other legal remedies established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes and the use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.020 Definitions.
“Administrative citation” means a document issued by an enforcement officer to a person violating the provisions of this code or applicable state code.

“Administrative order” means an order issued by an administrative hearing officer after a hearing requiring a responsible person to correct violations, abate a public nuisance, pay administrative fines, civil penalties, administrative costs, authorize the city to abate a public nuisance, assess a code enforcement lien, or take any other action as authorized or required by this code and applicable state codes.

“Assessment lien” means a lien recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder’s office, or a special assessment filed with the San Joaquin County auditor-controller’s office, for the purposes of collecting outstanding administrative citation fines, civil penalties, and administrative costs imposed as part of a cost recovery, administrative or judicial code enforcement action. It also means the same as a code enforcement lien.

“Code Enforcement Lien.” See definition of “assessment lien.”

“Enforcement officer” means a person authorized to enforce violations of the Manteca Municipal Code, adopted uniform codes, and applicable state codes within their department’s jurisdiction, or as designated by the city manager.

“Director” includes each of the directors of the following city departments: community development, public works, parks, finance, police, fire, and any of their designated agents or representatives within their jurisdiction.

“Hearing officer (or administrative hearing officer)” means any person appointed by the city attorney to preside over administrative hearings.

“Notice and order” means a document used in abatement actions and assessment of civil penalties involving serious code violations, which provide notice of municipal code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code violations and orders a responsible person to take certain steps to correct the violations within a definitive period of time. Civil penalties may also be imposed in conjunction with this notice.

“Notice of compliance” means a document issued by a director, which represents that a property has been brought into compliance with the criteria set forth under this code.

“Notice of pendency of action” means a document or form to be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder’s office advising that the property is in violation of the Manteca Municipal Code, uniform codes, or applicable state codes or that an abatement action is pending.

“Notice of satisfaction” means a document or form, which indicates that all outstanding civil penalties and costs have either been paid in full, or that the city has negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has resolved the outstanding debt.

“Notice of violation” means a written notice, which informs a responsible person of code violations present on the subject property, lists the required compliance actions, and contains specific information as required by this code.

“Owner” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

“Person,” unless it otherwise appears from the context as used, includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, corporation, public agency, school district, the state of California, its political subdivisions and/or instrumentalities thereof or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.

“Property owner” means the record owner of real property as listed on the last equalized assessment roll maintained by the San Joaquin County assessor.

“Responsible person” means a person who a director determines is responsible for causing, permitting, or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of the Manteca Municipal Code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. The term “responsible person” includes, but is not limited to, a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in the subject property, person in possession of the subject property, or person that exercises custody and control over the subject property.

“Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. However, the use of the word “shall” in this chapter is not intended and shall not impose any mandatory duty to third parties by the city, its commissions, boards, officers, agents, or employees and is not intended and shall not impose any liability on the city, its commissions, boards, officers, agents, or employees. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.030 Administrative enforcement authority.
The police chief, designated enforcement officers, the fire chief, and other city directors and/or their designated agents have the authority and powers necessary to determine whether a violation of this code or applicable state codes exists and the authority to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue notices of violation, administrative citations, notices and orders, civil penalties, the power to inspect public and private property, and use the administrative remedies which are available under this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.040 Authority to inspect.
A director, an enforcement officer, or other duly authorized agent are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence such as the use of a sound level measurement device to measure noise disturbances. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent or other responsible person refuses permission to enter or inspect, the enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.050 Code enforcement fees—Purpose.
A.    The city council finds there is a need to recover costs incurred by the city in its code enforcement efforts including time spent by city personnel inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the city, preparing and posting the various notices that are required under this code whenever a property is found to be in violation of a mandatory provision, processing a case file, towing inoperative vehicles, obtaining inspection warrants, and preparing for and appearing at administrative hearings, which procedures all become necessary when a responsible person fails to voluntarily correct code violations on his or her property. These additional code enforcement efforts are not usually undertaken or employed until after a responsible person has failed to respond on a voluntary basis to notices and/or warnings from the city or volunteers.

B.     The city council further finds the assessment of fees for the services listed in subsection A of this section, are an appropriate method to recover costs incurred for the additional work that is undertaken by city staff when a responsible person fails to voluntarily correct code violations on his or her property in a timely manner. The assessment and collection of these code enforcement fees shall not preclude the imposition of, and shall be in addition to, any administrative or judicial civil penalties or fines for violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.060 Assessment of reinspection fees.
Whenever a enforcement officer and/or designated staff inspects, reinspects, processes a case file, prepares and posts a notice of intent to abate, a notice of violation, notice to vacate, notice and order of demolition, abandoned vehicle abatement notice, seeks and obtains an inspection warrant, prepares for and appears at an administrative hearing, or any other action as may be hereinafter designated by resolution of the city council, for which an action has been initiated to obtain compliance with this code or applicable state code, a director shall assess the appropriate code enforcement fee against the responsible person. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.070 Amount of reinspection fees.
A code enforcement fee schedule shall be established and revised as necessary by the city council to reflect current costs. The code enforcement fee schedule shall be filed in the city clerk’s office. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.080 Code enforcement fees exemption.
No fee shall be charged if any of the following circumstances exist:

A.    A notice of compliance has been issued;

B.     It is determined that the previously identified responsible person has not caused the code violation; or

C.     The responsible person fully complies with any notice of violation or warning before the compliance reinspection deadline set by code enforcement staff. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.090 Notification of assessment of reinspection fees.
A.    Where the assessment of code enforcement fees is authorized under this chapter, the director shall provide the responsible person with a written notice assessing code enforcement fees. The written assessment shall contain the following information: (1) the amount of fees charged; (2) the corresponding dates when code enforcement action took place; and (3) a deadline by which the code enforcement fee must be paid.

B.     Notification of the code enforcement fee assessment shall be provided to the responsible person by any of the means outlined in this chapter.

C.     Code enforcement fees may be assessed as part of any judicial or administrative enforcement action as provided for in this chapter.

 

D.    Code enforcement fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be duplicated in any other action to recover these identical costs.

E.     The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the code enforcement fees shall not affect the validity of any fees imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.100 Collection of reinspection fee.
The city shall collect the assessed code enforcement and late fees by the use of all appropriate legal means, including but not limited to: referral to the finance department for collection or assessment against the property. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

Article II. Notice of Violation
1.10.110 Notice of violation—Procedures.
Whenever it is determined that a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes exists, the director, the enforcement officer, or other duly authorized agent may issue a notice of violation to the responsible person(s). The notice of violation shall include the following information:

A.    The name of the responsible party;

B.     The name of the owner, if different from the responsible person;

C.     Street address of the property at issue;

D.    The code sections in violation;

E.     A description of the conditions which violates the applicable codes;

F.     A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance;

G.    A deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of violation; and

H.    A list of the potential consequences for failure to comply with the notice including, but not limited to: criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, administrative citations, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation, and withholding of future municipal permits. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.120 Service of notices.
Whenever any notice is required to be given under this code, the notice shall be served in the following manner unless a different procedure is specifically stated to apply:

A.    Personal service or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice shall be sent by regular mail to the responsible person. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail.

B.     Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the subject property.

C.     Mailings to the property owner shall be sent to the address listed in the last equalized assessment roll of the San Joaquin County assessor.

D.    In the event the responsible person is someone other than the property owner, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the property owner.

 

Service by certified or regular mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing.

The failure of any person with an interest in the subject property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. The notice requirements in this section do not apply to initial notices of violation, courtesy notices, which may be sent by regular mail. Service of a courtesy notice by regular mail is effective on the date of mailing. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.130 Proof of notice.
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this chapter, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.140 Recordation of notices—Purpose.
The city council finds that there is a need to give notice of pending enforcement actions to persons who may subsequently acquire the property as a means by which to ensure the violations will be corrected. An appropriate method to accomplish this is through the issuance and recordation of notices of violation. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.150 Procedures for recordation.
A.    Once a director has issued a notice of violation or notice and order to a responsible person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice, the director may record the notice with the San Joaquin County recorder’s office.

B.     The recorded notice shall include the name of the property owner, the assessor’s parcel number, the street address, the parcel’s legal description, and a copy of the latest notice of violation.

C.     Any costs associated with recording or removal of the notice of violation may be assessed against the property as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.160 Service of notice of violation.
A copy of the recorded notice shall be mailed to the responsible person and to the property owner and/or any other persons who have requested copies of such notices pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

1.10.170 Notice of compliance—Removal procedures.
A.    When the violations listed on a notice have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may file with the director a written request for a notice of compliance on a form provided by the city.

B.     Once the director receives this request, the director shall reinspect the property within ten days from receipt of the request to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.

C.     The director shall provide a notice of compliance to the responsible person or property owner if the director determines that:

1.     All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected;

2.     All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;

3.     All administrative fines or civil penalties have been paid; and

4.     The party requesting the issuance of the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the city for all administrative costs.

D.    Administrative costs may include costs incurred in the investigation, inspection, reinspection, title search, appeal hearing, and any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the notice of violation.

E.     If the director denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, the director shall serve the requesting party, the responsible person, and the property owner with a written explanation within five days from the inspection setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter.

F.     The director’s decision denying a request to issue a notice of compliance constitutes the final decision in the matter and is not appealable. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.180 Prohibition against issuance of municipal permits.
For properties where a notice has been recorded, the city may withhold permits for repair, construction, and/or alteration on the affected property until a notice of compliance has been issued by the director. The city may not withhold permits, which are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.190 Cancellation of recorded notice of violation.
The director shall record or cause to be recorded the notice of compliance with the San Joaquin County recorder’s office. The recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

Article III. Administrative Citations
1.10.200 Administrative citations—Authority.
A.    Any person violating any provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter.

B.     Each and every day a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

C.     An administrative fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city unless otherwise noted on the citation.

D.    Fines assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter.

 

E.     An enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation for any violation of a rule or regulation duly adopted by the director of local disaster pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of this code, a related resolution or ordinance of the city council to ratify such rule or regulation, or a public health order duly issued by San Joaquin County Public Health Officer. Such administrative citation may be exercised in place of, or in addition to, any administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable remedy allowed by law. (Ord. O2020-06 § 1, 2020; Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.210 Administrative citations—Procedures.
A.    Upon discovering any violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by the city attorney.

B.     If the responsible person is a commercial business, the enforcement officer shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue the business owner an administrative citation. If the code enforcement officer can only locate the manager of the commercial business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the business. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed to the business owner or responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter.

C.     The administrative citation shall be signed by the issuing code enforcement officer.

D.    Method of Service.

1.     Signature. Once the responsible person is located, the enforcement officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. However, if the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, it shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings.

2.     If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter.

3.     Posting. If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by this chapter.

E.     A copy of the administrative citation shall thereafter be mailed to the responsible person and to the owner of the property if different from the responsible person in the manner prescribed by this chapter. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.220 Contents of administrative citation.
Any administrative citation that is issued shall contain all of the following information:

A.    The date and location of the violations and the approximate time the violations were observed;

B.     The code sections violated and a brief description of how the sections are violated;

C.     Where appropriate, the action required to correct the violations;

D.    Set forth a deadline by which the violations must be corrected and the consequences of failing to comply;

E.     The amount of fine imposed for the violations, if any;

F.     An explanation as to how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine; and

G.    Identify all rights and procedures of appeal. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.230 Appeal of administrative citation.
An appeal from the issuance of an administrative citation shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.240 Fines for administrative citations.
A.    If the responsible person fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of the fine shall increase for those subsequent violations.

B.     The amount of the fines assessed for each administrative citation issued shall be at a rate established by resolution of the city council.

C.     Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.

D.    All fines assessed shall be payable to the city, unless otherwise directed on the citation.

E.     For all delinquent, unpaid administrative citation fines, there shall be a penalty imposed in the amount of ten percent of the citation fine amount and an additional one percent per month of the total amount of such fine for each month during the time that said fine remains unpaid after its delinquency date. The delinquency date for an administrative citation fine shall be sixty days following the imposition of the fine, or the appeal determination of the administrative hearing officer, whichever is later. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.250 Failure to pay administrative citation fine.
The failure of any person to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the director referring the matter to the finance department or other designated agent for collection. Alternatively, the director shall pursue any other legal remedy to collect the fines. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.260 Allocation of administrative citation fines.
Administrative fines collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into the special revenue fund. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

Article IV. Abatement
1.10.270 Abatements—Declaration of purpose.
The city council finds that it is necessary to establish appropriate procedures for the administrative and summary abatement of public nuisances and code violations. The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. This chapter governs all other nuisance abatement procedures established in other chapters of this code unless other procedures are specifically stated to apply. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.280 Authority.
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this code or an applicable state code, which constitutes a public nuisance, may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.290 General procedures.
A.    Abatement Notice.

1.     Whenever the director determines that public or private property or any portion of public or private property is a public nuisance as generally defined in Section 17.53.020 or as declared in any other specific section of this code, including adopted uniform codes or applicable state codes, an abatement notice (notice and order) may be issued to the responsible person to abate the public nuisance.

2.     The abatement notice shall contain a description of the subject property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property. It shall refer to specific sections of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code violations, which render the property a public nuisance.

3.     The abatement notice shall describe the action required to abate the public nuisance, which may include, but is not limited to: corrections, repairs, demolition, removal, obtaining the necessary permits, vacation of tenants or occupants, or other appropriate action and shall establish time frames by which each action must occur.

4.     The abatement notice shall explain the consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms of the notice.

5.     The abatement notice shall identify all applicable hearing and appeal rights.

B.     Service of Abatement Notice. The abatement notice shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.300 Abatement of a public nuisance by the city.
A.    Once the director follows the procedures set forth herein and the time for compliance has lapsed, if the violations remain, the nuisance conditions may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor.

B.     City personnel or a private contractor can enter upon private property in a reasonable manner as provided by law to abate the nuisance conditions as specified in the abatement notice or abatement order.

C.     If the responsible person abates the nuisance conditions before the city performs the actual abatement pursuant to an abatement notice or abatement order, the director may still assess all costs incurred by the city against the responsible person pursuant to the procedures set forth herein.

D.    When abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be prepared by the director. The report shall contain the names and addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel, the name and address of the property owner, if different from the responsible person, the tax assessor’s parcel number, and a legal description of the property, if the responsible person is an owner.

E.     The director shall schedule a confirmation of costs hearing before an administrative hearing officer pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, unless waived in writing by all responsible persons.

F.     All administrative and actual costs incurred by the city in abating the violations may be assessed and recovered against the responsible person pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.310 Summary abatement.
This article governs the procedures relating to summary abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.320 Authority.
Whenever the director determines that an imminent health and safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the director may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the responsible person:

A.    Order the immediate vacation of any tenants and prohibit occupancy of the subject property until all repairs are completed;

B.     Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;

C.     Board, fence, or secure the building or site;

D.    Raze and grade that portion of the premises or site to prevent further collapse and remove any hazard to the general public;

E.     Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent health and safety hazard; or

F.     Take any other action as appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.330 Procedures.
A.    The director shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred by the city during the summary abatement process shall be assessed, collected, and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in this chapter.

B.     The director may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law to abate any remaining public nuisance. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

Article V. Administrative Penalties
1.10.340 Declaration of purpose.
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for enforcing more serious violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, and applicable state codes. The city council further finds that the assessment of civil penalties through an administrative hearing procedure for code violations is a necessary alternative method of code enforcement. The administrative assessment of civil penalties is in addition to any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law, which may be pursued by the city to address serious violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.350 Authority.
A.    Any person violating any provision of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties pursuant to the administrative procedures provided in this chapter.

B.     Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation.

C.     Civil penalties may be directly assessed in conjunction with a notice and order issued by the director, or affirmed by a hearing officer. Civil penalties assessed shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter.

D.    Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes shall be assessed at a daily rate determined by the director or hearing officer pursuant to the criteria listed in this chapter. Except as authorized pursuant to state and federal laws, the maximum civil penalty shall be one thousand dollars per violation per day with the maximum amount of civil penalties not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars per parcel or structure for any related series of violations occurring within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the latest violation. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.360 Procedures—Issuance of notice and order.
A.    Whenever the director determines that a violation of one or more provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes has occurred or continues to exist, a civil penalty may be issued in conjunction with a notice and order to the responsible person.

B.     The notice and order shall refer to all code sections violated and describe how each section is or has been violated.

C.     The notice and order shall refer to the dates and locations of the violations.

D.    The notice and order shall address the action required to correct the outstanding violations and establish time frames for completion.

E.     The notice and order shall establish a daily amount of civil penalties. The director shall determine the daily amount of civil penalties pursuant to the criteria set forth in this article.

F.     The notice and order shall identify a date when the civil penalties began to accrue and a date when the assessment of civil penalties ended, unless the violation is continuous. In the case of a continuous violation, there shall be an ongoing assessment of penalties at the daily rate established in the notice and order until the violations are corrected.

G.    If a director determines that the violations are continuing, the notice and order shall demand that the responsible person cease and desist from further action causing the violations, or take affirmative action to cease from maintaining or permitting the violation to exist, and commence and complete all action to correct the outstanding violations under the guidance of the appropriate city departments.

H.    The notice and order shall enumerate any other consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice and order.

I.      The notice and order shall identify appropriate hearing procedures as required by this chapter.

J.      The notice and order shall be served upon the responsible person by any one of the methods of service listed in this chapter.

K.    The notice and order shall identify the factors used by the director in determining the duration and the daily amount of civil penalties.

L.     More than one notice and order may be issued against the same responsible person if it encompasses either different dates or different violations. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.370 Determination of civil penalties.
A.    In determining the date when civil penalties started to accrue, a director may consider the date when the department first discovered the violations as evidenced by the issuance of a notice of violation or any other written correspondence.

B.     The assessment of civil penalties shall end when all action required by the notice and order has been completed.

C.     In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed on a daily rate, the director may consider some or all of the following factors:

1.     The duration of the violation;

2.     The frequency or recurrence of the violation;

3.     The seriousness of the violation;

4.     The history of the violation;

5.     The responsible person’s conduct after issuance of the notice and order;

6.     The good faith effort by the responsible person to comply;

7.     The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible person;

8.     The impact of the violation upon the community;

9.     Any other factors that justice may require. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.380 Recovery of civil penalties.
The director may collect all civil penalties and related administrative costs by the use of all appropriate legal means, including, but not limited to, the recordation of a code enforcement lien pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. If unable to collect the obligation, the director may refer the obligation to the city attorney to file a court action to recover these penalties and costs. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.390 Recovery of abatement costs.
The total costs for abating a declared nuisance, as so confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.

After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the council’s decision shall be filed with the county auditor-controller on or before August 1st of each year, whereupon it shall be the duty of the auditor-controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against and respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

In the alternative, after such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.

Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows:

 

Notice of Lien

 

(Claim of the City of Manteca)

 

Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section of Manteca Ordinance No. __________, the City Manager of the City of Manteca did on or about the _____ day of __________, 20_____, cause the property hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the building or structure on the property hereinafter described, to be repaired or demolished in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of Manteca did on the _____ day of __________, 20_____, assess the cost of such hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that the City of Manteca does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the amount of said assessment, to wit, the sum of $__________, and the same, shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the city of Manteca, county of San Joaquin, state of California, and particularly described as follows:

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

(description)

Dated this _____ day of __________, 20_____.

_________________________

City Manager

 

(Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.400 Cancellation of code enforcement lien.
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the director shall, within ten days from the date payment is made or decision is final, record a notice of satisfaction with the San Joaquin County recorder’s office. The notice of satisfaction shall include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement lien. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the code enforcement lien. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.410 Administrative costs.
The director or hearing officer is authorized to assess any reasonable administrative costs. Administrative costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.420 Failure to comply with notice and order.
The director shall request the city attorney to appoint a hearing officer and the director shall establish a date, time, and place for the civil penalties hearing in accordance with this chapter when the responsible person fails to comply with the terms of the notice and order. Failure to comply includes failure to pay the assessed civil penalties, failure to commence and complete corrections by the established deadlines, or failure to refrain from continuing violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.430 Civil penalties hearing.
A.    The procedures for the civil penalties hearing are the same as the hearing procedures set forth in this chapter.

B.     The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the following issues: (1) whether the responsible person has caused or maintained a violation of this code or applicable state code that existed on the dates specified in the notice and order; and (2) whether the amount of civil penalties assessed by the director pursuant to the procedures and criteria outlined in this chapter was reasonable. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

Article VI. Administrative Hearings
1.10.440 Administrative hearing procedures.
A.    These sections establish the procedures for the use of administrative hearing officers and the procedures governing administrative hearings.

B.     Qualifications of Administrative Hearing Officer. The city attorney shall promulgate rules and procedures as are necessary to establish a list of qualified persons who are capable of acting on behalf of the city as hearing officers.

C.     Appointment of Administrative Hearing Officer. Hearing officers presiding at administrative hearings shall be appointed by the city attorney and compensated by the city. The city attorney shall develop policies and procedures relating to the appointment and compensation of hearing officers.

D.    Disqualification of Hearing Officer. Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. Rules and procedures for the disqualification of a hearing officer shall be promulgated by the city attorney.

E.     Powers of Hearing Officer.

1.     The hearing officer may continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing or if the hearing officer independently determines that due process has not been adequately afforded.

2.     The hearing officer, upon receipt of a written request which is submitted no later than five days before the hearing, shall subpoena witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. The city attorney shall develop policies and procedures relating to the issuance of subpoenas in administrative hearings, including the form of the subpoena and related costs.

3.     The hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ensuring compliance with an administrative order, modifying an administrative order, or where extraordinary circumstances exist granting a new hearing.

4.     The hearing officer has the authority to require the responsible person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order.

F.     Failure to Obey Subpoena. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by a hearing officer. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.450 Procedures for requesting an appeals hearing.
A.    A person served with one of the following documents, order or notices may file an appeal within ten calendar days from the service of the notice:

1.     Any civil penalty notice and order issued;

2.     An administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter.

B.     The appeal shall be made in writing stating the grounds for the appeal and filed with the director on or before the tenth day after service and shall be accompanied by the appeal fee as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.460 Procedures for notification of administrative hearing.
A.    Where an administrative remedy or proceeding provides for an appeal procedure, the director shall request the city attorney to appoint a hearing officer and to schedule a day, time, and a place for the hearing.

B.     Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the responsible person.

C.     The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance with rules and policies promulgated by the city attorney.

D.    The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.470 Procedures at administrative hearing.
A.    Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the city attorney.

B.     The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes.

C.     The standard of proof to be used by the hearing officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence.

D.    Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his or her case. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.480 Failure to attend administrative hearing.
Any responsible person who requests a hearing or whose actions are the subject of an administrative hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that the hearing was properly noticed. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.490 Administrative order.
A.    The decision of the hearing officer shall be entitled “Administrative Order” and shall be issued in accordance with this chapter and the rules and procedures promulgated by the city attorney.

B.     Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the hearing officer shall issue an administrative order, which affirms, modifies, or rejects the director’s action. In the case of a notice and order of civil penalty, the administrative order may affirm, modify, or reject the daily rate or duration of the civil penalties depending upon the review of the evidence and may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs assessed.

C.     The hearing officer may issue an administrative order that requires the responsible person to cease from violating this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes and to make necessary corrections within a specific time frame.

D.    As part of the administrative order, the hearing officer may establish specific deadlines for the payment of penalties and costs and condition the total or partial assessment of civil penalties on the responsible person’s ability to complete compliance by specified deadlines.

E.     The hearing officer may issue an administrative order, which imposes additional civil penalties that will continue to be assessed until the responsible person complies with the hearing officer’s decision and corrects the violation.

F.     The hearing officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with the administrative order.

G.    The administrative order shall become final on the date of service of the order.

H.    The administrative order shall be served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.500 Judicial review.
Once an administrative order becomes final as provided in this chapter, the time in which judicial review of the order must be sought shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or as may be amended hereafter. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

 

1.10.510 Failure to comply with the administrative order misdemeanor.
A.    After the hearing officer issues an administrative order, the director shall monitor the violations and determine compliance.

B.     Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in the administrative order, the director may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties, administrative costs, and obtain compliance with the administrative order, including seeking an injunction.

C.     Failure to comply with an administrative order constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1457 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 1.11 CIVIL PENALTIES
1.11.010 Declaration of purpose.
The council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for enforcing more serious violations of the Manteca Municipal Code and applicable state codes. The council further finds that the assessment of civil penalties through an administrative hearing procedure for code violations is a necessary alternative method of code enforcement. The administrative assessment of civil penalties is in addition to any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law which may be pursued to address serious violations of the municipal code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.020 Authority.
A.    Any person violating any provision of the municipal code or applicable state code may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties pursuant to the administrative procedures provided in Chapter 1.10.

B.     Each and every day a violation of any provision of the municipal code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation.

C.     Civil penalties may be directly assessed in conjunction with a notice and order issued by the director, or affirmed by a hearing officer. Civil penalties assessed shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter.

D.    Civil penalties for violations of any provision of the municipal code or applicable state codes shall be assessed at a daily rate determined by the director or hearing officer pursuant to the criteria listed in Section 1.11.040(C) of this chapter. Except as authorized pursuant to state and federal laws, the maximum civil penalty shall be one thousand dollars per violation per day with the maximum amount of civil penalties not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars per parcel or structure for any related series of violations in a year. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.030 Procedures—Issuance of notice and order.
A.    Whenever the director determines that a violation of one or more provisions of the municipal code or applicable state codes has occurred or constitutes to exist, a civil penalty may be issued in conjunction with a notice and order to the responsible person.

 

B.     The notice and order shall refer to all code sections violated and described how each section is or has been violated.

C.     The notice and order shall refer to the dates and locations of the violations.

D.    The notice and order shall address the action required to correct the outstanding violations and establish time frames for completion.

E.     The notice and order shall establish a daily amount of civil penalties. The director shall determine the daily amount of civil penalties pursuant to Section 1.11.040(C) of this chapter.

F.     The notice and order shall identify a date when the civil penalties began to accrue and a date when the assessment of civil penalties ended, unless the violation is continuous. In the case of a continuous violation, there shall be an ongoing assessment of penalties at the daily rate established in the notice and order until the violations are corrected.

G.    If a director determines that the violations are continuing, the notice and order shall demand that the responsible person cease and desist from further action causing the violation, or take affirmative action to cease from maintaining or permitting the violation to exist, and commence and complete all action to correct the outstanding violations under the guidance of the appropriate city departments.

H.    The notice and order shall enumerate any other consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice and order.

I.      The notice and order shall identify appropriate hearing procedures as required by Chapter 1.10 of this title.

J.      The notice and order shall be served upon the responsible person by personal service, certified mail or any other method reasonably calculated to provide notice.

K.    The notice and order shall identify the factors used by the director in determining the duration and the daily amount of civil penalties.

L.     More than one notice and order may be issued against the same responsible person if it encompasses either different dates or different violations. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.040 Determination of civil penalties.
A.    In determining the date when civil penalties started to accrue, a director may consider the date when the department first discovered the violations as evidenced by the issuance of a notice of violation or any other written correspondence.

B.     The assessment of civil penalties shall end when all action required by the notice and order has been completed.

C.     In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed on a daily rate, the director may consider some or all of the following factors:

1.     The duration of the violation;

2.     The frequency or recurrence of the violation;

3.     The seriousness of the violation;

4.     The history of the violation;

5.     The responsible person’s conduct after issuance of the notice and order;

6.     The good faith effort by the responsible person to comply;

7.     The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible person;

8.     The impact of the violation upon the community;

9.     Any other factors that justice may require.

(Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.050 Cancellation of code enforcement lien.
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the director shall, within ten days from the date payment is made or decision is final, record a notice of satisfaction with the county recorder’s office. The notice of satisfaction shall include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement lien. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the code enforcement lien. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.060 Administrative costs.
The director or hearing officer is authorized to assess any reasonable administrative costs. Administrative costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.070 Failure to comply with notice and order.
The director shall request the city manager to appoint a hearing officer and the director shall establish a date, time and place for the civil penalties hearing in accordance with Section 1.11.040 when the responsible person fails to comply with the terms of the notice and order. Failure to comply includes failure to pay the assessed civil penalties, failure to commence and complete corrections by the established deadlines or failure to refrain from continuing violations of the municipal code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

 

1.11.080 Civil penalties hearing.
A.    The procedures for the civil penalties hearing are the same as the hearing procedures set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this title.

B.     The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the following issues: (1) whether the responsible person has caused or maintained a violation of the municipal code or applicable state code that existed on the dates specified in the notice and order; and (2) whether the amount of civil penalties assessed by the director pursuant to the procedures and criteria outlined in Section 1.11.040(C) was reasonable. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 1.12 ARREST PROCEDURE
1.12.010 Citations for violations—Contents.
Whenever any person is arrested for the violation of this code or of any ordinance of the city and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as prescribed by law, the arresting officer shall prepare in triplicate a written notice, hereinafter called “citation,” to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. (Prior code § 1-8)

 

1.12.020 Citations for violations—Delivery.
The officer shall deliver one copy of the citation to the arrested person. The arrested person in order to secure his or her release must give his or her written promise to appear in court, or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, by signing two copies of the citation, which copies shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. (Prior code § 1-9)

 

1.12.030 Citations for violations—Failure to appear.
Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. (Prior code § 1-10)

 

1.12.040 Citations for violations—Issuance of warrant.
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the citation and has not posted bail as provided by law, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued and delivered for execution within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised. When a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than the magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then a warrant shall be issued and delivered for execution within twenty days after the delivery of the citation to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. (Prior code § 1-11)

Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY
1.16.010 General penalty—Continuing violations.
A.    Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city or in any order, rule or regulation issued or promulgated by any duly authorized officer or agent of the city any act is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise specifically provided, the violation of any such provision shall be an infraction, punishable by:

1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within twelve months; and

3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within twelve months.

B.     Every day any violation of this code or any ordinance of the city or any such order, rule or regulation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 840 § 1, 1989; prior code § 1-7)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.09 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.12 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.20 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.28 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
Chapter 2.32 OFFICERS’ BONDS
Chapter 2.36 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Chapter 2.38 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE INFORMATION
Chapter 2.40 POLICE
Chapter 2.44 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.48 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Meetings—Time and place.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month in the council chambers at 1001 W. Center Street, Manteca, California, at 7:00 p.m. All regular meetings of the city council shall be adjourned no later than 10:00 p.m., which time is referred to as the normal time of adjournment. No new item of business shall be taken up by the city council after the normal time unless the city council has determined by a majority vote to extend the meeting beyond the normal time. All agenda items not considered at the meeting shall be on the agenda of the next regular meeting unless the city council directs otherwise. Upon being notified that any regular meeting will not be held, the city clerk shall post a notice of cancellation of such meeting as soon as practicable. (Ord. O2018-30 § 1; Ord. 1547 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1424 § 1, 2008; prior code § 2-1)

 

2.04.020 Redevelopment agency duties.
The city council finds, determines and declares there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city, and the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency for the city. (Ord. 431, 1973)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created—Appointment—Term.
The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2-40)

 

2.08.020 Residence requirements.
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of appointment, but the city manager shall within six months of appointment reside within thirty miles of the city administrative offices. (Ord. 1498 § I, 2011; Ord. 1426 § 1, 2008; prior code § 2-41)

 

2.08.030 Eligibility of council members for appointment.
No person elected as a councilmember of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be member of the city council. (Prior code § 2-42)

 

2.08.040 Bond required.
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Prior code § 2-43)

 

2.08.050 Temporary manager.
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager and his or her failure to appoint a manager pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of such city manager, subject however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in Section 2.08.040. (Prior code § 2-44)

 

2.08.060 Compensation.
A.    The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution and such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate.

B.     The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council for approval. (Prior code § 2-45)

 

2.08.070 Powers and duties.
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the council except as otherwise provided in this title. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:

A.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to see that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.

B.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city through their department head; transfer employees from one department to another and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction.

C.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to appoint, remove and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, the city attorney and the city treasurer. The city manager shall also have the power to appoint an assistant city manager subject to the approval of the city council.

D.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to exercise control over all departments of government of the city and over all appointive officers and employees thereof.

E.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to attend all the meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by such council.

F.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient.

G.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city.

H.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the council for its approval.

I.      It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to purchase all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the council except on report or approval of the city manager.

J.      It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract for the proper performance of any obligations running to the city.

K.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed.

L.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the council.

M.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote full time to the duties of his or her office in the interests of the city. Duties as city clerk or any other duties delegated or approved by the city council shall not be applicable to this section.

N.    It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall have the power to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the council.

O.    The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, recreation commission and any other commissions or boards heretofore or hereafter created by the council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the council. At any such meetings at which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions or boards as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address them.

P.     At the expiration of the existing term of the elected city clerk, the city council vests in the city manager the authority to appoint the city clerk and the city manager shall appoint the city clerk. The city clerk shall hold office during the pleasure of the city manager. The city clerk appointed by the city manager is not required to be a resident or an elector of the city. This action is taken pursuant to authority granted to the city council under Government Code Section 36510. (Ord. 1125 § 1, 2000; prior code § 2-46)

 

2.08.080 Relationship to city council.
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council not any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any order or instructions to the city manager. (Prior code § 2-47)

2.08.090 Cooperation of city employees required.
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. (Prior code § 2-48)

 

2.08.100 Removal from office—Notice from council.
The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three-fifths vote of the whole council in regular council meetings, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding sections. In case of his or her intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him or her and the reason therefor, at least thirty days before the effective date of his or her removal. (Prior code § 2-49)

 

2.08.110 Removal from office—Hearing by council.
Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice he or she may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. (Prior code § 2-50)

 

2.08.120 Removal from office—Suspension pending hearing.
After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him or her from duty, but his or her compensation shall continue until his or her removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. (Prior code § 2-51)

 

2.08.130 Removal from office—Finality of council action.
In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to such city council his or her grounds of opposition to his or her removal prior to its action. (Prior code § 2-52)

 

2.08.140 Removal from office—Limitations.
Notwithstanding the provisions enumerated in Sections 2.08.100 through 2.08.130, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of such ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding section as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Prior code § 2-53)

Chapter 2.09 CITY ATTORNEY
2.09.010 Office created.
The office of city attorney of the city of Manteca is created and established. The city attorney shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the city council as its legal advisor. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

 

2.09.020 Appointment.
The city attorney is appointed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the city council solely on the basis of their legal qualifications and ability. The city attorney shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the state of California. No member of the city council shall receive such appointment during the term for which they serve or within one year after the expiration of their term of office. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

 

2.09.030 Term of office.
The city attorney is appointed by the city council and holds office for and during the pleasure of the city council. The removal of the city attorney is only upon a three-fifths vote of the city council. Notwithstanding this provision, however, the city attorney will not be removed from office, except for cause, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general or special municipal election held in the city at which election a member or members of the city council is elected; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council to observe the actions of the city attorney in the performance of the powers and duties of their office. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

 

2.09.040 Compensation.
The city attorney receives such compensation and benefits as the city council will from time to time determine and fix, and the compensation will be a proper charge against such funds of the city that the city council designates. The city attorney is reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid in the performance of duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

 

2.09.050 Powers and duties.
The city attorney is the legal counsel of the city government under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city attorney is responsible for the efficient administration of the legal matters pertaining to city business. In addition to the city attorney general powers as the legal counsel, and not as a limitation thereon, the city attorney has the duty and power to:

A.    Advise the city council and all city officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;

B.     Provide legal counsel at all meetings of the city council and planning commission, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under consideration by the council, or by the boards, commissions, or officers of the city;

C.     Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts, and other legal instruments as is required for the proper conduct of the business of the city, and approve the form of all contracts, agreements and bonds given to the city;

D.    Defend all civil litigation filed against the city, and prosecute civil litigation advancing the interests of the city as authorized by the city council;

E.     Prosecute on behalf of the people cases for violations of city ordinances;

F.     The city attorney may employ or retain other attorneys to take charge of any litigation or matter to assist the city attorney therein;

G.    Appoint and remove those employees of the city attorney’s office allocated by the city council through the annual city budget as necessary and appropriate to assist the city attorney in performance of the duties and responsibilities of the office;

H.    Perform such other legal tasks as may be required by the city council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of these duties. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

 

2.09.060 Council-city attorney relations.
The city attorney takes orders, directions, and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the council, and no individual councilmember shall give any order or instruction to the city attorney. All employees of the city attorney’s office shall deal with the city council solely through the city attorney. This is not meant to restrict or limit contact and communications from city attorney staff to the city council. However, any councilmember may, as an individual, request pertinent information on municipal legal affairs from the city attorney.

The city council and its members deal with the city attorney’s office solely through the city attorney. This requires that neither the city council nor any individual member gives any direct orders to any of the subordinates of the city attorney. However, this is not meant to impede or restrict access by any city councilmember to city attorney office staff for the purpose of collecting information they feel they need to do their job as an elected official. (Ord. 2020-08 § 1)

Chapter 2.12 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
2.12.010 Department established under jurisdiction of director of public works.
There is established the department of public works which shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of public works. (Prior code § 2-31)

 

2.12.020 Director’s functions.
The director of public works acting directly or through properly authorized agents acting within the scope of the particular duties delegated to them shall also serve the following functions:

A.    City engineer;

B.     City traffic engineer;

C.     Superintendent of public works. (Ord. 1516 § 11, 2013; prior code § 2-32)

Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
2.16.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the finance ordinance of the city of Manteca. (Prior code § 2-54)

 

2.16.020 Established—Director of finance created.
There is established a department of finance; further the office of director of finance created. (Prior code § 2-55)

 

2.16.030 Director of finance—Duties and powers.
The director of finance shall be appointed by and shall be subject to removal by the city manager. The director of finance shall perform all duties as required by this office, by state law, this chapter and ordinances of the city, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the city council and the city manager, and shall, under the jurisdiction of the city manager:

A.    Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city;

B.     Complete the budget expenses and income estimates for the city council and city manager;

C.     Maintain and supervise a general accounting system for the city government and each of its officers, departments and agencies;

D.    Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, preauditing, presenting and disbursements of claims, warrants and demands against the city, including payrolls, to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded;

E.     Prepare and submit to the city manager and city council monthly financial statements of receipts and disbursements and budget balances of the city, as well as an annual statement and report of the financial conditions of the city;

F.     Assist the city manager in keeping current inventories of all property of the city, its departments, officers and agencies;

G.    Examine the books of each department of the city from time to time to see that they are kept in proper form;

H.    Demand and receive all moneys and fees owing to the city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner, when the means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law. When any shall not be collectible by other methods, he or she shall report the same to the city attorney for prosecution. (Ord. 999 § 1(A), 1994; prior code § 2-56)

 

2.16.040 Director of finance—Duties of city clerk transferred to director of finance.
The duties imposed upon the city clerk by Title Four, Division Three, Part Three, Chapter Two of the Government Code of the state, are transferred to the director of finance in accordance with Sections 37209 and 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state. In addition, the finance and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the state are transferred to the director of finance. The director of finance shall have those duties that were the duties of the city clerk that are transferred to the director of finance by this chapter. (Prior code § 2-57)

 

2.16.060 Director of finance—Bond.
The director of finance upon the entry to his or her duties of office shall execute a bond of the city in conformity with bonds of public officers, in accordance with the provisions of the Government Code of the state relating thereto, the amount of such bond to be determined by the city council by resolution. (Prior code § 2-59)

Chapter 2.20 FIRE DEPARTMENT
2.20.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and expressions shall have the meanings relatively ascribed to them as follows:

A.    “Chief” means the administrator of the fire department.

B.     “City manager” means the city manager of the city.

C.     “Fire department” means the city fire department. (Prior code § 9-1)

 

2.20.020 Established—Designated.
There is established a fire department for the city to be known as the Manteca fire department. (Prior code § 9-2)

 

2.20.030 Officers and men.
The fire department shall consist of a paid chief, who shall be in charge of the fire department and such other paid officers and men as the chief, with the approval of the city manager, may deem necessary for the effective operation of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-3)

 

2.20.040 Fire chief—Appointment—Term.
The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. Employment of the chief may be terminated by the city manager with the approval of the city council. (Prior code § 9-4)

 

2.20.050 Fire chief—Compensation and terms of employment.
The compensation and terms of the employment of the chief shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. (Prior code § 9-5)

 

2.20.060 Fire chief—Reports to city manager.
The chief shall be accountable to the city manager and shall make such written and verbal reports to him or her as he or she may require. (Prior code § 9-6)

 

2.20.070 Fire chief—Fire department officers to be accountable to chief.
All other fire department officers and men shall be accountable to the chief. (Prior code § 9-7)

 

2.20.080 Fire chief—To adopt rules and regulations.
The chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the fire department. The chief shall be responsible to the city manager for the personnel, morale, and general efficiency of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-8)

 

2.20.090 Fire chief—To determine number and kind of companies.
The chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall determine the number and kind of companies of which the fire department is to be composed. (Prior code § 9-9)

 

2.20.100 Fire chief—To determine response of fire companies to alarms.
The chief shall determine the response of fire companies to alarms. (Prior code § 9-10)

 

2.20.110 Fire chief—To appoint training officer.
The chief shall appoint a training officer to conduct all suitable training and drills in all subjects generally considered essential to the protection and safety of life and property from fire and explosion. (Prior code § 9-11)

 

2.20.120 Fire chief—To assist in suppressing arson.
The chief shall assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. (Prior code § 9-12)

 

2.20.130 Obedience to notices.
Any person served with a notice to abate any fire hazard or hazards shall comply therewith and promptly notify the fire department of same. (Prior code § 9-13)

 

2.20.140 Records.
The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-14)

 

2.20.150 Monthly report.
The chief shall report monthly to the city manager the condition of the apparatus and equipment; the number of fires during the month, their location and cause, the date of the same and loss occasioned thereby; the number and purpose of all other runs made; and the number of members responding to each fire or other incident changes in membership. (Prior code § 9-15)

 

2.20.160 Annual report.
The chief shall make a complete annual report to the city manager each year, such report is to include the information specified in Section 2.20.150 together with comparative date from previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-16)

 

2.20.170 Composition of fire department.
The membership of the fire department shall consist of such persons as may be appointed by the fire chief. (Prior code § 9-17)

 

2.20.180 Suspension and discharge of members.
Any member of the fire department may be suspended or discharged from the department by the fire chief at any time he or she may deem such action necessary for the good of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-18)

 

2.20.190 Badges to be issued.
Each member of the fire department shall be issued a badge designating his or her rank. (Prior code § 9-19)

 

2.20.200 Equipment generally.
The fire department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire and explosion. (Prior code § 9-21)

 

2.20.210 Recommendations as to equipment.
Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief with the approval of the city manager. (Prior code § 9-22)

 

2.20.220 Housing of equipment.
All equipment of the fire department shall be safely and conveniently house in such places as may be designated by the chief. (Prior code § 9-23)

 

2.20.230 Private use of fire equipment prohibited.
No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any articles used in any way by the fire department. (Prior code § 9-24)

 

2.20.240 Entering fire stations and handling equipment prohibited without permission.
No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the fire department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the fire department. (Prior code § 9-25)

 

2.20.250 Police powers of fire department members.
All regular full-time paid members of the fire department are given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code. (Prior code § 9-26)

Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.24.010 Created—Number of members.
There is created a planning commission of the city. The planning commission shall consist of five members and one alternate member. The alternate member shall attend all meetings of the commission and is authorized to serve and vote in place of any regular member of the commission who is absent. The planning commission shall also consist of two ex officio members: the city attorney or the assistant city attorney and the city engineer. (Ord. 1437 § 1, 2009; prior code § 2-26)

 

2.24.020 Members—Appointment.
Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council; provided, however, no member of the planning commission will be appointed who is not a resident of the city. There shall be no residence requirement for the ex officio members of the planning commission. (Prior code § 2-27)

 

2.24.030 Members—Terms—Vacancies.
A.    The members of the planning commission shall be appointed for terms of four years except as provided below. If a vacancy shall occur other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. A vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred when a member is no longer a resident of the city. Residence shall be determined by the same rules as a determination of residence for city councilmembers.

B.     The first planning commission shall be appointed for staggered terms commencing December 19, 1966: one commissioner for one year; one commissioner for two years; one commissioner for three years and two commissioners for four years. If any planning commission absents him or herself without permission from all regular planning commission meetings for sixty days consecutively from the last regular meeting he or she attended, his or her office becomes vacant and shall be filled as any other vacancy. (Prior code § 2-28)

 

2.24.040 Members—Compensation.
Each member of the planning commission may receive compensation at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city. The ex officio members shall receive no compensation. Such compensation may hereafter be reviewed and adjusted by resolution of the city council, if so desired. (Ord. 1437 § 2, 2009; prior code § 2-28.1)

 

2.24.050 Members—Removal.
Any appointed member of the planning commission may be removed by the appointing official at his or her pleasure, but such removal shall be subject to the approval of the city council. By a majority vote of the city council any appointed member may be removed. (Prior code § 2-29)

 

2.24.060 Powers and duties.
The rights, powers and duties of the planning commission shall be as provided in Chapter 3, Title 7, relating to local planning, of the Government Code of the state. (Prior code § 2-30)

Chapter 2.28 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
2.28.010 Created.
There is created a recreation and parks commission consisting of five members and one alternate member. The alternate member shall attend all meetings of the commission and is authorized to serve and vote in place of any regular member of the commission who is absent. (Ord. 1437 § 3, 2009; Ord. 1083 § 1, 1998; prior code § 2-20)

 

2.28.020 Appointment and compensation.
All members of the recreation and parks commission shall serve without compensation. Three of the members shall be appointed by the mayor with consent of the city council and shall reside within the corporate boundaries of the city of Manteca. Two members shall be appointed by the trustees of the Manteca Unified School District and shall reside within the Manteca Unified School District boundaries. (Ord. 1083 § 1, 1998; prior code § 2-21)

 

2.28.030 Terms of office—Vacancies.
Members of the recreation and parks commission shall serve for a term of three years or until their successors are appointed. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the members whose office is vacant in the same manner as such member received original appointment. Two members, one each appointed by the city council and the trustees of MUSD, terms shall expire on December 31, 1999. Two members, one each appointed by the city council and the trustees of MUSD, shall expire on December 31, 2000. One city appointed member’s term shall expire on December 31, 1998. The terms of commissioners serving as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be aligned to the previously outlined term expiration dates by drawing lots at the first commission meeting following city council adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 1083 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2-22)

 

2.28.040 Officers—Rules and regulations—Meetings.
The officers of the recreation and parks commission shall be a chair and vice-chair who shall be selected by the commission. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried out by such officers. Officers shall hold office for one year or until their successors are selected. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern proceedings. The commission shall meet at least quarterly, at a time determined by vote. Upon being notified that any regular meeting will not be held, Department staff shall post a notice of cancellation of such meeting as soon as practicable. A majority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Absence from four consecutive regular meetings without the formal consent or permission of the commission shall be deemed to constitute retirement of such member and the position declared vacant. (Ord. 1553 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1083 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2-23)

 

2.28.050 Duties and responsibilities.
A.    The commission shall be advisory to the city council in the field of public parks and recreation, and shall make all appropriate recommendations for the functioning and operation of recreation programs in the city and boundaries of the Manteca Unified School District to the city council. The recreation and parks commission is established to provide a communication link between the community and the city council and its staff.

B.     The commission shall have no administrative authority or power to incur indebtedness or obligation on behalf of or against the city of Manteca.

C.     The commission shall have the power to make recommendations and advise the city council on various parks and recreation operations, services and issues, as necessary in the exercise of its duties. The advisory powers of the commission shall include, but not be limited to:

1.     The commission shall set fees for recreation programs. Any person may appeal the setting of fees to the city council. In the event the commission is unable to make a determination on a specific fee, then the city council shall decide what fee shall be charged;

2.     Advise and assist the parks and recreation director in the preparation of the annual budget;

3.     Advise the city council on the subjects of recreation and facility master planning and development;

4.     Study and recommend needed parks and recreation facilities; review, develop and recommend capital improvement projects;

5.     Maintain close liaison and coordination with other related community agencies to ensure total cooperative community effort to provide the most effective, most economical services possible;

6.     Evaluate the city’s recreation programs, facilities, services and relationships periodically to assure that its objectives and goals are being achieved;

7.     Recommend goals and objectives for parks and recreation within the community;

8.     Provide recommendations for community involvement and serve as a conduit for community feedback to the city council and staff on parks and recreation issues;

9.     Commission may adopt and enforce players code of conduct guidelines for organized sports programs; arbitrate participant conduct problems and mediate participant complaints in organized sports programs.

(Ord. 1083 § 1, 1998; prior code § 2-24)

 

2.28.060 Acceptance of money—Recreation fund.
The city may accept all money appropriated for recreation program purposes by the Manteca Unified School District, San Joaquin County or from any other public body, and all donations, legacies or bequests from any other source. All such money shall be deposited in the treasury of the city in the recreation fund, and shall only be paid out after approval by the city council at a regular or special meeting. (Ord. 1083 § 1, 1998; prior code § 2-25)

Chapter 2.32 OFFICERS’ BONDS
2.32.010 City clerk bond.
Each city clerk before entering upon the duties of his or her office shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of twenty-five thousand dollars, and in the manner and form required by Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state. (Prior code § 2-2)

 

2.32.020 City treasurer bond.
Each city treasurer before entering upon the duties of his or her office shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars, and in the manner and form required by Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state. (Prior code § 2-3)

Chapter 2.36 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
2.36.010 Conflict of interest code adopted—Statement filing required when.
A.    The Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 81000, et seq., requires state and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate conflict of interest codes. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation, 2 Cal. Code of Regs. Section 18370, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. It can be incorporated by reference and may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission after taking public notice and hearings to conform to amendments in the Political Reform Act.

Therefore, the terms of 2 Cal. Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission are hereby incorporated by reference and, along with the attached Appendices in which members and employees are designated and disclosure categories are set forth, constitutes the conflict of interest code of the city of Manteca.

B.     Pursuant to Section 4 of the standard code, designated employees shall file statements of economic interests with the city clerk of the city of Manteca. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1513 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1491 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1482 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1425 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1338 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1225 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 2.38 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE INFORMATION
2.38.010 Required use of electronic filing system.
A.    Except as set forth in subsection B hereto, any elected officer, candidate, committee or other person required to file specified statements, reports, or other documents with the city clerk as required by Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 84100) of Title 9 of the California Government Code, also known as the Political Reform Act, and that has received contributions or made expenditures of two thousand dollars or more, may electronically file such statement using the city’s online system according to procedures established by the city clerk. To ensure continuity, once a report or other document is filed electronically on behalf of any elected officer, candidate, or committee, all future statements, reports, and other documents filed on behalf of that officer, candidate or committee must be filed electronically.

B.     An elected officer, candidate, committee or other person may choose not to use the electronic filing system by filing all original statements, reports or other documents in paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

 

2.38.020 Paper filing not required after electronic filing.
Any elected officer, candidate, committee or other person who has electronically filed a statement, report, or other document using the city’s online system is not also required to file a copy of that document in a paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

 

2.38.030 Filing options when a copy must be filed with city clerk.
In any instance in which an original statement, report, or other document must be filed with the Secretary of State or other agency, and a copy of that document is required to be filed with the city clerk, the filer may electronically file a copy with the city clerk, or may file in a paper format. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

 

2.38.040 Paper filing when cannot file electronically.
If the city’s system is not capable of accepting a particular type of statement, report or other document, an elected officer, candidate, committee or other person shall file that document in paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

 

2.38.050 Internet posting of data.
The city’s system shall make all electronically filed data available on the Internet in an easily understood format that provides the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of charge and as soon as possible after receipt/deadline. The data made available on the Internet shall not contain the street name of the persons or entity representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or any bank account number required to be disclosed by the filer. The city clerk’s office shall make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement available to the Fair Political Practices Commission for Government Code Section 87200 filers. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

 

2.38.060 Records retention.
The city clerk’s office shall maintain records according to the city’s records retention schedule commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version of that record. (Ord. 1587 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 2.40 POLICE
2.40.010 Recruitment and training standards.
A.    Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4 of the Penal Code of the state, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such Chapter 1, shall adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training.

B.     Pursuant to Section 13525 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, Article 3 of the California Penal Code, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such Chapter 1 shall, in the training of its regularly employed and paid public safety dispatchers, adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training. (Ord. 831 § 1, 1989; prior code § 15-1)

 

2.40.020 Assisting fire department during fires.
It is the special duty of the police chief and other police officers who may be on duty and available for fire duty, to respond to all fire alarms and assist the fire department in the protection of life and property in regulating traffic, maintaining order and enforcing observance of all sections of this chapter. (Prior code § 9-40)

Chapter 2.44 EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.44.010 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, emergency means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. It shall not include nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy. (Prior code § 7-1)

 

2.44.020 Purposes of chapter.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Prior code § 7-2)

 

2.44.030 Local disaster council—Created—Members.
The city local disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

A.    The mayor, who shall be chair;

B.     The vice mayor, who shall be vice chair;

C.     The director of local disaster;

D.    The assistant director of local disaster;

E.     All chiefs of local disaster as are provided for in a current local disaster operations plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

F.     Such representatives of municipalities, civic, professional and industry organizations having an official responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Prior code § 7-3)

 

2.44.040 Local disaster council—Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty to the city local disaster council, and it is empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The local disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. (Prior code § 7-4)

 

2.44.050 Director of local disaster—Office created.
A.    There is created, the office of director of local disaster. The city manager shall be the director of local disaster.

B.     There is created the office of assistant director of local disaster who shall be appointed by the director with the consent of the city council. (Prior code § 7-5)

 

2.44.060 Director of local disaster—Power and duties.
A.    The director is empowered to:

1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. The city council shall review, at least every fourteen days until such local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency, and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant;

2.     Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are considered to be inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered:

a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency, including orders or regulations imposing a curfew within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve the public order and safety; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; such orders and regulations and amendments and rescissions thereof shall be in writing and shall be given widespread publicity and notice,

b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the city or the existence of the state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this city as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency service workers,

d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

e.     To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council and by any other lawful authority.

B.     The director of local disaster shall be succeeded by the assistant director of local disaster in event that the director is unavailable or unable to perform his or her duties during an emergency. In such order of succession the assistant director shall assume all powers and duties as conferred heretofore upon the director.

C.     The assistant director of local disaster shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of local disaster chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Prior code § 7-6)

 

2.44.070 Emergency organization composition.
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (A) (6) (c) of Section 2.44.060, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Prior code § 7-7)

 

2.44.080 Disaster operations plans.
The city local disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city local disaster operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 7-8)

 

2.44.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 7-9)

 

2.44.100 Prohibited acts.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during a state of war emergency, state of emergency or local emergency, to:

A.    Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof.

C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Amended during 2009 republication; prior code § 7-10)

Chapter 2.48 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Note
*       Prior code history: prior code §§ 13A-1—13A-3 and 13A-5—13A-19.

 

2.48.010 Adoption of personnel system.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system set out in this chapter is adopted. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.020 Personnel officer.
The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.48.180. The personnel officer shall:

A.    Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

B.     Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules. The city attorney shall approve the legality of such rules and amendments prior to their submission to the city council;

C.     Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

D.    Prepare or cause to be prepared a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council;

E.     Provide for the publishing or posting notices of test for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification to the appointing power of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.030 Competitive service.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city except:

A.    The city manager;

B.     Elective officers;

C.     Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

D.    All department heads: public works director, police chief, fire chief, community development director, finance director, city clerk, administrative services director, assistant city manager and parks and recreation director;

E.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or other services, volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters;

F.     City attorney;

G.    Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property;

H.    Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are employed less than half-time which is defined as employees who are expected to or do work less than one thousand forty hours in any one fiscal year. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.040 Personnel rules—Adoption and amendment.
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been publicly posted at least five days prior to city council consideration. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including:

A.    Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service;

B.     Preparation, revision and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

C.     Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of application for employment;

D.    Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

E.     Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional and emergency appointments;

F.     Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

I.      Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

J.      The establishment of adequate personnel records;

K.    The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.050 Appointments and promotions.
A.    Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluations of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. Physical and medical tests may be given as a part of any examination.

B.     In any examination the personnel officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.

C.     Minimum or maximum age limits for any competitive service under this chapter shall not be established and age shall not be a minimum qualification for any city employment in the classified service. Any person possessing all the minimum qualifications for the position is eligible to take any competitive service examination, regardless of age, personnel officers, or any appointing power shall not adopt any rule prohibiting the employment of any person, otherwise qualified, in any city employment solely because of age.

D.    Appointments shall be made by the city council, city manager, or by the officer in whom the power to make appointments is vested.

E.     When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive services, the personnel officer shall transmit to the appointing power the names of all persons on the appropriate certified employment list, in the order in which they appear on the list.

F.     In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional appointment may be made not to exceed six months by the appointing authority of a person meeting the minimum training and experience qualifications for the position. A provisional employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an employee, such vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.060 Absence resulting from compensable injury or disease.
The period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from his or her position by reason of any injury or disease for which he or she is entitled to receive compensation under the provisions of Division 4 of the State Labor Code is not a break in his or her continuous service for the purpose of his or her right to salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation or seniority. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.070 Probationary period.
A.    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected, with or without cause, at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

B.     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted if there is a vacancy unless he or she is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules.

C.     An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him/her, and if there is a vacancy, unless he or she is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. (Amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.080 Present employee status.
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.090 Demotions—Dismissals—Suspensions.
A.    Any appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay, or suspend without pay any permanent employee. Notice of such action must be in writing and served on such employee, such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor.

B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.100 Appeal.
A.    Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the city manager or their designee, any disciplinary action, interpretation or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder.

B.     All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.110 Abolition of positions.
A.    Whenever in the judgment of the city manager or city council it becomes necessary, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service. Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the abolishment of positions, shall not be subject to written charges nor shall they have the right of appeal in such cases.

B.     Seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel and the order of lay-off shall be in the reverse order of total cumulative time served in permanent and probationary status in the competitive service upon the effective date of the lay-off. Lay-off shall be made within classes of positions, and all provisional employees in the affected class or classes shall be laid off prior to the lay-off of any probationary or permanent employee.

C.     For the purpose of determining order of lay-off, total cumulative time shall include time served on military leave of absence.

D.    The names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists for classes which, in the opinion of the personnel officer require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities of those of the class of positions from which lay-off was made.

E.     Names of persons laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists in order of total cumulative time served in probationary and permanent status, and shall remain on such lists for a period of two years unless reemployed sooner. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.120 Improper political activity.
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.130 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for employment by the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the appointing authority shall consider the following factors:

1.     The classification, including its sensitivity, to which the person is applying or being certified and whether the classification is unrelated to the conviction;

2.     The nature and seriousness of the offense;

3.     The circumstances surrounding the conviction;

4.     The length of the time elapsed since the conviction;

5.     The age of the person at the time of the conviction;

6.     The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation;

7.     Contributing social or environmental conditions.

B.     The appointing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application for employment.

C.     An applicant who is disqualified for employment under this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with personnel officer within ten days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The determination of the personnel officer shall be final.

D.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a peace officer position shall be disqualified, without right of appeal, from employment if the applicant has been convicted of a felony.

E.     Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state of California, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling employment duties set forth in this section: city manager, assistant city manager, administrative services director, human resources manager, city attorney and police chief. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.140 Discrimination.
The city is committed to the goal of equal employment opportunities. It is the policy of the city to ensure that the application of these rules and the recruitment, employment, training, advancement, layoff, salary level, termination, and all other personnel actions for all positions, classes and individual employees are made on the basis of qualifications and performance without regard to race, religion, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, age, or sexual orientation, or any other basis prohibited by federal or state law. (Amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.150 Solicitation of contributions.
No officer or employee of the city shall, directly or indirectly, solicit any assessment, subscription or contribution; whether voluntary or involuntary, for any municipal political purpose whatever, from anyone on the eligible lists or holding any position in the classified service. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.160 Right to contract for special services.
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

B.     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

C.     The preparation of a plan of compensation, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

D.    The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

 

2.48.170 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be grounds for reprimand, suspension, demotion or dismissal. (Ord. 1348 § 1, 2007)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES OF COUNTY
Chapter 3.08 SALES AND USE TAXES
Chapter 3.09 GANG AND DRUG PREVENTION, 9-1-1 EMERGENCY AND PUBLIC SAFETY IMPROVEMENT TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.20 PARK ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FEES
Chapter 3.24 PURCHASING
Chapter 3.28 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 3.32 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.36 DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Chapter 3.38 DEVELOPMENT FEE DEFERRAL PROGRAM
Chapter 3.42 MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEE DEFERRAL PROGRAM

Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES OF COUNTY
3.04.010 Transfer of functions of city assessor and collector to county.
The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, are transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of this chapter, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1956. (Prior code § 19-1)

 

3.04.020 Offices of city assessor and tax collector abolished.
The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished as of the first day of July, 1956, and thereafter all duties performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of the city property, and all duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property that becomes a lien after the adoption of this chapter, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1956, are transferred and are to be performed by the city clerk. (Prior code § 19-2)

Chapter 3.08 SALES AND USE TAXES
3.08.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Prior code § 19-3)

 

3.08.020 Rate.
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be .95 percent to and including December 31, 1975, and at the rate of one percent thereafter. (Prior code § 19-4)

 

3.08.030 Operative date of chapter.
This chapter shall be operative on October 15, 1975. (Prior code § 19-5)

 

3.08.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:

A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 19-6)

 

3.08.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 19-7)

 

3.08.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city, at the rate stated in Section 3.08.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Prior code § 19-8)

 

3.08.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place in which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 19-9)

 

3.08.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate, stated in Section 3.08.020, of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 19-9.1)

 

3.08.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Divisions 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 19-9.2)

 

3.08.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Prior code § 19-9.3)

 

3.08.110 When seller’s permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Prior code § 19-9.4)

 

3.08.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Prior code § 19-9.5)

 

3.08.130 Additional exemptions.
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Prior code § 19-9.6)

 

3.08.140 Applicability.
A.    Section 3.08.130 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

B.     Section 3.08.120 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Prior code § 19-9.7)

 

3.08.150 Effect of amendments to state law.
        All subsequent amendments of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code which are not consistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. This chapter also shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Sections 7202 to 7203 inclusive, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. (Amended during 2009 republication; prior code § 19-9.8)

 

3.08.160 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Amended during 2009 republication; prior code § 19-9.9)

Chapter 3.09 GANG AND DRUG PREVENTION, 9-1-1 EMERGENCY AND PUBLIC SAFETY IMPROVEMENT TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.09.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Manteca Gang and Drug Prevention, 9-1-1 Emergency and Public Safety Improvement Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The city of Manteca hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.020 Operative date.
“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.030 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.91 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if two-thirds of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.050 Transactions tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such tax shall be in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by this code or applicable state law. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

3.09.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.070 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. Such tax shall be in addition to any other use tax imposed by this code or applicable state law. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A.    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1.     The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

2.     The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;

3.     In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a.     Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or

b.     Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4.     In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B.     The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1.     Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2.     Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a.     With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her or her principal place of residence; and

b.     With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3.     The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4.     A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5.     For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C.     There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1.     The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

2.     Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

3.     If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4.     If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance.

5.     For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6.     Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7.     “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property, the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.120 Amendments.
A.    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter unless any increase in the rate of this tax is first approved by two-thirds of the voters of the city of Manteca voting on such question.

B.     Pursuant to California Elections Code Section 9217 or any successor statute, the city council of the city of Manteca may amend or repeal this chapter and any of its exhibits, but not increase or extend the rate of tax imposed herein, without a vote of the people. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.140 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.150 Use of tax proceeds and expenditure plan.
All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a special fund or account designated for use by the city of Manteca only for the public safety services set forth in the Program Guidelines and Public Safety Expenditure Plan for the administration and expenditure of the tax proceeds, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “1” and incorporated by reference herein. The public safety expenditure plan may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the city council, so long as the funds are utilized for public safety, police and fire protection services. For the purposes of this part, “public safety services” means: (a) obtaining, furnishing, operating, and/or maintaining police protection equipment or apparatus, paying the salaries and benefits of police protection personnel, and such other police protection service expenses as are deemed necessary by the city council for the benefit of the residents of the city; (b) obtaining, furnishing, operating, and/or maintaining fire protection equipment or apparatus, paying the salaries and benefits of fire protection personnel, and such other fire protection service expenses, including capital expenses, as are deemed necessary by the city council for the benefit of the residents of the city. No revenues collected pursuant to the tax levied hereby may be spent on department administrators’ salaries, general fund operating expenses in effect at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, or projects not a part of the public safety measure police and fire expenditure plan. It is the intent of the people that revenues collected hereunder shall supplement, rather than supplant, existing city expenditures for public safety. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

 

3.09.160 Establishment of citizens’ oversight committee.
A.    Committee Established. There is hereby established in the city of Manteca a citizen’s oversight committee to monitor the expenditures of revenue collected pursuant to this chapter only and report to the people and the city council.

B.     Selection of Members. Members of the citizens’ oversight committee shall be appointed by the city council. The committee shall consist of five members. The citizens’ oversight committee members shall not be current city of Manteca employees, officials, contractors or vendors of the city. Past employees, officials or vendors shall be eligible to serve on the committee, provided that there are no conflicts of interest as determined by the city attorney.

Of the members of the committee first appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of two years and two for terms of three years. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years. No member may serve more than two consecutive three-year terms.

The city council shall solicit citizens’ oversight committee members through an open application process that is promoted through the city’s adopted recruiting process. Any Manteca resident is eligible to apply for committee membership, subject to the appointment categories specified above. All applications will be reviewed by the city council, which will have the authority to make all final decisions on committee representation, subject to these guidelines.

C.     Purpose and Jurisdiction. The citizens’ oversight committee shall review expenditures of revenue collected pursuant to this chapter only to determine whether such funds are expended for the purposes specified in the then-current public safety measure police and fire expenditure plan, and issuing reports on their findings to the city council and public at least annually. Committee members may also review the annual financial or performance audits performed by an independent auditor. The committee shall confine its oversight specifically to revenues generated under this chapter. Revenue generated through other sources shall be outside the jurisdiction of the public safety measure citizens’ oversight committee.

In order to preserve the integrity and independence of the oversight process, committee members will not play a formal role in contracting, project management, or any other aspect of the public safety measure funding.

The committee is not charged with decision-making on spending priorities, schedules, project details, funding source decisions (e.g., leveraged funds, developer fees, etc.), financing plans, or tax rate assumptions. The committee shall serve in an advisory-only role to the city council. The committee shall have no jurisdiction other than that delegated to it by the people pursuant to this chapter.

The city of Manteca city manager or designee shall provide any reasonable administrative or technical assistance required by the committee to fulfill its responsibilities or publicize its findings.

D.    Meetings. The citizens’ oversight committee shall meet semi-annually (or as otherwise provided for in approved or amended by-laws) with specific meeting dates to be determined by committee members. Citizens’ oversight committee meetings are subject to the Brown Act. Meetings must be noticed and open to the public. Committee minutes and reports are a matter of public record, and must be posted on a web site provided by the city. Additional meetings may be scheduled by the committee as necessary. All committee members shall attend a training and orientation session prior to the first regular committee meeting.

Committee members are expected to attend all regular meetings. Failure to attend two consecutive meetings may result in removal from the committee at the discretion of the city council.

E.     Committee Operations. The citizens’ oversight committee will select members to serve as chair and vice chair of the committee. A city staff person will be appointed by the city manager or designee to serve as secretary. The secretary will be responsible for preparing, posting and distributing agendas and taking minutes at each meeting. Approved minutes shall be made available to the public. Committee decisions, positions, findings and procedures shall require a simple majority vote of those members in attendance. The quorum requirement for any meeting shall be a minimum of three members.

F.     Vacancies. Committee members may be removed from the committee only by the city council for repeated absence (see Section D of this section), for malfeasance, for failing to meet the qualifications set forth in this section or for inability or unwillingness to fulfill the duties of a member. In the event of removal, resignation, or death, the city council shall appoint a person to fill the vacant seat.

G.    Miscellaneous. With the exception of those items specifically addressed in these guiding principles, the committee may draft and adopt its own standard procedures and by-laws by majority vote. All citizens’ oversight committee procedures and by-laws remain subject to review and approval by the city council. Citizens’ oversight committee reports and audits are subject to review and approval of the city council. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.12.010 Short title—Adoption authority.
This chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Manteca. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 19-24)

 

3.12.020 Imposition.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writ in by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any line or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of fifty-five cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Amended during 2009 republication; prior code § 19-25)

 

3.12.030 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issued any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 19-26)

 

3.12.040 Exemptions—Instruments to secure debts.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 27)

 

3.12.050 Exemptions—Public agencies when acquiring title.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United Stated or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Prior code § 28)

 

3.12.060 Exemptions—Plans of reorganization or adjustment.
A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

B.     Subdivisions 1 to 4, inclusive, of subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 19-29)

 

3.12.070 Exemptions—Deed taken in lieu of foreclosure.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit of declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. (Ord. 774 § 3, 1987; prior code § 1929.1)

 

3.12.080 Exemptions—Community property.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil code of California, or by a written agreement between the spouse, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. In order to qualify for the exemption provided by this section, this deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 774 § 3, 1987; prior code § 19-29.2)

 

3.12.090 Exemptions—Order of Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made certifies that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding company Act of 1935;

B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 19-30)

 

3.12.100 Exemptions—Partnerships.
A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 19-31)

 

3.12.110 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 19-32)

 

3.12.120 Refunds.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 19-33)

 

3.12.130 Operative date.
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is later. (Prior code § 19-34)

Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.16.010 Purpose and scope.
A.    In accordance with Ordinance No. 270 adopted by city council on September 26, 1966, Ordinance No. 323 adopted by city council on November 18, 1968, and Ordinance No. 863 adopted by city council on May 7, 1990, the city has historically imposed a nine percent transient occupancy tax (“TOT”) as a general tax, with TOT revenue allocated to the general fund to be expended for any proper municipal purpose.

B.     An additional transient occupancy general tax is imposed in the amount of three percent.

C.     The three percent tax is in addition to the nine percent tax, for a total effective tax in the amount of twelve percent. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and definitions shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B.     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

C.     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be in compliance with both.

D.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

E.     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

F.     “Tax administrator” means the director of finance.

G.    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of chapter may be considered. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.030 Imposition—Amount—Where payable.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with such installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.040 Persons exempt from tax.
A.    No tax shall be imposed upon:

1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

2.     Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

3.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

B.     No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.050 Collection—Advertising that payment of tax not required is prohibited.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.060 Transient occupancy registration certificate.
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from the tax administrator a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.     The address of the hotel;

C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    The following language:

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, not to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.070 Reports and remittances.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by the tax administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if deemed necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.080 Penalties for failure to remit tax when due.
A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty to ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

C.     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereof in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed  by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or a fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.090 Failure of operator to collect and report tax.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last-known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest  and penalties should not be so affixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.16.100. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.100 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last-known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.110 Records keeping.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable of the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.120 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator, that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.130 Action by city to collect taxes.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provision of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city, however, such operator may require the transient to pay the tax as additional rent. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

 

3.16.140 Violation—Penalty.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the city Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. O2018-22 § 1)

Chapter 3.20 PARK ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENT FEES
3.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the park acquisition and improvement fee ordinance for the city. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-35)

 

3.20.020 Purpose.
The council of the city declares that the fees required to be paid are assessed pursuant to the police powers of the city for the purpose of generating revenue for parks and recreation facilities, which will provide for the general public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. Increases in the development of dwelling units in the city, along with increases in population of the city, creates a need for the planning, acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities to serve the future increasing population of the city, and the means of providing additional revenues with which to finance such public facilities. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1118 § 1, 1999; prior code § 19-36)

 

3.20.030 Definitions.
Except where the context requires otherwise, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

A.    “Dwelling unit” means each single dwelling and each unit of an apartment, duplex or multiple-family structure designed as a separate habitation for one or more persons and mobile homes. For the purpose of establishing the amount of fee, mobile homes shall be considered two-bedroom dwelling units.

B.     “Person” means every person, firm or corporation constructing a dwelling unit itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-37)

 

3.20.040 Recreation land requirement.
It is found and determined:

A.    That the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five acres of land for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to park and recreation purposes;

B.     That such requirement will be satisfied in part by the joint use of schools, playfields and other community facilities and open spaces;

C.     That the remainder of the required acreage shall be supplied by the requirements of this chapter and the recreation program of the city;

D.    That the above standards are consistent with the recreation element of the general plan of the city. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-38)

 

3.20.050 Fee—Application.
The fees imposed by this chapter shall be applicable to every dwelling unit and mobile home space constructed in the city. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-39)

 

3.20.060 Fee—Amount.
Every person constructing any dwelling unit or mobile home space in the city, for which a park acquisition and improvement fee is required, shall pay to the city a fee in an amount that may be established and revised periodically by resolution of the city council. The fee to be paid for each lot shall be the amount of the fee in effect, pursuant to the resolution at the time that full payment is made to the city. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-40)

 

3.20.070 Fee—When payable—Refund.
A.    All required fees shall be paid on a unit by unit basis and shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a building permit for the construction of any dwelling unit or mobile home space; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event that such building permit is not approved or is not used for such construction. Until such time as the city takes over the inspection of mobile home parks from the state, fees in connection with mobile home spaces shall be due and payable as a condition of site plan approval of a mobile home park.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A, fees required by this chapter for a residential development shall be paid upon final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the required fee is not fully paid prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of any portion of the residential development encumbered thereby, the property owner, or lessee if the lessee’s interest appears of record, as a condition of issuance of the building permit, shall execute a “Development Fee Deferral Agreement and Notice of Lien with Power of Sale” to pay the fee or charge, or applicable portion thereof, within the time specified above. The contract shall be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fee. No certificate of occupancy for a dwelling unit within a residential development subject to this chapter will be issued unless and until the fees are paid in full.

C.     For purposes of this section, “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” shall be defined as those terms are defined in Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Ord. O2017-14 § 2; Ord. O2017-11 § 2; Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-41)

 

3.20.080 Neighborhood parks.
In all new subdivisions, developers are required to build and dedicate a neighborhood park that meets the required three acres per one thousand people per the adopted park acquisition and improvement fee update. The park must be constructed in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Standards and Specifications for Landscape Development and must include a minimum of one acre of park land that is not located in the floodplain. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-42)

 

3.20.090 Neighborhood park in-lieu fee.
If a development is determined to be too small to develop their own neighborhood park which meets the neighborhood park requirements as defined in the Standards and Specifications for Landscape Development, the developer may pay the established neighborhood park in-lieu fee rather than building and dedicating a park. The decision as to whether or not a development will be required to build and dedicate a neighborhood park or pay the neighborhood park in-lieu fee will be at the discretion of the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-43)

 

3.20.100 Parks acquisition and improvement funds established—Fees disposition.
There is established a parks acquisition and improvement fee fund and a neighborhood park in-lieu fee fund. All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in such funds and shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks and recreation facilities as outlined in the park acquisition and improvement fee update. (Ord. 1601 § 1, 2016; prior code § 19-44)

Chapter 3.24 PURCHASING
3.24.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Agency” and “using agency” mean any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit of the city government which derives its support wholly or in part from the city.

B.     “Emergency purchase” means an emergency purchase arising out of a situation in which the delay in procurement of material, equipment or service may jeopardize the life, health or safety of local citizens or city employees.

C.     “Lowest responsible bidder” means in addition to price, the lowest responsible bidder will be determined after the following factors have been considered:

1.     The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required;

2.     Whether the bidder has the facilities to perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;

3.     The bidders’ record of performance of previous contracts or services;

4.     The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;

5.     The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or service;

6.     The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, equipment or services to the particular use required;

7.     The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract;

8.     The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.

D.    “Open purchase order” means an open purchase order document placed with a vendor for a specified period of time which authorizes the delivery of specified merchandise or the rendering of certain services at a specified price.

E.     “Purchases” means purchases of supplies, equipment and personal property and includes leases or rentals as well as transactions by which the city acquires ownership.

F.     “Responsible bid” means an offer submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish supplies, equipment or services in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements including in the invitation for bids.

G.    “Responsible bidder” means a bidder who submits a responsible bid and who is not financially responsible but is possessed of the resources, judgment, skill, ability, capacity and integrity requisite and necessary to perform the contract according to its terms.

H.    “Services” means all services, including but not limited to the following: the repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned or operated property; and towel and cleaning services. Such term does not include services rendered by city officers or employees nor professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition.

I.      “Supplies and equipment” means all articles, things or personal property furnished to or used by any agency. (Prior code § 2-9)

 

3.24.020 Purchasing procedures manual.
All purchases of supplies, services and equipment by the city of Manteca shall be in compliance with the “Purchasing Procedures Manual” which has been approved and adopted by resolution of the city council. The city council from time to time, as it deems necessary, may amend the “Purchasing Procedures Manual” by further resolution. (Ord. 1056 § 2, 1997)

 

3.24.030 Informal bid procedures.
Public projects, as defined by the Act and in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. (Ord. O2019-03 § 1)

 

3.24.040 Contractors list.
The agency shall comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22034. (Ord. O2019-03 § 1)

 

3.24.050 Notice inviting informal bids.
Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be circulated using one or both of the following alternatives:

A.    Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed, faxed, or emailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 3.24.040.

 

B.     Notices inviting informal bids may be mailed to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids; provided, however:

1.     If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. (Ord. O2019-03 § 1)

 

3.24.060 Award of contracts.
The city manager or designee is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. O2019-14 § 1;  Ord. O2019-03 § 1)

 

3.24.090 Open purchase orders.
An open purchase order may be placed with a vendor for a specified length of time authorizing the purchase of materials or services.

A.    Placement. Open purchase orders shall be issued on a monthly basis, unless otherwise specified, with vendors who deal with the city on a regular basis. The open purchase order shall include a list of those employees authorized to make purchases on the city’s behalf.

B.     Spending Limit. Purchases on an open purchase order shall be limited to one hundred fifty dollars per day per department. This is intended to facilitate efficient operations in situations where personnel responsible for repair work frequently find it necessary to purchase material or services without the benefit of advance planning.

C.     Invoice-Receipts. The city employee authorized to make purchases on an open purchase order shall acquire an invoice or receipt for the materials purchased. It shall clearly list and describe the materials purchased, be dated and the price fully detailed. The employee shall sign the invoice or receipt and promptly deliver it to his or her department head. The department head shall indicate on the invoice or receipt the appropriate accounting clerk and initial and route it immediately to the finance department for further processing.

D.    Open Purchase Order Exceptions.

 

1.     The following items shall not be purchased on an open purchase order:

a.     Office furniture and equipment;

b.     Industrial grade chemicals;

c.     Tools, both power and hand types, regardless of cost;

d.     Materials with value in excess of one hundred dollars;

e.     Capital outlay and improvement items.

2.     Each department head shall be responsible for monitoring the volume of open purchase orders made so as not to exceed budgetary appropriations.

(Prior code § 2-18)

 

3.24.100 Inspection and testing of supplies and equipment.
The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered and contractual services performed, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical test of samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Prior code § 2-19)

 

3.24.110 Disposal of surplus supplies and equipment.
All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies and equipment. Such sales shall be made pursuant to Section 3.24.020. (Prior code § 2-19.1)

 

3.24.111 Sale to employees prohibited.
The purchasing officer of the city shall not sell any surplus supplies or equipment of the city to any employee of the city. This provision shall not apply to police canines that were purchased by the city. (Ord. 943, 1992; Ord. 1246 § 2, 2003)

 

3.24.112 Retired police canines.
Upon the retirement, from active service, of a police canine that was purchased by the city, and with the written approval of the police chief, the handler to which said canine is assigned may purchase the canine from the city for the sum of one dollar. In the event the handler does not want to purchase said canine or the purchase is not approved then in that event the police chief shall dispose of said canine. (Ord. 1246 § 4, 2003)

 

3.24.120 Joint power purchasing.
By contract approved by the city council, any act authorized or required by this chapter may be performed by another public entity required by law to purchase supplies and equipment through a public bidding process. (Ord. 904 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 3.28 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
3.28.010 Receipt and disposition—Police chief action.
The police chief shall make provision for receiving and safekeeping found property and money delivered to him or her or coming into his or her possession. (Prior code § 15-3)

 

3.28.020 Receipt and disposition—Notice to owner.
The police chief shall notify the owner of the property or money, if his or her identity is reasonably ascertainable, within thirty days that his or her department possesses the property and where it may be claimed. The notice shall also specify the cost, if any, of storage and care of the property, payment of which will be required of the owner at the time he or she claims the property or money. If the owner appears within ninety days after receipt of the property by the police department, proves ownership to the satisfaction of the police chief, pays all charges for storage and care of the property, the property shall be restored to him or her. If ownership is not proved to the satisfaction of the police chief he or she shall refuse to deliver such property or order the payment of such money until ordered to do so by an appropriate court. (Prior code § 15-4)

 

3.28.030 Receipt and disposition—Advertisement.
A.    If the reported value of the property is less than fifty dollars and no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the property within ninety days after receipt of the property by the police department, title shall vest in the finder, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property shall be sold at public auction.

B.     If the reported value of the property is fifty dollars or more and no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the property within ninety days, the police chief shall cause notice of the property found and its description once in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. If, after seven days following the publication, no owner appears and proves ownership, title shall vest in the finder provided:

1.     He or she pays to the city the cost of publication; and

2.     He or she is not an employee of any public agency and the property was found in the course of that employment (in which case the property shall be sold at public auction).

(Prior code § 15-5)

 

3.28.040 Receipt and disposition—Holding—Disposal.
Such property shall be stored in a safe place for a period of at least three months unless sooner claimed by the true owner, and shall then be deemed to be unclaimed property or unclaimed money, subject to disposal as provided in Sections 3.28.020 through 3.28.100. (Prior code § 15-6)

 

3.28.050 Receipt and disposition—Unclaimed money—Deposit.
All money so received by the police chief and not delivered to the true owner or the finder, during a three-month period, shall thereafter be deposited in the general fund. (Prior code § 15-7)

 

3.28.060 Receipt and disposition—Unclaimed property —Sale at auction.
Upon expiration of the initial three-month period, any property so received and not delivered to the true owner or finder shall be sold at auction to the highest bidder for cash. Notice of any such sale shall be given by the police chief at least five days before the time fixed for the public auction once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. (Prior code § 15-8)

 

3.28.070 Receipt and disposition—Proceeds of auction.
After such auction is completed the police chief shall deliver the proceeds of the auction, less any expense incurred, to the director of finance for deposit in the general fund. (Prior code § 15-9)

 

3.28.080 Receipt and disposition—Unsalable and unusable property.
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the police chief directs. (Prior code § 15-10)

 

3.28.090 Receipt and disposition—Extraordinary authority to sell.
Such property may be sold by public auction, in the manner and upon the notice of sale of personal property under execution, if:

A.    It is a thing which is commonly the subject of sale;

B.     The owner cannot, with reasonable diligence be found, or being found, refuses upon demand to pay the lawful charges provided in this chapter; and

C.     Either:

1.     The property is in danger of perishing, or of losing the greater part of its value; or

2.     The lawful charges provided in this chapter amount to two-thirds of its value.

(Prior code § 15-11)

 

3.28.100 Receipt and disposition—Provisions not applicable to certain property.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to property subject to confiscation under the laws of the state or of the United States of America and shall apply to property held as evidence only when the same is unclaimed by any persons and no other provisions of law are applicable concerning its disposition. (Prior code § 15-12)

Chapter 3.32 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.32.010 Fund created.
To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the State Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto, by Chapter 652, Statutes of 1965, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Prior code § 2-37)

 

3.32.020 Payments into fund.
Money received by the city from the state, under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the state for the acquisition of real property or interest therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund created by this chapter. (Prior code § 2-38)

 

3.32.030 Expenditures.
All money in the fund created by this chapter shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and subject to, all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 2-39)

Chapter 3.36 DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
3.36.010 Schedule.
 

Category

Government Building Facilities Fee

Nonresidential

(Per Sq. Ft.)

General Commercial

$ 1.38

Neighborhood Commercial

   1.38

Commercial Mixed-Use

   1.38

Heavy Industrial

   0.53

Light Industrial

   0.72

Business Park Industrial

   1.38

Business Professional

   1.81

 

The government buildings facilities fee will be updated annually based on the change of the Twenty-City U.S. Average Engineering News-Record Official Construction Cost Index, and developer shall pay those fees in place at time payment is due. The first year’s adjustment shall reflect the change in the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index from the effective date of the fee to January 1, 2008. In each subsequent year thereafter, the adjustment shall reflect the change in the Construction Cost Index from January one year to January the following year. In no event shall the fees be less than in any previous year. The government building facilities fee and the fire facility fee shall be charged at such time as is provided for in Government Code Section 66007.

 

Category

Major Equipment Purchase Fee

Commercial

(Per Sq. Ft.)

Retail stores

$ 0.10

Hotels, motels

   0.09

Markets

   0.11

Professional offices

   0.08

Restaurants

   0.12

Other commercial use (auto steam cleaners, car washes, mortuaries, and others)

   0.12

Institutions—This category includes hospitals, care homes, schools and churches

   0.07

Industrial—This category includes utility companies, such as PG&E, telephone companies, etc.

   0.07

(Memo dated 12/18/18; Staff email dated 1/7/15; staff email dated 1/2/14; staff email dated 12/12/12; staff email dated 12/15/11; staff email dated 1/12/11; amended during 5/08 supplement; Ord. 1331 § 1, 2006; Ord. 982 § 7, 1993; Ord. 793 § 2, 1988)

 

3.36.020 Disposition of revenue.
In conformance with California Government Code Section 53077, the finance director shall deposit all fees received as a result of this chapter with separate capital facilities accounts and expend all such fees collected solely for the purpose for which the fee was collected. (Ord. 793 § 3, 1988)

Chapter 3.38 DEVELOPMENT FEE DEFERRAL PROGRAM
3.38.010 Intent.
It is the intent of the city to facilitate qualified development projects that provide extraordinary economic benefits to the city or that provide substantial affordable housing to the city by adopting a program to defer the payment of certain development fees that would otherwise be due upon issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 1445 § 3, 2009)

 

3.38.020 Administrative guidelines.
The city council shall, by resolution or ordinance, adopt administrative guidelines for the deferred payment of one or more development fees that are levied in connection with the development of property. (Ord. 1445 § 3, 2009)

 

3.38.030 Deferral.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this municipal code, the payment of fees by a property owner, which fees are otherwise due upon issuance of a building permit, may be deferred in accordance with the administrative guidelines adopted pursuant to Section 3.38.020. (Ord. 1445 § 3, 2009)

 

3.38.040 Failure to make timely payments.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this municipal code, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building or other development unless all development fees levied on the building or development have been paid or a valid and binding agreement for the deferred payment of development fees is in effect, the city has reviewed the parties’ performance under the agreement and the city has determined that the property owner has complied with each term of the agreement and that there has been no uncured breach of any term of the agreement. (Ord. 1445 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 3.42 MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEE DEFERRAL PROGRAM
3.42.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of the city to provide for orderly, well-planned, and balanced growth consistent with the limits imposed by the city’s infrastructure and the city’s ability to assimilate new development, promote the development of affordable and market rate housing that matches the needs of the present and future work force, and facilitate multifamily development projects by adopting a program to defer the payment of certain fees that would otherwise be due upon issuance of a building permit. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.020 Establishment of fee deferral program.
A.    The city council hereby establishes the development fee deferral program for multifamily housing projects.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this municipal code, the payment of certain fees by a property owner, as set forth in Section 3.42.040, which fees are otherwise due upon issuance of a building permit, may be deferred in accordance with the process and requirements set forth in this chapter.

C.     The city manager is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this chapter, execute on behalf of the city agreements to secure the repayment of any deferred fees, and monitor the security and collection of fees consistent with the intent of this chapter. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.030 Eligible projects.
Multifamily housing projects are eligible for deferral of one or more development fees pursuant to this chapter if the city manager determines that, with the fee deferment, the project will be able to mitigate its own impacts and the project will produce additional multifamily housing supply within the city. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.040 Applicable fees.
An eligible multifamily housing project may have one or more of the following fees deferred as determined by the city manager:

 

A.    Fire facilities fee;

B.     Park acquisition and improvement fee;

C.     Neighborhood park in-lieu fee;

D.    Government building facilities fee;

E.     Major equipment purchase fee;

F.     Surface water capital fee;

G.    Sewer PFIP fee;

H.    Storm drainage PFIP fee;

I.      Transportation PFIP fee;

J.      Well water PFIP fee. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.050 Procedures for fee deferral program.
A.    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a multifamily housing project, the property owner of such project may submit an application for deferral of one or more of the development fees set forth in Section 3.42.040.

B.     The application must include a preliminary title report, legal description of the property on which the project is located, a brief description of the project, and any other relevant information requested by the city manager or designee necessary to review the deferral request. The administrative processing fee established in Section 3.42.070 shall be paid prior to or at the time an application is submitted to the city.

C.     Upon receipt of a complete application for a fee deferral, the city council shall have discretion to determine whether the project is eligible for deferral of development fees and, if so, which development fees should be deferred pursuant to Section 3.42.040.

D.    If the city council determines that a project is eligible for deferral of one or more development fees, the city manager shall cause to be prepared a development fee deferral agreement, an irrevocable standby letter of credit, and any other documents that the city council determines are necessary to defer development fees for the project. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.060 Fee deferral requirements and standards.
A.    Fee deferrals approved pursuant to this chapter shall be acknowledged by a development fee deferral agreement executed by the city manager and approved as to form by the city attorney.

B.     Property on which an eligible project will be developed shall be current on all property tax obligations and free and clear of all property tax liens. Satisfactory evidence of this requirement shall be submitted as part of the fee deferral application.

C.     Unless a fee deferral agreement is approved in accordance with this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for an eligible project until all development fees are timely paid. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.070 Administrative processing fees established.
A non-refundable administrative processing fee is hereby established in the amount of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars for each application to defer fees pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.080 Security.
Prior to, or at the time of application for a fee deferral, the property owner requesting a fee deferral shall provide adequate security for the payment of those development fees to be deferred. Such security shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall, at a minimum, consist of an irrevocable standby letter of credit naming the city as the beneficiary. The irrevocable standby letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the city manager and shall be a direct pay standby to the city with a term not to exceed the term set forth in the development fee deferral agreement. The irrevocable standby letter of credit may be for a shorter term; however, the applicant shall have an irrevocable standby letter of credit in place naming the city as beneficiary until all deferred fees are paid in full. The irrevocable standby letter of credit shall be in an amount sufficient to secure all deferred fees, plus interest equal to the one-year LIBOR at the time the development fee approval agreement is approved applied as simple interest for the term set forth in the development fee deferral agreement. The irrevocable standby letter of credit shall be due at the time the development fee deferral agreement is executed by the parties. Upon payment of all deferred fees in full, the city will release the irrevocable standby letter of credit. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.090 Payment of deferred fees as adjusted.
The unpaid balance of all deferred fees shall be due and payable in full on the date set forth in the development fee deferral agreement, but in no case shall such due date be later than twenty-four months from the final inspection of the project’s first dwelling unit for any phase of development. Deferred fees shall be paid at the rate or rates applicable at the time of building permit issuance. In addition, interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance of deferred fees at an annual rate equal to the one-year LIBOR in place at the time the development fee approval agreement is approved applied as simple interest for the term of the deferral beginning at the time the development fee approval agreement is approved. (Ord. O2017-4 § 1)

 

3.42.100 Expiration.
This chapter shall remain in effect until June 30, 2018, and thereafter shall be repealed a

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 PERMITS
Chapter 5.12 LICENSES FOR REVENUE ONLY
Chapter 5.16 LICENSES FOR REVENUE AND REGULATION
Chapter 5.20 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.24 CARD ROOMS
Chapter 5.28 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.30 CABLE TELEVISION
Chapter 5.32 FIRE SALES
Chapter 5.36 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS AND PROTECTION DOG OPERATORS
Chapter 5.40 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Chapter 5.44 TOWING
Chapter 5.48 FIREARMS SALES
Chapter 5.50 SMOKING IN VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Chapter 5.52 COMMERCIAL FILMING PERMITS
Chapter 5.56 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DANCES
Chapter 5.60 HOTELS, MOTELS, RESIDENTIAL HOTELS/MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

Application of Terms. The use of or reference of the title of any officer, or employee, or any office or ordinance, means such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city unless otherwise specifically designated.

“Business” means all professions, crafts, trades, occupations and callings of every kind and nature which are carried on for profit, or in which materials, commodities, goods, wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale to the public.

Gross Receipts. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, the gross receipts of the calendar year preceding the beginning of the annual license period and is defined as follows: The total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, commodities, goods, wares, merchandise or not, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses whatsoever; provided, that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not be included, and this chapter shall not be construed to impose any tax upon any business or transaction which the city is not authorized to license or tax under any law of the state or of the United States. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold and returned by the purchaser to the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale, shall be deducted for the purpose of determining the gross receipts under this chapter.

“Instrumentality” means every device other than a vehicle in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be carried, moved or conveyed, in connection with the operation of any business as that term is used in this chapter.

“License” means the certificate issued by the finance director after payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth. “License” and “license certificate” are used in this chapter synonymously and interchangeably and shall be so construed.

“Permit” means the right to operate, carry on, conduct or maintain the particular business for which a permit is required under this chapter which right shall be evidenced by a permit form issued by the city clerk after the same is authorized by the city council as provided in Chapter 5.08.

“Street-faire/special event” means an event, sponsored by an organization, consisting of not less than ten vendors offering for retail sale handmade items, textiles, ceramics, paintings, sculptures, agricultural produce, refreshments, prepared food, beverages and other such items which are commonly offered for sale at events of a similar nature. At any street-faire/special event the sponsoring organization may provide live entertainment.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1050 §§ 1, 2(part), 1996; Ord. 953 § 2(part), 1993; Ord. 892 § 1, 1990; prior code § 11-1)

 

5.04.020 Requirement.
There is imposed upon the business, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this title license fees in the amounts hereinafter prescribed, and it is unlawful for any person to commence, transact or carry on in the city any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation specified in this title and as defined in this title without first having paid the required license fee and having procured a license from the city so to do and without complying with all other applicable regulatory provisions of this code or ordinances now affecting or hereafter passed and adopted by the city council, and without obtaining the permit, certificate of compliance or other instrument required under the provisions of this title, and complying with all regulations covering such business contained in this title; and the carrying on of any business not specifically exempted by law without first having complied with the provisions of this title shall constitute a separate violation thereof for each and every day that such business is so carried on. (Prior code § 11-2)

 

5.04.030 Separate licenses for branch establishments.
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Prior code § 11-3)

 

5.04.031 Separate licenses for multiple businesses or stations at the same location.
A separate license shall be obtained by each person conducting a business when there are multiple businesses or there are multiple stations within one location. This section shall not apply to bona fide employees of a single business being operated at one location. (Ord. 1093 § 1, 1998)

 

5.04.040 Concessions—License required.
Except vendors participating in a farmer’s market or arts and crafts fair as defined in this chapter, every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under any provision of this chapter, shall be required to pay the license fee and obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to the appropriate provisions of this title, and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 953 § 2(part), 1983; prior code § 11-4)

 

5.04.050 Exemptions.
A.    Constitution or Statutes of the United States or of the State. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution of applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations of such fees as are prescribed in this chapter.

B.     Charitable Organizations. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee for any of the following:

1.     To conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity, from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation; however, any such institution or organization which conducts, manages or carries on any business, occupation or activity providing health care, hospitalization or other medical services shall not be exempt from the provisions of this chapter;

2.     To conduct any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture dealing with scientific, historical, political, literary, religious or other educational subjects within the city, wherein the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are appropriated to any service organization, church or school, or to any religious or benevolent purpose;

3.     To conduct any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any service club or religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such institution or organization from complying with the provisions of this or any other ordinance of the city requiring a permit from the city council or a certificate of compliance from any officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation specified in this title.

C.     Veteran’s Exemption.

1.     Subject to the provisions of Sections 5.16.010 through 5.16.020, every person honorably discharged from any of the armed forces of the United States and physically unable to earn his or her livelihood by manual labor, shall be permitted to hawk, peddle, and vend any materials, goods, wares or merchandise (the sale or offering for sale of which is not prohibited by any federal, state or local law), without payment of any license fee required under this chapter, providing that the applicant files with the finance director, as proof of his or her right to his or her exemption, the following:

a.     A certificate of honorable discharge from any of the armed forces of the United States, or a certified or exemplified copy thereof;

b.     A certificate of disability signed by any practicing physician or surgeon employed by the United States government, the county, the city or any physician or surgeon engaged in private practice in the city;

c.     Two copies of a photograph of the applicant taken within three years from the date of the application, one of which shall be attached to the license certificate if the same is issued, and the other to be retained by the finance director.

2.     Upon the presentation of the foregoing required proof and identification, the finance director shall issue a license certificate without fee, providing he or she is satisfied that applicant is entitled thereto under the provisions of this section.

3.     No license issued under this title shall be assigned or transferred, and no person, except the person named in the license certificate shall be permitted to carry on the business authorized thereunder.

4.     The exemption provided in this subsection is personal to the veteran exempted from the payment of a license fee and shall not apply to a distributing or other business conducted by such veteran in which others are employed or to any business other than house to house or place to place hawking, peddling, or vending materials, goods, wares, or merchandise or soliciting orders therefor by such veteran personally.

D.    Public Utilities. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of any license fee by any public utility which pays to the city a tax under a franchise or similar agreement.

E.     Claim for Exemption. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the finance director stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed.

F.     Licenses. The finance director shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under subsections B, C or D of this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter.

G.    Revocation. The finance director may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon reasonable cause to believe that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this title. The licensee may appeal the decision of the finance director pursuant to Section 5.04.250, Appeals. (Amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 924 § 1, 1991; Ord. 894 §§ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1990; prior code § 11-5)

 

5.04.060 Employees and certain vendors not required to have separate licenses.
A.    No license fee shall be required of any person engaged in any profession, business, calling, trade or occupation, covered by this chapter, as an employee, whether on salary, commission or other compensation basis.

B.     No license fee shall be required of any person due to participation as a vendor in a farmer’s market or arts and crafts fair as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 953 § 2(part), 1993; prior code § 11-6)

 

5.04.070 Issuance.
It shall be the duty of the finance director to prepare and issue a license to every person making proper application paying a license fee as prescribed by this chapter, and each license shall contain:

A.    The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

B.     The business licensed;

C.     The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

D.    The period of time covered by such license; and

E.     Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 892 § 7, 1990; prior code § 11-7)

 

5.04.080 Transfer of license—Change of location.
A.    No license issued pursuant to this code shall be transferable; provided, however, that where a license is issued not requiring a certificate of compliance from the police chief, authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application to the finance director and paying a fee of five dollars, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business has moved or is to be moved.

B.     Where a license is issued that requires a certificate of compliance from the police chief authorizing a person to transact and carry on business at a particular place, such license may, upon application by licensee to the finance director and pay a fee of five dollars, be amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other place to which the business is to be moved, provided that the applicant either declares in writing to the finance director under penalty of perjury that there are no changes in the information provided to the police chief form the time of obtaining the original certificate of compliance or obtains a new certificate of compliance as provided in subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of Section 5.16.020.

C.     Where a license is issued that requires a permit from the city council, authorizing a person to transact and carry on business at a particular place, such license may, upon application by the licensee to the finance director and paying a fee of five dollars, be amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other place to which the business is to be moved, provided that said applicant has provided to the finance director a certificate of compliance issued by the police chief pursuant to Section 5.08.060 of this title. (Ord. 928 § 1, 1991; Ord. 892 § 8, 1990; prior code § 11-8)

 

5.04.090 Duplicate licenses—Issuance fee.
A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued under this title which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the city clerk a duplicate license fee of five dollars. (Ord. 892 § 9, 1990; prior code § 11-9)

 

5.04.100 Posting and exhibiting licenses.
A.    Except as otherwise specifically provided, all licenses shall be kept and posted in the following manner:

1.     Subject to other provisions of this section, any licensee engaged in business in the city at a fixed place of business shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted.

2.     Any person engaged in business in the city, but not operated from a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued to him or her upon his or her person at all times while engaged in such business. All employees, agents, representatives of said business shall keep a copy of the business license on their person at any time they are transacting business.

3.     Every person driving, operating or having control of any vehicle or other means of instrumentality for which a license is required under the provisions of this chapter shall have the license issued for the particular vehicle, means or instrumentality firmly fixed thereto in a place readily accessible and so located on the vehicle, means or instrumentality that the same is plainly visible at all times.

B.     Applicants for all vehicular licenses shall, at the time of paying the license fee, file with the city clerk a statement showing the motor number, state license number and the type of each vehicle used in the business covered by such license.

C.     Except as otherwise in this title specifically provided, the provisions of this section relating to vehicular licenses shall not apply to vehicles or instrumentalities used by a licensee who has paid a license fee under any other provisions of this title for conducting a business in connection with which vehicles or instrumentalities are required for delivery service as an incident to the main business. (Ord. 1093 § 2, 1998; prior code § 11-10)

 

5.04.110 Destruction of delinquent and revoked licenses.
No license shall be exhibited or kept in a conspicuous place by any licensee when such license is delinquent or has been revoked. (Prior code § 11-11)

 

5.04.120 License fee—Payment.
A.    Except as otherwise in this chapter provided, license fees required under this chapter shall be due and payable in advance as follows:

1.     Annual license fees on the first day of July of each year;

2.     Semiannual license fees on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year;

3.     Quarterly license fees on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year;

4.     Monthly license fees on the first day of every month;

5.     Weekly license fees on Monday of each week.

B.     In the event a bond is required covering the operation of any business licensed under this title, no license shall be issued until such bond has been filed with the finance director.

C.     No proration of any license fees due under this chapter shall be made for any portion of the period for which a license fee is payable; except, that in the case of a first annual, semiannual or quarterly license, the license fee may be prorated for the balance of the license period, and in making such proportion a fractional part of a month shall be counted as a full month. Except in the case of a first annual, semiannual or quarterly license, the license fee to be paid for the period specified therefor shall be for the entire period or for any fractional part thereof and no license fees shall be prorated. (Ord. 892 § 10, 1990; prior code § 11-12)

 

5.04.140 License fee—Delinquencies and penalties.
A.    Delinquency Dates. All license fees required by this title shall be delinquent if not paid on or before the times hereinafter prescribed:

1.     Annual and semiannual license fees at five p.m. on the last day of the month when the same became due and payable;

2.     Quarterly and monthly license fees at five p.m. on the tenth day of the month when the same became due and payable;

3.     Weekly and daily license fees at the time the same become due and payable.

B.     Penalties. Whenever a license fee required by this chapter is not paid on or before the delinquency date, a penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be added, and an additional penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be added on the last day of each calendar month thereafter. Every penalty shall become a part of the license fee required by this chapter. In no event shall the penalty or penalties exceed the amount of the license fee due. This section shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of the penal provisions of this chapter and such provisions may be enforced at any time after the due date of the license. (Prior code § 11-14)

 

5.04.150 License fee—Gross receipts statement.
A.    In all cases where the amount of license fee to be paid by any person is not specifically stated in this title but the determination thereof is based upon the amount of gross receipts, sales or business transactions, or number of vehicles used, or id determined by any other method hereinafter set forth, such person shall, before obtaining a license, furnish to the finance director, for his or her guidance, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the finance director, sworn to before the finance director, his or her deputy or some other person authorized to administer oaths, showing the total amount of gross receipts, sales or business transactions or number of vehicles used for the year immediately preceding, or other facts upon which the finance director may determine the license fee under the provisions of this chapter as applied to the particular business involved; provided, that where the license fee is paid otherwise than annually, such statement need only be filed once during any calendar year at the time the first license is procured, and the license fee shall be determined by and be based upon such annual statement for the proportionate period for which the license fee is paid.

B.     All statements filed pursuant to the provisions of this section and Section 5.04.160 shall be confidential and there shall be no unwarranted disclosure or use of the information by any officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 892 § 12, 1990; prior code § 11-15)

 

5.04.160 License fee—Estimate for newly established businesses.
A.    Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued under this title or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of the license fee to be paid is based upon the amount of gross receipts, sales, or business transactions, or number of vehicles used, or is determined by any other method other than a fixed amount, such person shall furnish to the finance director for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the finance director, sworn to before the finance director, his or her deputy or some other person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to properly determine the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant.

B.     If the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant is based upon gross receipts, sales or business transactions, or number of vehicles used or is determined by any other method other than a fixed amount, he or she shall estimate the gross receipts, sales, business transactions or number of vehicles for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the finance director as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant; provided, that, the amount of the license fee so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the finance director with a sworn statement upon a form furnished by the finance director showing the gross receipts, sales, business transactions or number of vehicles used in such business during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license fees for other businesses, deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.

C.     The finance director shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business until such person shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license fee required in this title. (Ord. 892 § 13, 1990; prior code § 11-16)

 

5.04.170 License fee—Refunds.
Any license fee or portion thereof, or any penalty hereafter paid more than once, or illegally, erroneously or wrongfully paid or collected under this chapter or any ordinance of the city requiring the payment of a license fee, may be refunded; provided, that a claim therefor, duly verified by the person paying such fee or penalty, or his or her authorized representative, agent or attorney, shall have been filed with the finance director within six months after the day of payment of the amount sought to be refunded and approved by the finance director. Such claim shall include the name and address of the claimant, the amount and date of the payment sought to be refunded, and the reasons or grounds upon which the claim for refund is based, and shall be paid in the same manner as other approved claims and demands. (Ord. 892 § 14, 1990; prior code § 11-17)

 

5.04.180 Statements not to be conclusive.
A.    No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this title. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the finance director, his or her deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.

B.     All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes aforesaid. (Ord. 892 § 15, 1990; prior code § 11-18)

 

5.04.190 Failure to file statement—Procedure.
A.    If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the finance director he or she fails to file a corrected statement, the finance director may determine the amount of license fee due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain.

B.     In case such determination is made, the finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office of Manteca, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address. Such person may, within ten days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the finance director for a hearing on the amount of the license fee. If such application is made, or if application is not made within the time prescribed, the finance director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within thirty days before the city council. The finance director shall give at least ten days’ notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of assessment. The city council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of assessment. (Ord. 892 § 16, 1990; prior code § 11-19)

 

5.04.200 Finance director’s powers.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the finance director shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the city council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. (Ord. 892 § 17, 1990; prior code § 11-20)

 

5.04.210 Enforcement.
A.    It shall be the duty of the finance director and his or her qualified deputies, and they are directed, to enforce each of the provisions of this chapter, and the police chief shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this title as may from time to time be required by the finance director or the city council.

B.     The finance director, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him under this title, and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine all places of business in the city to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.

C.     The finance director and each and all of his or her assistants and deputies, and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed under this chapter and to demand that its license be exhibited. Any person having any such license theretofore issued in his or her possession or under his or her control who fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the finance director and each of his or her assistants, and deputies and all police officers to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of such provisions.

D.    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title the finance director may, with the prior consent of the city council, deputize a qualified accountant to examine the necessary books and records of any person doing business in the city for the purpose of determining the correctness of the statement filed with the finance director, or which the license fee for such business is based. Any failure on the part of any person licensed under this title to exhibit his or her books and records of the accountant so deputized shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as in this chapter provided. (Ord. 1093 § 5, 1998; Ord. 892 § 18, 1990; prior code § 11-21)

 

5.04.220 Administration.
The finance director with the approval of the city council may promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, which rules and regulations so promulgated and adopted shall be in writing and be filed in the office of the finance director and shall be open to public inspection. The violation of any of such rules or regulations so on file shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this code. (Ord. 892 § 19, 1990; prior code § 11-22)

 

5.04.230 State license required.
No license shall be issued covering any business, profession or operation for which a permit or license is required by the state unless the applicant shall exhibit such license or permit to the finance director. (Ord. 892 § 20, 1990; prior code § 11-23)

 

5.04.240 Unlawful business not authorized.
No license shall be issued under this chapter for an activity that is illegal or unlawful under local, state or federal law.

No license issued under this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. (Ord. 1404 § 1, 2008; prior code § 11-24)

 

5.04.250 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue any license under this title or any certificate of compliance pursuant to this title may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the city council. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the city council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office of Manteca, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address. (Prior code § 11-25)

 

5.04.260 Applicability to businesses not covered.
It is the intent and purpose of this title to license either for revenue or regulation, or both, as set forth in this title, all businesses, occupations, trades, callings or professions carried on within the city, other than those specifically excepted in this title, and if application for license is made for any business not specifically referred to in this title or not included in any of the provisions of this title fixing license fees, the finance director shall cause the applicant to file an application for permit and the same shall be referred to the city council for its consideration, and if the permit is granted, then the city council shall fix the license fees to be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 892 § 21, 1990; prior code § 11-26)

 

5.04.270 Acknowledgments.
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, any application for permit, license or any other instrument, is required to be acknowledged or verified before a person lawfully authorized to administer oaths, such acknowledgment or verification may be made before the finance director or his or her duly authorized deputy, and they are authorized and empowered to take such acknowledgments or verifications. (Ord. 892 § 22, 1990; prior code § 11-27)

 

5.04.280 License fee to be debt.
The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business covered in this title without having lawfully procured a license from the city so to do shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of license fees and penalties. (Prior code § 11-28)

 

5.04.290 Complaint filing—Notice of intent.
Prior to filing a complaint against any person for failure to pay business license fees under the provisions of this chapter, the finance director may, if he or she deems it advisable, serve on the person from whom such license fees are due, a notice of intention to file a complaint, in substantially the following form:

 

CITY OF MANTECA FINANCE DEPARTMENT

 

Notice of Intention to File Complaint

Re: Delinquent Business License

To ____________________ Phone _______________

________________________________________

Street Address

_________________________

City

Pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances of the City of Manteca, you are hereby notified that this Department will be required to file a complaint against you for failure to pay business license due the City unless you make such payment at the office of undersigned in the City Hall of Manteca, California within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of this notice.

Dated:

This _____ day of _______________, 20_____.

_________________________

Finance Director

 

(Ord. 892 § 23, 1990; prior code § 11-29)

 

5.04.300 Failure to pay license fee—Criminal and civil action.
The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license fee to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 11-30)

 

5.04.310 Failure to pay license fee—Prosecution.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the finance director from filing a complaint and prosecuting the offender for violation of the provisions thereof immediately after any license becomes delinquent, if, in his or her judgment, it appears that the filing thereof is justified under the facts of the case. (Ord. 892 § 24, 1990; prior code § 11-31)

 

5.04.320 Criminal conduct.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for the following city licenses or permits: taxi driver’s permit, private security officer’s permit, and card room license.

B.     The city licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the city licensing authority shall consider the following factors:

1.     The type of business license or permit for which the person is applying;

2.     The nature and seriousness of the offense;

3.     The circumstances surrounding the conviction;

4.     The length of time elapsed since the conviction;

5.     The age of the person at the time of the conviction;

6.     The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation;

7.     Contributing social or environmental conditions.

C.     The city licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.

D.    An applicant who is disqualified for a city business license or permit under this provision may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city council within ten days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety days after it is filed. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final.

E.     Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize state summary criminal history information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling licensing duties set forth in this section: city manager, assistant city manager, city attorney, and police chief. (Prior code § 11-31.1)

Chapter 5.08 PERMITS
5.08.010 Applicability of provisions.
Whenever, by the provisions of this title or any other ordinance of the city, a permit from the city council, the planning commission, the director of community development, fire chief or the police chief, is a prerequisite to the operation or maintenance of any business, establishment or place, or the engaging in or carrying on of any activity, such permit shall be procured in the manner and be subject to the provisions hereinafter in this title set forth, unless otherwise specifically provided. For purposes of this chapter the permit issuing authority shall be the city council, the planning commission, the director of community development, fire chief or the police chief depending on the applicants business and as required by Section 5.16.020 et seq. of this code. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-32)

 

5.08.020 Application—Information required.
Application for a permit shall be filed with the city clerk in duplicate, on forms provided by him or her, the original of which shall be duly verified before the city clerk or deputy city clerk or some other person lawfully authorized to administer oaths, and shall supply the following information and such other information as the city council, or any official to whom the application may be referred shall require, in connection with such application:

A.    A full identification of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly interested if the permit is granted;

B.     The residence and business address and the citizenship of applicant, including all members of any firm or partnership, or all officers and directors of any corporation applying;

C.     The location of the proposed business, place, thing, etc., for which the permit is requested, and the name of the owner and the present use of such premises;

D.    The exact nature of the proposed business, place, thing, etc., for which the permit is requested, and the name under which it is to be operated;

E.     The past experience of the applicant in the business to which the requested permit appertains; and the name, address, and past experience in such business of the person to be in charge thereof;

F.     Whether or not any permit has been revoked and, if so, the circumstances causing such revocation. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-33)

 

5.08.030 Application—Procedure—Investigation.
Immediately upon the filing of any properly executed application for a permit as provided in this title, the city clerk shall place the same in the permanent records of his or her office, refer one copy to the department head whose duty it is to inspect the types of business for which the permit is requested, and such department head shall make such investigation of the applicant and of the statements set forth in the application as he or she shall deem sufficient; he or she shall make a written report of such investigation, together with his or her recommendations relative to disposal of the application and file the same with the city clerk, who shall refer such report and recommendations together with a copy of the application to the city council, the planning commission, the director of community development, fire chief or the police chief as required by Section 5.16.020, for action at a hearing set by him or her for a day certain, not more than five days from the date of filing of the application. At such hearing any person interested shall be entitled to be heard and file objections, protests or recommendations relative to the subject matter. Such hearing may be continued over from time to time by the permit issuing authority as, in its opinion, circumstances require. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-34)

 

5.08.040 Application—Public hearing.
A.    The city clerk shall in every case of application for a permit, notify the applicant in writing of the time and place of such hearing required by Section 5.08.030, which notice shall be given at the time the application is filed, unless the applicant waives such notice in writing. The notice may be given the applicant by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Manteca, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his or her last known address.

B.     If, in the judgment of the permit issuing authority, a public notice of the hearing on any application for permit is advisable, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city. Such notice shall show the purpose or type of activity for which the permit is sought, the name and address of the applicant, and the time and place of the hearing upon his or her application.

C.     Whenever a public notice shall be required, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a sum of five dollars before such notice is given, which payment shall not be lieu of any license fee or other tax otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-35)

 

5.08.050 Application by permit issuing authority.
A.    The permit issuing authority shall deny application for any permit if it shall appear to its satisfaction that the applicant has not complied with the provisions of this title or any other ordinance of the city appertaining thereto; that the activity for which permit is sought is itself detrimental to the public health, morals, safety or general welfare, or that it is contrary to or conflicts with any state or federal law, or any ordinance of the city.

B.     For the protection of the public interest, the permit issuing authority, in granting such permits, may attach such conditions as, in its judgment, the public interests may require, and in the consideration of any application for permit the permit issuing authority or other official to certificates of compliance shall give attention to all pertinent facts which may affect the health, morals, safety and general welfare of the public, and shall exercise a reasonable and sound discretion, with reference to the subject matter.

C.     If the application is approved by the permitting body, the city clerk shall issue and deliver to the applicant a permit. If the application is denied the clerk shall give written notice, to the applicant, of denial within three calendar days of said denial. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-36)

 

5.08.060 Transfer of permit—Change of location.
No permit required under this title shall be transferable, nor shall it apply to any premises other than those originally specified in the application as the location of the thing permitted. Upon application to the finance director, a permit holder may obtain an amended permit showing a different location than that originally specified in the original permit application; provided, however, that said applicant has received a certificate of compliance from the police chief as provided in subdivisions (2) and (3) of Section 5.16.020 of this title. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; Ord. 928 § 1, 1991; prior code § 11-37)

 

5.08.070 Suspension—Hearing.
The right to operate any business or other activity for which a permit is required under any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city may be suspended forthwith if, in the judgment of the police chief, building official, or city council, such suspension is necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, morals, safety or general welfare; provided, that no such suspension shall continue for more than fifteen days unless an order to show cause why the permit should not be revoked shall be issued and hearing ordered thereon as provided in this chapter within the fifteen-day period, in which event such suspension may continue until the hearing has been held and the matter disposed of by order of the city council. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-38)

 

5.08.080 Revocation.
A.    Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the same body that approved the permit application for any reason for which the granting of such permit might lawfully be defined, or on any ground specifically set forth in this title or any other ordinance of the city, or which, in its judgment, is necessary for the protection of the public interest. Such revocation shall be made only upon a hearing held before the same body that approved the permit application after at least five days, notice to such permit holder stating the grounds of complaint against him or her and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing may be given to the permit holder by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post office or Manteca, California, postage prepaid addressed to the permit holder at his or her last known address.

B.     In the event of such revocation any license or other certificate issued in connection with the granting of such permit shall, by the holder thereof, be forthwith surrendered to the city clerk. Such hearing may, by the city council, be continued over from time to time, and its findings shall be final and conclusive on the matter involved. Such revocation of any permit shall be in addition to other penalties more specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003; prior code § 11-39)

 

5.08.090 Appeal.
Any action by the planning commission, the director of community development, fire chief or the police chief under this chapter may be appealed to the city council. The city clerk shall publish notice of any decision granting the permit in the Manteca Bulletin no later than five days after it was granted. Any decision granting or denying the permit required by this chapter may be appealed to the city council by any person. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of permit approval, and must be accompanied by the filing fee established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. The appeal shall be heard at a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 2003)

Chapter 5.12 LICENSES FOR REVENUE ONLY
5.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Arts and crafts” means the service rendered individually for compensation by artisans (artists), brick-layers, brickmasons, carpenters, dress makers, electricians, engravers, gardeners, sign painters, mechanics, metalworkers, painters, plumbers, printers, sculptors, tailors, woodworkers, etc.

“Billboard advertising, etc.” means all places of business the principal function of which is the advertising of any service, event, commodities, materials, goods, wares or merchandise by means of billboards, illuminated signs, banners, posters or statuary, and carrying on any advertising business by any process or method similar, kindred or related to those enumerated in this chapter.

“Building, contracting and subcontracting” means the business carried on as a contractor by any person engaged in building, lathing, acoustical installation, plastering, paving, cement and concrete work, painting, decorating, paperhanging, metal work, heating and ventilating, house and building moving and wrecking, electrical work, plumbing, structural work, well drilling, pest control, awning work, burglar alarm installations, windows decorations, etc.

“Commercial vehicles” means the business carried on by any person engaged in the delivering, selling or offering for sale by means of any motor-driven or horse-drawn vehicle, any materials, commodities, edibles, goods, wares or merchandise, including any similar, kindred or related vehicular operations and for which a license fee is not specifically required under any other section of this chapter.

“Drug, food and refreshment establishments” means all places of business, the principal function of which is the sale of drugs, food, soft drinks, confections and all other substances usually and ordinarily sold and disposed of at drugstores, cafes, restaurants, boardinghouses, soft drink establishments, soda fountains, bakeries, fruit and vegetable markets, butcher shops, fish and fowl markets, dairy and farm product stores and food storage establishments and shall include the business of selling or offering for sale any or all products, goods, wares or merchandise similar, kindred or related to those sold or offered for sale in business stores specified in this subsection and for which a license fee is not specifically required under any other section of this chapter.

“Dwelling unit” means any structure, or portion thereof, designed for human occupancy as a discrete place of abode which has one or more rooms, with or without kitchen facilities. However, “dwelling unit” does not include a hotel room constructed in a nonresidential zone.

“Gasoline filling stations” means all places of business the principal function of which is to sell or offer for sale gasoline or any oil or by-products of petroleum or other like product or in which is maintained tire repair and automobile repair service.

“Hand laundry” means all places of business the principal function of which is the laundering by hand of any garment, household linen, fabric or other material or article commonly and ordinarily accepted for laundry service.

“Hand laundry collection agency” means every person engaged in the business of collecting or delivering any garment, household linen, fabric or other material or article commonly and ordinarily accepted for laundry service, by a hand laundry.

“Hotels,” “motels,” “apartments,” “rooming houses” and “auto courts” means all places of business, the principal function of which is to provide guest rooms, shelter or space at a fixed rental for the accommodation of the public and consisting of at least five rental units.

“Laundry collection agency” means every person engaged in the business of collecting or delivering any garment, household linen, fabric and other material or article commonly and ordinarily accepted for laundry service, by any laundry establishment other than a hand laundry.

Laundry, Power-Driven. “Power-driven laundry” means all places of business, the principal function of which is the laundering by steam or other power-driven machinery of any garment, household linen, fabric or other material or article commonly and ordinarily accepted for laundry service.

“Machine, woodwork and repair shops” means all places of business the principal function of which is to render, offer for sale, or sell to the public for compensation work or services relating to the construction or repair of the machine or mechanical device, facility or equipment.

“Manufacturing” means all places of business the principal function of which is the manufacturing, making or developing of any machines, device, article, thing, commodity, goods, wares, merchandise, product, equipment, material or substance for sale or distribution to the public, either at wholesale or retail.

“Nurseries and private schools” means all places of business the principal function of which is to conduct any nursery or private school as that term is ordinarily and commonly used and understood, other than parochial schools, including any place, school or institution operated for profit wherein facilities and accommodations are offered to the public for compensation in connection with the care, instruction, and education of children, or for the teaching of any subject, art, science, practice, trade, craft or profession.

“Oil storage tank stations” means all places of business the principal function of which is maintaining tankage facilities for the storage of petroleum, petroleum products, compound or any hydrocarbon substance, including wholesale distributors of such petroleum, petroleum products or compound or hydrocarbon substances.

“Personal services” means any personal service, as that term is ordinarily and commonly used and understood, rendered by any person offering to the public personal services for compensation, and not specifically covered under any other section of this chapter, including but not limited to barbers, beauticians, cosmeticians (manicurists, hairdressers, etc.), bootblacks, checkroom operators and any person engaged in rendering any service to the person, or personal services similar, kindred or related to any of those enumerated in this subsection, and for which a license fee is not specifically required under any other section of this chapter.

“Printing and publishing” means any person engaged in carrying on the business of job printing or producing or publishing any newspaper, magazine or other printed publication for public dissemination.

“Professional services” means any professional service as that term is ordinarily and commonly used and understood, wherein individuals are engaged in the business of offering to the public professional or semiprofessional services for compensation, and not specifically covered under any other section of this chapter, including but not limited to the services rendered by any person engaged in the practice or profession of law; medicine; surgery; dentistry; optometry; chiropractic; osteopathy; chiropody; veterinary; real estate agent; real estate broker; insurance agent; insurance broker; stock and bond agent or broker; telephone message service; civil, mechanical, electrical, industrial or other class of engineer; architect; draftsman; designer; landscape artist; accountant; income tax consultant; teacher of dancing, music, elocution, dramatic art; all teachers of the arts and sciences; and similar enterprises or occupations.

“Public garages” means all places of business the principal function of which is the operation of any shop or place wherein is offered to the public for compensation, work or service for the repair, construction, reconstruction, building or assembling of any motor, motor vehicle accessories, or the storing, washing, lubricating or rendering of any other work or service to any motor vehicle, commonly and ordinarily carried on in a public garage.

“Residential construction” means the business of constructing new dwelling units in the city, whether performed or accomplished in whole or in part by employees, contractors, subcontractors or others, and whether for sale, rental, lease or other purposes.

“Retailing” means the business of offering for sale or selling to the public at retail any materials, commodities, goods, wares or merchandise.

“Street-faire/special event” means an event, sponsored by an organization, consisting of not less than ten vendors offering for retail sale handmade items, textiles, ceramics, paintings, sculptures, agricultural produce, refreshments, prepared food, beverages and other such items which are commonly offered for sale at events of a similar nature. At any street-faire/special event the sponsoring organization may provide live entertainment.

“Trucking and transportation” means the business carried on by any person engaged in trucking or transportation by vehicle, for hire or compensation, baggage, express, freight, household goods, building or other materials, rubbish, goods, wares or merchandise, etc.

“Wholesale and jobbing” means the business of offering for sale or selling at wholesale or as a jobber any materials, commodities, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 1050 §§ 1, 2(part), 1996; Ord. 998 § 3, 1994; Ord. 953 § 2(part), 1993; prior code § 11-40)

 

5.12.020 Applicability of provisions.
The operations for which license fees are required under this chapter are more particularly defined as hereinafter set forth, and such license fees for revenue only shall be applicable to all of such businesses, operations, trades, arts, crafts and professions so defined and all other businesses related or similar thereto conducted for compensation or profit and for which a license is not specifically required under any other chapter or section of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-41)

 

5.12.030 Fees.
Every person managing, transacting, conducting or carrying on in the city any business, calling or operation, or rendering any of the services in this chapter set forth and defined in this chapter, shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following schedule, which fees are intended to and shall be collected for the purpose only of raising revenue for the city and not for the purpose of regulation.

A.    Miscellaneous Business, Trades, Occupations and Professions. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting in the city any business, trade, calling or operation other than those enumerated in subsections B to N, inclusive, of this section or in Sections 5.16.010 and 5.16.020 shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the carrying on, operation or conduct of such business, trade, calling or operation in accordance with the following scale:

If the annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

149,999.00

150.00

150,000.00

249,999.00

250.00

250,000.00 and over

 

313.00

 

B.     Professional Services, Personal Service and Arts and Crafts. Every person transacting, carrying on or engaged in the occupation or the business of furnishing professional services, personal services, arts and crafts, and laundry collection agencies, shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such a business or occupation in accordance with the following scale:

If annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 999.00

$ 15.00

1,000.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

9,999.00

63.00

10,000.00

19,999.00

94.00

20,000.00

29,999.00

125.00

30,000.00

39,999.00

163.00

40,000.00

49,999.00

200.00

50,000.00 and over

 

250.00

 

C.     Retailing, Printing and Publishing, Trucking and Transportation. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting a retail business, printing and publishing, drug business, food or refreshment establishment, nursery, private school, machine, woodwork or repair shop, public garage, gasoline filling station, laundry or trucking or transportation business unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter, shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such business in accordance with the following scale:

If annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

 

D.    Livestock and Poultry Feed. Every person carrying on, transacting or conducting the business of selling feed for livestock or poultry at retail shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts realized from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such business in accordance with the following scale:

If annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

 

E.     Wholesaling and Jobbing. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting a wholesale or jobbing business shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such business in accordance with the following scale:

If annual gross receipts are:

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

 

F.     Contractors. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting the business, trade or calling of general building contractor or plumbing, electrical or roofing contractor, or other specialty contractor in the city, shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such business in accordance with the following scale:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

9,999.00

45.00

10,000.00

49,999.00

63.00

50,000.00

99,999.00

94.00

100,000.00

149,999.00

156.00

150,000.00

199,999.00

219.00

200,000.00

249,999.00

281.00

250,000.00

299,999.00

344.00

300,000.00

349,999.00

406.00

350,000.00

399,999.00

469.00

400,000.00

449,999.00

531.00

450,000.00

499,999.00

594.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

688.00

600,000.00

699,999.00

813.00

700,000.00

799,999.00

938.00

800,000.00

899,999.00

1,063.00

900,000.00

999,999.00

1,188.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

1,250.00

 

G.    Manufacturing. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting business of manufacturing shall pay an annual license fee based upon the gross receipts resulting from the operation, carrying on or conducting of such business in accordance with the following scale:

If annual gross receipts are:

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

 

If any person transacting, carrying on or conducting the business of manufacturing shall also engage in retailing business, whether selling products manufactured by him or her or not, he or she shall also be required to obtain a license and pay the tax specified for such retail business in addition to the license specified herein provided that any person engaged in the business of manufacturing shall not be required to obtain a license in addition to his or her manufacturing license to engage in the wholesale or jobbing business with respect to products manufactured by him or her. In the event a manufacturer has obtained a license as a retailer for the purpose of retailing products manufactured by him or her, he or she shall be entitled to deduct from the gross receipts as a manufacturer the amount of gross receipts realized by him or her from the retail sale of the products manufactured by him or her.

H.    Commercial Vehicles. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting the business of trading in, selling or offering for sale any materials, commodities, edibles, goods, wares or merchandise by means of any vehicle or operating a delivery service for the delivery thereof by means of any vehicle shall pay an annual license fee as follows:

 

 

Per Year

1. For every vehicle used in serving residents or places of business within the city, by:

 

a. Person maintaining a fixed place of business outside the city or operating from outside city.

$   63.00

b. Person maintaining a fixed place of business within the city or operating from within the city.

45.00

2. For every mobile grocery store, operating within the city.

750.00

3. For every mobile lunch-wagon used in selling or delivering boxed lunches, confections, refreshments, cigarettes, tobaccos, etc., or offering lunch-counter service, operating within the city.

188.00

4. For every vehicle used in selling, delivering, or offering for sale to residents, vegetables, fruits and similar commodities, operating within the city.

188.00

 

No fee shall be required for any vehicle used for miscellaneous and irregular delivery service by any person carrying on any business located within the city for which a license fee is paid under any other provision of this chapter providing that this exemption shall not apply to any such business operating any vehicular order-and-sale or delivery service over fixed or regular routes.

I.      Trucking and Transportation Maintained by Person Maintaining Fixed Place of Business Outside of City. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting a trucking or transportation business from outside of the city shall pay an annual license fee in the amount of sixty-three dollars for every vehicle used in such business inside the city.

J.      Vending Machines, Hotels, Etc. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting in the city any of the following businesses, trades or operations or rendering any of the following services shall pay a license fee as follows:

1.     Vending machines vending merchandise other than cigarettes where gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

 

2.     Cigarette vending machines where gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

 

3.     Hotels, motels, apartments and roominghouses and auto courts: gross receipts of five thousand dollars or less, thirty-eight dollars per year; plus seventy-five cents for each additional one thousand dollars of gross receipts up to one hundred thousand dollars; plus twenty-five cents for each additional one thousand dollars of gross receipts thereafter;

4.     Christmas trees, decorations, and miscellaneous Christmas merchandise other than in connection with another business license under this chapter: fifty dollars per year;

5.     Oil storage tank stations: one hundred twenty-five dollars per year;

6.     Advertising billboards, illuminated signs, wall signs, etc.: one hundred fifty dollars per year.

K.    Food Processing. Every person transacting, carrying on or conducting in the city any of the following businesses, trades or operations shall pay an annual license fee as follows:

 

 

Per Year

1. Canning, processing or preparing green or dried fruits or vegetables or other food products for shipment or for sale on commission or otherwise.

$300.00

2. Creamery, milk or cheese processing or manufacturing plant which makes no retail sales.

300.00

3. Packing or preparing for shipment fresh fruit or vegetables where no processing other than washing or trimming is involved.

75.00

 

L.     Trading Stamps. The primary business of selling or redeeming any stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices to be issued to purchaser of goods, wares or merchandise, which stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices shall entitle such purchaser receiving the same to procure from the person issuing the same or any other persons, any goods, wares or merchandise free of charge upon the presentation of one or a number of such stamps, coupons, tickets, cards or other devices shall pay a license tax of one hundred twenty-five dollars per year or fractional part thereof.

M.    Street-Fairs/Special Events.

1.     Every organization sponsoring a street-faire/special event shall obtain a business license for the event and pay the fee set forth in subsection (M)(3) of this section.

2.     The sponsoring organization shall provide the city finance department with a list of all participating vendors with each vendor’s state resale license number. Said list shall be provided at least twenty-four hours prior to any scheduled event.

3.     The fee for this event shall be five dollars per vendor. The sponsoring organization may request the city council to waive this fee in whole or in part if the city council finds a waiver or partial waiver of the stated fee for this event is “in the best interest of the city.”

4.     Street-fairs/special events shall only be a permitted use in those areas zoned commercial, industrial, or park.

5.     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to sell, vend or give away any product or engage in any commercial activity for which a business license is required in the area and at the times set forth in the permit issued pursuant to this code unless said person has obtained the prior express written permission of the sponsoring organization. This section shall not apply to any business operating from a fixed location in the area covered by the permit issued for this event.

N.    Residential Construction. In addition to the license fee assessed under subsection C of this section to persons engaged in the business or trade of general contractor, any person engaged in the business of residential construction shall pay a license tax of nine hundred dollars per dwelling unit for dwelling units constructed in very low density or low density residential zones and six hundred twenty-five dollars per dwelling unit for dwelling units constructed in medium density or high density residential zones. If a dwelling unit is constructed in any other zone than those set forth in this subsection, then the license tax shall be as set forth in this section and shall be determined by whether the actual density of the development would be considered to be “very low,” “low,” “medium,” or “high” as those terms are used in the city’s zoning ordinances.

1.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, for each dwelling unit constructed, the license tax required by this subsection shall be collected prior to the final inspection of that dwelling unit by the city and prior to the city’s release to the appropriate utility company of any natural gas connection for that dwelling unit. No estimate of the residential construction business license tax shall be required to be paid before engaging in the business of residential construction.

2.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no person shall be required to obtain a license to engage in the business of residential construction prior to the time that the residential construction business license tax is collected pursuant to subsection (N)(1) of this section. Nor shall any person be required to post or display a license or permit to engage in the business of residential construction. Nothing in this subsection shall exempt a person from any requirement to obtain, post or display a business license or permit as a prerequisite to engaging in the business or trade of general contractor.

(Ord. O2017-18 § 1; Ord. 1122 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1093 §§ 3, 4, 1998; Ord. 1050 § 3, 1996; Ord. 998 §§ 2, 5, 1994; Ord. 953 § 2, 1993; Ord. 893 § 1, 1990; prior code § 11-42)

 

5.12.040 Fee cap.
Except with regard to business license taxes for residential construction assessed pursuant to subsection N of Section 5.12.030, notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, no business enterprise shall be assessed a business license tax in excess of nine thousand five hundred dollars. (Ord. 998 §4, 1994; Ord. 893 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 5.16 LICENSES FOR REVENUE AND REGULATION
5.16.010 Definitions.
A.    The businesses referred to and for which a license is required in this chapter shall be and the same are defined as set forth in this section and shall mean and include all the businesses and operations so defined and any business or operation conducted for profit or compensation similar, kindred or related to those specifically included in such definitions and for which a business license fee is not specifically required under any other section of this title.

B.     The operations for which license fees are required under this chapter are more particularly defined as follows:

1.     Amusement, Music Boxes and Mechanical Devices, Including Remote Control Machines. Any person engaged in the business of maintaining any amusement machine, apparatus or device designed or constructed for the purpose of producing or reproducing or playing any musical tone or tones or combination of tones, or any similar instrument, recording device, music box, juke box, motion picture or photograph machine, or any other mechanical device displaying pictures or emitting music or furnishing entertainment for the amusement of the public maintained for entertainment and amusement purposes only and not contrary to any state law, the provisions of this code, or city ordinance, and requiring for its operation the insertion of any coin, plate, disk, token, key, or the payment of any fee therefor.

2.     “Auctioneers” means any person not having a fixed place of business in the city engaged in selling at auction any real estate, goods, wares, materials or merchandise or any similar, kindred or related things, for which a license fee is not specifically required under any section of this chapter, providing that no additional fee shall be required of any person otherwise licensed to do business in the city personally carrying on any auction sale in the regular course of his or her business.

3.     “Canvassers,” “solicitors” and “peddlers” means any person not operating from or connected with a fixed place of business paying a license fee in the city and engaged in the business of going from house to house or place to place or along the public streets or public places of the city soliciting business of any kind or character, including selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for materials, photographs, commodities, goods, wares, demonstrators or merchandise or other things of value for future delivery or for services to be performed immediately or in the future.

4.     “Handbill distributors” means any person engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers maintaining a fixed place of business in the city and which newspapers pay a license fee under any other provision of this title and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills; provided, that no license fee shall be charged for the distribution of any noncommercial handbill, the principal purpose of which is to disseminate information relating to any political, economic, religious, philosophical, sociological or related subjects and not connected with any commercial enterprise.

5.     “Itinerant street vendors” means any person not having a regularly established place of business for the conducting of which a license is required pursuant to other provisions of this title, and engaged in the business of vending, selling, or offering for sale, any confections, food, fruits, vegetables, flowers, notions, magazines, mechanical devices or appliances or any other goods, wares or merchandise from any stand or doorway located adjacent to any street, alley or other public place or adjacent to any enclosed vacant lot or parcel of land. It does not include vendors participating in a licensed farmer’s market or arts and crafts fair as defined in Section 5.04.010 of this title.

6.     “Public card room” means any person conducting, managing or carrying on any public card room where games of any kind are played with cards, exempting, however, all fraternal organizations and labor unions.

7.     “Transient house-to-house personal and miscellaneous services” means any personal service as the same is ordinarily and commonly used and understood, wherein individuals, either by appointment or call or otherwise, go from house to house or place to place rendering personal or other service for compensation and shall include services rendered by barbers, beauticians, cosmeticians, manicurists, hairdressers, etc., tool or cutlery grinders, dressmakers, tailors, cobblers and any person engaged in rendering any service to the person or personal or miscellaneous services similar, kindred or related to any of those enumerated in this section not prohibited by law and for which a license fee is not specifically required under any other section of this chapter; provided, that any person maintaining a fixed place of business in the city for rendering personal services and paying a license fee therefor shall not be required to pay any further license fee under the provisions of this chapter.

8.     “Vehicular street advertising” means the business of advertising commercial enterprises of any character or for any purpose, carried on by means of any vehicle traversing the public streets.

C.     The businesses, occupations, trades and callings referred to and for which a license is required under subsection B of Section 5.16.020 shall cover all operations and activities named under the group and ordinarily included in the usual and ordinary meaning of the terms used in this chapter.

It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to initiate any of the activities set forth in subsection (B)(3) above in any R-zoned districts between the hours of eight p.m. and ten a.m. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2004; Ord. 953 § 2, 1993; prior code § 11-43)

 

5.16.020 Schedule of fees.
Any person managing, conducting or carrying on in the city any business, calling or operation, or rendering any of the services set forth in this chapter and as defined in Section 5.12.010, and maintaining a fixed place of business therein, shall pay the license fee set opposite the name of such business, calling or operation in accordance with the schedules set forth in the following subsections of this section, which fees are intended to and shall be collected for the purpose of raising revenue for the city and for the purpose of regulating such business, calling or operation for the protection of the public health, morals, safety and general welfare.

A.    Requiring Certificate of Compliance from Police Chief.

1.     a.     Canvassers, solicitors and peddlers, three hundred dollars per year, or, at the option of the
        licensee, thirteen dollars per day for each person so engaged;

b.     Itinerant street vendors, handbills distributors, three hundred seventy-five dollars per year, or, at the option of the licensee, sixteen dollars per day for each person so engaged;

c.     Vehicular street advertising, four hundred fifty dollars per year, or, at the option of the licensee, twenty-five dollars per day;

d.     Klieg lights, one hundred fifty dollars per year or thirteen dollars per day;

e.     Transient house-to-house personal and miscellaneous services, three hundred dollars per year, or, at the option of the licensee, thirteen dollars per day for each person so engaged;

f.      Amusement-music boxes and mechanical devices, including remote control machines operated from a central station; machines or games for skill or amusement that require or involve the deposit or payment of a slug or coin and any vending machines; vending machines or games operated mechanically or otherwise in which slugs or coins are deposited and in addition to vending or discharging merchandise make any display other than the merchandise offered for sale or which emit anything whether of value or not in addition to merchandise, if the annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

   500.00

   4,999.00

   30.00

   5,000.00

   14,999.00

   45.00

   15,000.00

   29,999.00

   55.00

   30,000.00

   44,999.00

   63.00

   45,000.00

   99,999.00

   100.00

   100,000.00

   199,999.00

   150.00

   200,000.00

   399,999.00

   200.00

   400,000.00

   799,999.00

   250.00

   800,000.00 and over

 

   313.00

 

2.     No license shall be issued covering any of the businesses, trades, callings or occupations included in this subsection until the applicant has furnished the police chief a sufficient statement setting forth the following, and the police chief has issued and delivered to the city clerk a certificate of compliance with the provisions of this section:

a.     Name and address of applicant;

b.     Type of business for which license is required;

c.     Name and address of person represented by applicant;

d.     Letter authorizing applicant to represent such person;

e.     Proposed route of applicant’s operations;

f.      Any convictions for violation of any law;

g.     Name and address of persons by whom applicant has been employed for the past five years;

h.     Fingerprints of applicant;

i.      Names addresses of three responsible persons who have known applicant for more than three years.

3.     If, in the judgment of the police chief the representations made in the statement or his or her investigation of the applicant discloses that the granting of the license applied for may be detrimental to the public peace, morals, health, safety or general welfare or that the applicant is not of good moral character or has been convicted of any violation of law involving moral turpitude, he or she shall recommend to the city clerk that the license shall not be issued until a permit therefor has been granted by the city council and the city clerk shall thereupon require the applicant to file an application for the permit, as required in Section 5.08.020, and the entire matter shall then be referred to the city council.

4.     No certificate of compliance shall be issued to an applicant for a permit to operate or maintain a vending machine for cigarettes or other tobacco products within the city, excepting therefrom any cigarette machine located in any business premises from which minor persons are excluded by law.

5.     All permits for vending machines for cigarettes or other tobacco products are null and void as of January 6, 1977.

B.     Requiring Permit From the Planning Commission. In addition to any land-use permit required by this code the following businesses shall require a permit from the planning commission and pay the fee set forth herein.

1.     a.     Bowling alleys, pool and billiard halls, amusement arcades, commercial amusements, ice
        and roller skating rinks: two hundred fifty dollars per year;

b.     Theaters maintaining a fixed place of business in the city: six hundred eighty-eight dollars per year;

c.     Public card rooms: three hundred seventy-five dollars per quarter plus two hundred fifty dollars per quarter for each additional table in excess of three tables;

d.     Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, mortuaries and funeral parlors: gross receipts of five thousand dollars or less, sixty-three dollars per year plus seventy-five cents for each additional one thousand dollars of gross receipts;

e.     Animal hospitals, kennels, and boarding stables, bathhouses, massage parlors, pawnbrokers, watchman: gross receipts of three thousand dollars or less, sixty dollars per year, plus one dollar and twenty-five cents for each additional one thousand dollars of gross receipts;

f.      Junk dealers or collectors, secondhand dealers, automobile wrecking yards: one hundred twenty-five dollars per year;

g.     Mobile home parks, sixty-three dollars per year, plus two dollars and fifty cents per one thousand dollars of annual gross receipts.

2.     Except for fortunetelling, no license certificate shall be issued for any businesses, callings or operations included in this subsection until an application for a permit therefor has been filed with the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.08 of this code and until the city council has authorized such permit to be issued to the applicant.

C.     Requiring Permit From the Director of Community Development. In addition to any land-use permit required by this code the following businesses shall require a permit for the director of community development or designee and pay the fee set forth herein.

1.     Circuses: Where seating capacity is four thousand persons or less, five hundred dollars for the first day and three hundred seventy-five dollars per day for each additional day; where seating capacity is more than four thousand persons, seven hundred fifty dollars for the first day and two hundred fifty dollars per day for each additional day;

2.     Carnivals, tent theaters, animal shows temporary entertainment under tent or temporary structure: three hundred seventy-five dollars for the first day, one hundred twenty-five dollars per day for each additional day;

3.     Automobile parking lots: twenty-five dollars per year, plus two dollars and fifty cents for each one thousand square feet of rental space;

4.     Rummage sales: three hundred dollars per year, or, at option of licensee, one hundred dollars per quarter, or thirteen dollars per day;

5.     Taxicab and ambulance service: sixty-three dollars per year for each vehicle or, at the option of the licensee, six dollars and twenty-five cents per quarter.

D.    Requiring Permit From the Police Chief. In addition to any land-use permit required by this code the following businesses shall require a permit from the police chief and pay the fee set forth herein.

1.     Private police and detective agencies: gross receipts of three thousand dollars or less, sixty dollars per year, plus one dollar and twenty-five cents for each additional one-thousand dollars or gross receipts;

2.     Fortune telling: three hundred seventy-five dollars per year.

(Ord. 1247 §§ l, 2, 2003; Ord. 901 §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 893 §§ 3, 4, 1990; Ord. 792 § 1, 1988; prior code § 11-44)

Chapter 5.20 BINGO GAMES
5.20.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols selected at random. Notwithstanding Section 330c of the Penal Code, as used in this chapter, the game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend, “for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.” (Ord. 965 § 1, 1993; prior code § 4A-12)

 

5.20.020 Charitable purposes—Permitted.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city under Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code to provide for bingo games, but only for charitable purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4A-1)

 

5.20.030 License—Required.
No person, firm, corporation, organization or association shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the city without first having secured a license from the city clerk in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of bingo games. (Prior code § 4A-2)

 

5.20.040 License—Organizations.
Organizations which are organized and operated for nonprofit purposes and exempted from the payment of bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and Mobile Home Park Associations and Senior Citizens’ Organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter, provided, that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Prior code § 4A-3)

 

5.20.050 License—Application.
Applications for a license to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall be executed under penalty of perjury and submitted to the city clerk on forms to be obtained from the finance director upon payment, to the finance director, of the license fee prescribed in subsection E of Section 5.20.070. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed upon application and payment of fees prescribed in subsection E of Section 5.20-.070. (Prior code § 4A-4)

 

5.20.060 Applicant qualification.
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.20.040 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4A-5)

 

5.20.070 Application contents.
The application for a license shall contain the following:

A.    The name of the applicant organization and written proof that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.20.040;

B.     A list of the names and residence addresses of members of the applicant organization who will, from time to time, operate and staff bingo games;

C.     The particular property within the city including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place;

D.    Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games;

E.     The annual license fee fixed by the city council by resolution shall accompany the application;

F.     A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city clerk upon violation of any of such provisions.

G.    The application shall be signed for the applicant by the presiding officer and one other officer of applicant under penalty of perjury. (Prior code § 4A-6)

 

5.20.080 Applicant investigation.
Upon receipt of the completed application, the city clerk shall make an investigation to determine if all of the statements in the application are true and shall refer the application to other interested departments of the city, including but not limited to the director of public works, police chief, fire chief, and the director of community development to determine if the appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations, building code ordinances and regulations, and the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code have been or will be complied with. (Prior code §4A-7)

 

5.20.090 License—Contents.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:

A.    The name of the organization to whom the license is issued;

B.     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted and statement that the property is owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized;

C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

D.    The date of the expiration of such license;

E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4A-8)

 

5.20.100 License—Posting.
An organization licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless the license is posted in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying for renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Prior code § 4A-9)

 

5.20.110 License—Suspension—Revocation.
A.    Whenever it appears to the city clerk that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease or desist any further operation of any bingo game.

B.     Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.     The order issued under subsection A shall also notify the licensee that it shall have ten days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city manager within the ten-day period shall result in a revocation of the license.

D.    Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection A of this section for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

E.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city clerk. (Prior code § 4A-10)

 

5.20.120 License—Revocation appeal.
A.    Any holder of a license whose license is revoked shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of this appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final.

B.     Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemptions. (Prior code § 4A-11)

 

5.20.130 Maximum amount of prize.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Prior code § 4A-13)

 

5.20.140 Profits—Special fund.
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax in Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

A.    Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

B.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel. (Ord. 775 § 3, 1987; prior code § 4A-14)

 

5.20.150 Financial interest in licensee only.
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Prior code § 4A-15)

 

5.20.160 Exclusive operation by licensee.
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization whose names shall have been previously given to the city clerk in accordance with subsection B of Section 5.20.070. Such members shall at all times during the conduct and operation of any bingo game be conspicuously identified by a name tag or other appropriate means, as members authorized to operate and staff such game. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Prior code § 4A-16)

 

5.20.170 Games to be open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Prior code § 4A-17)

 

5.20.180 Attendance limits.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building inspection department of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Prior code §4A-18)

 

5.20.190 Location restriction.
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for any office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Prior code § 4A-19)

 

5.20.200 Minors participation prohibited.
No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Prior code § 4A-20)

 

5.20.210 Use of credit prohibited.
No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including, but not limited to, IOUs and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit. (Prior code § 4A-21)

 

5.20.220 Intoxicated persons—Participation prohibited.
No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Prior code §4A-22)

 

5.20.230 Hours of operation.
No bingo game shall be conducted before nine a.m., nor after two a.m. of any day. (Prior code § 4A-23)

 

5.20.240 Rules and regulations posting.
The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game the rules and regulations of the game. (Prior code § 4A-24)

 

5.20.250 Participant to be present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Prior code § 4A-25)

 

5.20.260 Violation—Penalty.
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state of California for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Prior code § 4A-26)

 

5.20.270 Violation—Enjoining.
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Prior code § 4A-27)

Chapter 5.24 CARD ROOMS
5.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

“Controlled gambling” means to deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose for play any controlled game.

“Controlled game” means a game as defined by Penal Code Section 337j subdivision (e).

“Gambling enterprise employee” means any natural person employed in the operation of a gambling enterprise, including, without limitation, dealers, floor personnel, security employees, courtroom personnel, cage personnel, collection personnel, surveillance personnel, data-processing personnel, appropriate maintenance personnel, waiters and waitresses, and secretaries, or any other natural person whose employment duties require or authorize access to restricted gambling establishment areas.

“Gambling establishment,” which includes card rooms, means one or more rooms where there is conducted any controlled gambling or activity directly related thereto. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1396 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1272 § 1, 2004; prior code § 6-1)

 

5.24.020 License—Required.
No person, for him or herself, or for any other person shall engage in or carry on, or maintain, or conduct, any card room without first having secured a license so to do, according to the requirements of this chapter or without complying with every regulation contained in this chapter pertaining to such card room. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; prior code § 6-2)

 

5.24.030 License—Application—Fingerprinting.
An applicant for a card room license shall submit his or her application to the police chief which application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. “Persons financially interested” includes all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business shall be shown on such application. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints of the applicant and of persons financially interested in the business. Fingerprints are only required of each applicant upon initial application and not each subsequent application. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; prior code § 6-3)

 

5.24.040 License—Denial.
The police chief shall deny any applicant for a card room license, a license to operate such card room under any of the following circumstances:

A.    The applicant is under twenty-one years of age;

B.     Conviction of the applicant for any crime punishable as a felony;

C.     Conviction of the applicant for any dangerous drug, controlled substance or narcotics violation;

D.    Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code;

E.     Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code;

F.     Contumacious defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body or other official investigatory body of any state or of the United States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code;

G.    Failure of the applicant to provide information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or requested by the police chief, or failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualification, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1272 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1087 § 6, 1998; prior code § 6-5)

 

5.24.050 License—Number limit—Nontransferable.
No card room license shall be assignable or transferable. Upon a card room being sold the new or additional owners shall be licensed in accordance with Section 5.24.020 of this chapter. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; prior code § 6-6)

 

5.24.060 License—Additional to business license.
The licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be in addition to any licenses or permits required by this title. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; prior code § 6-6)

 

5.24.070 Employees—Work permits required.
A.    Gambling enterprise employees shall obtain a work permit from the police chief. Application for such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be deemed by the police chief necessary to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a card room work permit. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints of the applicant. A work permit shall be issued only to citizens of the United States or legal residents of the United States. The police chief shall deny to such applicants a work permit under any of the following circumstances:

1.     The applicant is under twenty-one years of age.

2.     Conviction of the applicant for any crime punishable as a felony.

3.     Conviction of the applicant for any dangerous drug, controlled substance or narcotics violation.

4.     Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code.

5.     Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code.

6.     Contumacious defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body or other official investigatory body of any state or of the United States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code.

7.     Failure of the applicant to provide information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or requested by the police chief, or failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualification, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria.

B.     Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not be returned in the event the work permit is refused, revoked or suspended. Only one such work permit shall be required each year even though the holder of the work permit may change their place of employment within the city.

C.     The action of the police chief in denying such a work permit on the basis of the applicant not being a person of good moral character shall be subject to an appeal to the city manager. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the denial of the work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police chief in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1454 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1396 § 4, 2008; Ord. 1272 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1087 § 7, 1998; Ord. 1081 § 1, 1998; Ord. 844 § 1, 1989; prior code § 6-8)

 

5.24.080 Employees—License and permit suspension or revocation.
The police chief shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any card room license or card room work permit issued pursuant to this chapter and to take possession of such permits. Any of the grounds upon which the police chief shall be required to refuse to issue an initial card room license or card room work permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation or suspension. In addition the failure of a holder of a card room license or card room work permit to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such license or work permit. The action of the police chief in this respect shall be subject to an appeal to the city manager. The decision of the city manager in such appeals shall be final. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police chief in revoking or suspending the license or work permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1454 § 1, 2010; prior code § 6-9)

 

5.24.090 Rules and regulations for operation.
It is unlawful to operate a card room in violation of any of the following regulations and rules:

A.    Not more than one card room shall be located at any one address.

B.     No game of faro, monte, roulette, lansquenet, rouge et noire, rondo, tan, fan-tan, stud-horse poker, seven-and-a-half, twenty-one, hokey-pokey or any banking or percentage game played with cards, dice or any device, for money, checks, credit or other representatives of value shall be played in any card room. Every person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.     Not more than thirteen tables shall be permitted in any card room.

D.    No more than ten players shall be permitted at any one card table.

E.     Card rooms shall be located on the ground floor, and so arranged that card tables and the players at the tables shall be plainly visible from inside the front of the card room. No wall, partition, screen, or similar structure between the front door opening on the street and any card table located in the card room shall be permitted if it interferes with visibility.

F.     No person under the age of twenty-one years shall play, be allowed to play, place wagers at or collect winnings, whether personally or through an agent, from any card or other gambling game.

No person under the age of twenty-one years shall loiter or be permitted to loiter in or about any room wherein any card or gambling game is operated or conducted.

G.    All card rooms may be open twenty-four hours per day and seven days per week.

H.    All card rooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation.

I.      There shall be no wagering limit.

J.      The cashing of checks drawn against any federal, state or county fund, including but not limited to social security, unemployment insurance, disability payments or public assistance is prohibited. However, cashing any payroll checks or checks for the delivery of goods or services that are drawn against federal, state or county fund is permitted.

K.    Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game and to see to it that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and with the provisions of the Penal Code of the state. This person may have more than one table under this supervision. He or she shall not, however, participate in the game.

L.     No signs or other insignia advertising or relative to card rooms shall be permitted upon the exterior of any premises occupied as a card room.

M.    No person who is in an obvious state of intoxication, is unable to care for themselves or a nuisance to others, shall be permitted in any card room.

N.    The total number of card tables authorized to be operated within the city of Manteca shall be thirteen. No additional card tables shall be allowed for tournaments or other special events.

O.    No alcoholic beverage as defined by the Business and Professionals Code shall be kept or stored, between the hours of two a.m., and six a.m., within any area where gambling is permitted. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1570 §§ 1, 2, 2015; Ord. 1499 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1396 §§ 1, 3, 2008; Ord. 1353 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 1272 §§ 5, 6, 2004; Ord. 1087 § 4, 1998; Ord. 844 § 24, 1989; prior code § 6-10)

 

5.24.100 Patron safety and security.
The holders of licenses granted under this chapter shall assure and be liable, without limitation, for the safety and security of their patrons while such patrons are in their respective card room facilities. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1087 § 1, 1998)

 

5.24.101 Locations of gambling establishments.
No license to operate a card room shall be issued unless the card room establishment is located in an area permitted under Title 17 of this code. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1087 § 2, 1998)

 

5.24.102 Wagering limits.
The type and limits of wagering of every game that is in progress must be prominently displayed on at least one sign with letters at least one inch high. Further each table where a game is being conducted shall display a similar sign with letters at least one-half inch in height. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1353 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1087 § 3, 1998)

 

5.24.103 State license and permit review.
Prior to the issuance of any license or work permit under this chapter, the police chief shall submit to the State Department of Justice, Division of Gambling Control all applications for their review. No license or permit shall issue if the Division of Gambling Control objects. (Ord. O2019-05 § 1; Ord. 1087 § 5, 1998)

Chapter 5.28 COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
5.28.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:

A.    “CATV” means a community antenna television system as defined in subsection C of this section.

B.     “City” means the city of Manteca, a municipal corporation of the state, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporate form.

C.     “Community antenna television system” means a system of antenna, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides, or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or through its facilities as contemplated in this chapter. “CATV system” also means or includes the transmission of any special program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as “pay television.”

 

D.    “Council” means the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city.

E.     “Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, means and includes any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city in accordance with Chapters 5.04, 5.08. 5.12 and 5.16.

F.     “Grantee” means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as defined in this section, is granted by council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the person, firm or corporation.

G.    “Property of grantee” means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the city under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.

H.    “Gross annual receipts” means any and all compensation and consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the city, including within the definition of “gross annual receipts” any moneys received for installation and line extension charges. “Gross annual receipts” shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.

I.      “Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city.

J.      “Subscriber” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee. (Prior code § 7A-1)

 

5.28.020 Exclusive use of telephone facilities.
When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, the grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a licensee and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used in this chapter it means and includes licensee. (Prior code § 7A-2)

 

5.28.030 Franchise to operate.
A.    A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the city may be granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.

B.     No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to require the grantee of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. (Prior code § 7A-3)

 

5.28.040 Uses permitted by grantee.
A.    Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city.

B.     The grantee may make charges for construction, installation, or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly subscriber service charge for the first year following the date of delivery of service pursuant to the initial grant of a franchise as filed and approved by the council.

For the remainder of the term of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the grantee may charge rates and establish rate structures exempt from regulations by the city provided that it:

1.     Provides twenty or more channels to the cable television subscriber;

2.     Receives or has contracted to receive television signals by satellite earth receiving station;

3.     Has a subscriber penetration ratio of less than seventy percent certified by the cable television system, subject to review by the city;

4.     If providing or has agreed promptly to provide a community services channel.

C.     The granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as permission or authority to enter on, occupy, or otherwise utilize private property without the express consent of the owner or agent in possession thereof. (Prior code § 7A-4)

 

5.28.050 Franchise—Duration.
A.    No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than fifteen years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof.

B.     Any such franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the council in the event that the council has found, after a public hearing, that:

1.     After written notice from the city of an alleged violation and a thirty-day opportunity to cure the violation, the grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of any franchise or permit issued under this chapter; or

2.     Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes a consideration material to the grant of the franchise; or

3.     The city acquires the CATV system property of the grantee.

(Prior code § 7A-5)

 

5.28.060 Franchise—Payments.
A.    Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of such franchise, a sum equal to three percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee unless otherwise agreed to by the grantee and city. Such payment by the grantee to the city shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantee’s franchise agreement, by delivery of the same to the director of finance of the city. All payments made under this chapter shall be made in lieu of any business license, occupation tax or similar levy.

B.     The grantee shall file with the city, within ninety days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined in this chapter, of grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city, within fifteen days after the time for filing such statements, the sum prescribed in this section or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements.

C.     The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter.

D.    In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted under this chapter, without the consent of the city, the grantee shall pay to the city reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than one hundred percent of its total gross profits during the period. (Prior code § 7A-6)

 

5.28.070 Franchise—Limitations.
A.    Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.

B.     No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter.

C.     Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.

D.    Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, that the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness.

E.     Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted under this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of this obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure on the city to enforce prompt compliance.

F.     Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city.

G.    The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued under this chapter or because of its enforcement.

H.    The grantee shall be subject to all requirements prescribed by federal, state, city and local law hereto or hereafter enacted or established during the term of any franchise granted under this chapter. Copies of all petitions, applications, and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or commissions or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting CATV operations authorized pursuant to this franchise shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city clerk.

I.      Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets.

J.      Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any CATV system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise under this chapter shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between grantee and the city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be under and pursuant to the franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, powers, immunity or authority whatsoever. (Prior code § 7A-7)

 

5.28.080 Rights reserved to city.
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract any or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain.

B.     There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agree to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

C.     Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, franchise or any other person, firms or corporation, within all or any portion of the city.

D.    There is reserved to the city the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the grantee.

E.     Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city.

F.     The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The city manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council within ten days for hearing the determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the decisions of the city manager and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter.

G.    The city has the right, during the life of any franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for police and fire alarm systems, on the condition that such wire and pole fixtures do nor interfere with the CATV operations of the grantee. The city shall assume all liability for damages for personal injuries caused or occasioned by the construction and maintenance of the police and fire alarm systems. (Amended during 2009 republication; prior code § 7A-8)

 

5.28.090 Permits—Installation and service.
A.    Within thirty days after acceptance of any franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.

B.     Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.

C.     Within one hundred eighty days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in Section 5.28.190, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided.

D.    Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth in this chapter, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of Section 5.28.050; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his or her control. (Prior code § 7A-9)

 

5.28.100 Location of property of grantee.
A.    Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the director of public works acting in the exercise of this reasonable discretion.

B.     In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, “underground” includes a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the director of public works. The city shall not in any manner be responsible for any costs incurred by grantee in placing grantee’s facilities underground.

C.     All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

D.    In the case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the director of public works replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.

E.     If at any time during the period of a franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or the public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. (Prior code § 7A-10)

 

5.28.110 Removal and abandonment of property of grantee.
A.    In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee’s franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given thirty days’ notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the director of public works.

B.     Any property of the grantee remaining in place sixty days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The director of public works may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty days’ extension.

C.     Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the director of public works shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and the grantee shall submit to the director of public works an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. (Prior code § 7A-11)

 

5.28.120 Changes required by public improvements.
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the director of public works by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 5.28.110. (Prior code § 7A-12)

 

5.28.130 Failure to perform street work.
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the director of public works may, at his or her option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the director of public works to the grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. (Prior code § 7A-13)

 

5.28.140 Liability and indemnification.
A.    The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of a franchise the grantee specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting the franchise. These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise.

B.     The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of this franchise specifically agree that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection A of this section. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his or her assistants or any employees of the city.

C.     The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain through the term of the franchise a general comprehensive liability insurance policy in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the city attorney and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death or property damage occasioned by the operations of grantee under this franchise, in the amounts of:

1.     One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit, however, of one million dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, and

2.     Two hundred fifty thousand dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident.

D.    The insurance policy mentioned in subsection C of this section shall contain an endorsement stating that the policy is extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee under the terms of the franchise, and shall contain an endorsement as follows:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City Clerk of the City of Manteca, City Hall, Manteca, California, by registered mail, of a written notice of such cancellation or reduction in coverage.

E.     The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance bond running to the city, with a surety approved by the city, in the penal sum of twenty-five thousand dollars conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be forfeited to the city as liquidated damages. The bond shall provide that thirty days’ prior written notice of cancellation, intention not to renew or material change, shall be given to the city by registered mail.

F.     The form of the bond obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section must be approved by the city attorney. The bond and a certificate of insurance evidencing the insurance policy mentioned in subsection C of this section, and written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk during the term of the franchise.

G.    Neither the provisions of this chapter, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued under this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. The council may at any time waive or reduce the amount of the bond provided for by this section. (Prior code § 7A-14)

 

5.28.150 Inspection of property and records.
A.    At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which pertain to subscriber lists, locations of lines, gross receipts and other financial records with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council determines that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

B.     The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the director of public works at the times and in the form prescribed by the director of public works such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

C.     The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city.

D.    The grantee shall file with the director of public works on or before the first anniversary date of the franchise, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city. (Prior code § 7A-15)

5.28.160 Operational standards.
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standard of the CATV industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest quality service technically possible. Such standards shall comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations which are incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out. (Prior code § 7A-16)

 

5.28.170 Miscellaneous provisions.
A.    When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all matters required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk.

B.     Grantee shall, without charge, provide all basic subscriber services of its system, including a multiple connection service, to all public and nonprofit private schools, city police and fire stations, city recreation centers, and such other buildings owned or controlled by the city, which shall from time to time be designated by the city manager; provided, that such buildings shall be located within the franchise area. Grantee shall install, without charge to city or such public or private schools, up to two hundred feet of aboveground service connection from the transmission cable otherwise maintained or required to the maintained by grantee for the service of paying subscribers of grantee. The city or any such public or private schools shall pay to grantee the costs of all labor and materials supplied by grantee for the installation of any service connection in excess of the initial two hundred feet of aboveground service connection.

C.     In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall upon request of the city manager, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.

D.    The grantee shall not engage directly or indirectly in the business of selling, leasing, renting, furnishing, providing, repairing or servicing any television, radio or other receiving apparatus or any component part thereof within the city except the receiving apparatus or component required for the reception of its service; and such prohibition shall extend and apply to the officers and directors of grantee, to all general and limited partners of grantee, to any person or combination of person owning, holding or controlling five percent or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest of grantee, or any affiliated or subsidiary entity, owner or controlled by grantee, or in which any officer, director, stockholder, general or limited partner, or person or group of person holding, or controlling any ownership interest in grantee, shall own, hold or control five percent or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest; and such prohibition shall likewise apply to any person, firm or corporation acting or serving in the capacity of a holding or controlled company of grantee.

E.     The grantee shall, prior to deleting, amending or adding any program source, give the city council a thirty-day notice of its intention. The city council may register its protest within thirty days of receiving the notice, and grantee shall be prohibited from making any change until such time the proposed change has been heard at a public hearing before the city council.

F.     The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers.

G.    No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable installation or connection fee or monthly service charge; nor to any subdivider who fails to pay the applicable construction charges.

H.    Before the grantee shall provide service to any subscriber, grantee shall obtain a signed contract from the subscriber containing a provision substantially as follows:

Subscriber understands that in providing service grantee is making use of public rights-of-way within the city of Manteca, and that the continued use of these public rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to grantee for any reason, grantee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. Subscriber agrees he or she will make nor claim nor undertake any action against the city, its officers, its employees, or grantee if a service to be provided by grantee hereunder is interrupted or discontinued because the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to grantee for any reason. The form of grantee’s contract with its subscribers shall be subject to approval of the city attorney with respect to the inclusion of this provision.

(Prior code § 7A-17)

 

5.28.180 Use of utility poles and facilities—Agreement.
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city clerk. Existing utility poles shall be used where possible. The grantee shall be allowed to construct its own poles in the event it is denied permission to attach to poles owned by a public utility, only after prior approval of the director of public works. (Prior code § 7A-18)

 

5.28.190 Franchise—Application.
A.    The city may prescribe, at its sole discretion, application standards. The city’s acceptance or action on an application deems its acceptance. Application standards include:

1.     The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main officers, major stock holders and associates, the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies;

2.     A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which applicant proposed to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and particularly, the intent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system;

3.     A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specified location thereof;

4.     A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested;

5.     A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city manager of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required or requested, an additional charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant’s proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and easements if required by the grantee. The decision of the city council as to what shall be remote or relatively inaccessible under this subdivision shall be final;

6.     A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines, or conduits;

7.     A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever;

8.     A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing applicant’s financial status and his or her financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system.

B.     The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted.

C.     Upon consideration of any such application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may by ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from the application to be in its opinion best qualified to render property and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the city. The council’s decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted.

D.    Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following condition:

The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City of Manteca and no other purpose whatsoever.

Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter.

E.     Prior approval of the city council shall be required where ownership or control of more than thirty percent of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person to group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control thirty percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its acceptance of the franchise the grantee agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the city council shall constitute a violation of the franchise by the grantee. (Prior code § 7A-19)

 

5.28.200 Franchise—Renewal.
Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required in this chapter for obtaining the original franchise, except those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.28.190. (Prior code § 7A-20)

 

5.28.210 Franchise—Acceptance.
A.    No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting the same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Section 5.28.140 are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void.

B.     Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city clerk his or her written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, together with the bond and insurance policies required by Section 5.28.140, and his or her agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. (Prior code § 7A-21)

 

5.28.220 Violation—Penalty.
A.    From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

B.     From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

C.     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system.

D.    It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. (Prior code § 7A-22)

Chapter 5.30 CABLE TELEVISION
Article I. General Provisions
5.30.010 Authority and intent.
A.    The city council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and positive impact upon the people of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate.

B.     The cable ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply to all franchises granted, renewed or otherwise extended after the adoption of said ordinance. Nothing herein is intended to preempt, modify or supersede Ordinance No. 585 of the city. Ordinance No. 585 shall continue in full force and effect, controlling all franchises granted before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, until such time as the city council shall repeal it. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Approval” or “consent” or “agree” or derivations of said words or words of similar import mean, unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter or the grantee’s franchise, the prior approval, consent or agreement of the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree with respect to the matter in question, and “require” or “judgment” or “satisfy” or derivations of said words or words of similar import mean the requirement, judgment or satisfaction of the person who may make a requirement or exercise judgment or who must be satisfied, which approval, consent, agreement, requirement, judgment or satisfaction shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter or the grantee’s franchise, not be unreasonably withheld by the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree or make a requirement or judgment or who must be satisfied.

“Basic cable service” means the lowest priced level of service which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals (as authorized) and public, educational and governmental access channels.

“Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.

“Cable system” or “system”, means a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, fiber optic cables, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, pedestals, equipment or facilities, used for distributing video programming to home subscribers, and/or producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of signals.

“Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering either one National Television Standards Committee (“NTSC”) video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals.

“City” means the city of Manteca.

“Council” means the city council of Manteca.

“Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued hereunder which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.

“Grantee” means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its successors, transferees or assignees.

“Grantor” means the city as represented by the city council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction and authority.

“Gross revenues” means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which grantee has a financial interest, or from any source whatsoever, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable services by grantee within the city. Gross revenues shall include basic service monthly fees, pay tiers, premium channels, pay-per-view, leased channel fees, converter rental or sales, advertising revenue and any other payments by subscribers or users of the grantee’s cable system made directly or indirectly to any person who has contracted to provide cable services on the cable system. These gross revenues shall not include: (1) the amount of any refunds, credits, or other payments made to subscribers or users; (2) any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly or indirectly on any subscribers or users by any municipal corporation, political subdivision, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for the governmental unit; (3) the sale or transfer of tangible property; (4) the sale or transfer of the franchise; (5) the issuance, sale, or transfer of corporate stocks, bonds, or other securities; (6) equipment deposits; and (7) uncollected bad debt. These gross revenues shall not be reduced for any purposes other than provided herein, and shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee.

“Installation” means the connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers’ terminals.

“Other programming service” means information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally.

“Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.

“Public property” means any real property owned by the city other than a street.

“Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area within the city designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service.

“State” means the state of California.

“Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the city, or dedicated for use by the city, use by the general public, or use compatible with cable system operations.

“Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.030 Franchise to install and operate.
A.    A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall permit constructing, operating and maintaining a system in the service area, including the right to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets and public property such lines, cables, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appropriate to the operation of the system.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any street or within any other right-of-way within the city without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.040 Term of the franchise.
A.    Term. An initial franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement. A renewal shall be granted for a minimum term of fifteen years or a maximum of twenty years.

B.     Renewal.

1.     A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed if:

a.     The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law,

b.     The quality of the grantee’s service, including a signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, level or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system been reasonable in light of community needs,

c.     The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in the grantee’s proposal, and

d.     The grantee’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. The city may not declare grantee’s proposal unreasonable and deny renewal, nor may community needs be established, on the basis of facilities, equipment, or services which another party has indicated it is willing to provide;

2.     In any renewal proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the city, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding;

3.     A proceeding under this subsection shall be completed within twelve months of its commencement, within which time the city shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor;

4.     Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in paragraph (1) of this subsection pursuant to the record of the proceeding under paragraphs (2) and (3). Grantor may not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under paragraph (l)(a) or on events considered under paragraph (l)(b) unless the grantor has provided grantee notice and the opportunity to cure as provided in this chapter, or in any case in which grantor has waived its right to object, or the grantee has given grantor written notice of a failure to cure and the grantor fails to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice;

5.     Grantee is expressly reserved its rights of appeal under federal and state law. In addition to such rights, the franchise shall remain in effect at all times during which a renewal proceeding or appeal remains pending;

6.     Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (5) of this subsection, grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of a franchise, and grantor may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced.) The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with paragraphs (l) through (5) of this subsection.

C.     City may not, upon the expiration of this franchise, or otherwise, acquire an ownership interest in the system, or require a sale of the system to any other person, unless city or such other person acquires the ownership interest at not less than fair market value for the system as a going concern. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.050 Franchise territory.
Any franchise shall be within all of the territorial limits of the city, and within any area henceforth added to the territorial limits of the city during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.060 FCC or California Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction.
This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) or Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) of the state of California or any other federal or state agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.070 Franchise transfer.
A.    Grantee shall not assign, or transfer control of, the franchise without the prior consent of the council, which consent will not be unreasonably denied. The council shall render its decision within seventy-five days from the date on which consent is requested. Any attempt to assign the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. No such consent shall be required for an assignment (1) to any affiliate of and entirely owned or controlled by the grantee or any person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the grantee, in each case as of the effective date of the grantee’s franchise, or (2) in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness.

B.     The requirements of subsection A shall apply only to a transfer in the control of grantee. The word “control” as used herein is limited to actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Thus, in the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than fifty-one percent of the voting stock is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.

C.     The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, financial and technical qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the transferee, by a preponderance of the evidence, demonstrates that it possesses such qualifications, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed.

D.    Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchisee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within thirty days of assuming such control that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.080 Geographical coverage.
All residential areas within the franchise area will be provided with access to service from the system where in the company’s judgment it is both technically and economically feasible and provided that all such permission as may be required from the owner of the property is reasonably available, and that service to multiple dwelling units need be provided only on terms acceptable to grantee. In new housing districts, areas with occupancy densities of more than twenty-five homes per mile which are contiguous to the system will be provided with access to service to the extent service is economically feasible and technically possible. In areas with less than twenty-five homes per mile, service shall be offered in conformance with grantee’s service extension policies. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.090 Nonexclusive franchise.
A.    Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive.

B.     If the city elects to grant an additional cable television franchise in an area where a franchise has already been granted to a cable television operator to any applicant that was not authorized to provide cable television service within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall do so only after a public hearing noticed pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code, in a newspaper of general circulation as defined in Section 6000 of the Government Code, where all of the following have been considered:

1.     Whether there will be significant positive or negative impacts on the community being served;

2.     Whether there will be an unreasonable adverse economic or aesthetic impact upon public or private property within the area;

3.     Whether there will be an unreasonable disruption or inconvenience to existing users, or any adverse effect on future use, of utility poles, public easements, and the public rights-of-way contrary to the intent of Section 767.5 of the Public Utilities Code;

4.     Whether the franchise applicant has the technical and financial ability to perform;

5.     Whether there is any impact on the franchising authority’s interest in having universal cable service;

6.     Whether other societal interests generally considered by franchising authorities will be met;

7.     Whether the operation of an additional cable television system in the community is economically feasible;

8.     Such other additional matters, both procedural and substantive, as the franchising authority may determine to be relevant.

C.     Nothing in this section prevents the city from considering the approval or denial of an additional cable service franchise in any area of the city subject to compliance with subsection E of this section, or the imposing of additional terms and conditions upon the granting of the franchise, as the city determines is necessary or appropriate.

D.    The city shall make a final determination as to whether to grant the additional franchise within six months of the application date unless the city can establish that the applicant has unreasonably delayed proceedings designed to consider the matters set forth in paragraphs (B)(1) to (8), inclusive, of this section.

E.     Any additional franchise granted to provide cable television service in an area in which a franchise has already been granted and where an existing cable operator is providing service or certifies to the franchising authority that it is ready, willing, and able to provide service, shall require the franchisee to wire and serve the same geographical area within a reasonable time and in a sequence which does not discriminate against lower income or minority residents, and shall contain the same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that are set forth in the existing franchise. This paragraph does not apply where all existing cable operators certify to the franchising authority that they do not intend to provide service within a reasonable time to the area to be initially served by the additional franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

Article II. Application For and Granting of Franchises
5.30.100 Renewals.
The terms of this article shall not apply to applications for renewal of a franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.110 Application—Required.
Any person desiring a franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A nonrefundable application fee established by the city shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document operation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs from the city. In the event such application fee exceeds the amount of such costs, the city shall refund the amount of the excess to the applicant within thirty days following completion of the proceedings relating to such application. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.120 Application—Contents.
An application for a franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable:

A.    Designation of specific area to be served by franchise;

B.     Resume of prior history of applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field;

C.     List of the partners, general and limited, if the applicant is a partnership and a list of the persons and/or entities involved if the applicant is a joint venture;

D.    List of the names and addresses of stockholders of applicant and percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder. List shall include all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its voting stock;

E.     List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of education and business background of each such person;

F.     A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;

G.    Proposed construction schedule, providing for at least thirty-three and one-third percent construction per year for three years;

H.    Street map of area to be served showing the location of proposed or existing head-end site (antenna site) and business office;

I.      Legal description of area to be served;

J.      Proposed rates and charges to be charged subscribers;

K.    Itemized electronic equipment to be used, channels to be provided, pay TV, or additional services and type of converter;

L.     Technical market survey of area and economic analysis including number of homes, population, income bracket and percent of those requesting and those projected or estimated to request service, if available;

M.    The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;

N.    A signed statement by an officer indicating whether any principal, officer, director or managing employee:

1.     Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude (including, but not limited to, charges sustained before any federal or state agency, or violation of any tax or securities law), or is presently under any indictment, investigation or complaint charging any such acts;

2.     Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; or

3.     Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable television system; and

O.    Any reasonable additional requirements or information that the city deems to be applicable. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.130 Setting for public hearing.
A.    The council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the city, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received, and may make any other determinations and specify, the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications.

B.     Upon receipt of any application for a franchise, the council shall refer the same to the city manager, who shall prepare a report and make his or her recommendations respecting such application.

C.     The city clerk shall set applications for hearing at a time and date approved by the city council. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.140 Notice of hearing.
Not less than fifteen days before the hearing, the city clerk shall give notice to the applicant in writing of the time, date and place of hearing. The city clerk shall serve such notice upon the applicant either by first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery thereof to the applicant. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.150 Posting and publishing notice.
The city clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in three places within the area to be served stating the time, date and place of a hearing not less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. The city clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the area to be served and pursuant to Section 6006 of the Government Code the same notice is required to be posted. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.160 Comments by interested persons.
Any person interested, any time after the filing of an application as provided in this chapter, and prior to the hearing thereon, may file with the city clerk written comments, protests, and/or suggestions, either for or against the granting of the franchise or to suggest any terms and conditions which should be included in the franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.170 Conduct of hearing.
At the time and place set for the hearing or at the time and place to which the hearing may be continued by the council, the council shall hear the applicant, who may present any relevant evidence to show why the franchise should be granted, why certain terms or conditions should be imposed or not imposed on such franchise if granted, and also shall hear testimony or statements of other persons who may attend the hearing. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.180 Decision after hearing.
Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based on the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the application should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. The council shall send a copy of its decision to the applicant. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

Article III. Franchise Requirements
5.30.190 Minimum service standards.
Minimum service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and grantee shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable television system. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.200 Franchise fee.
After the franchise is granted, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee of up to five percent of gross revenues in accordance with terms set forth in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.210 Bond.
Grantee shall, at all times during the life of the franchise, keep on file with the city council a bond running to the grantor in such amount established in the franchise agreement with sureties to be approved by the city council. The bond shall be available to grantor to satisfy an amount due grantor from grantee which arise in accordance with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.220 Construction requirements.
A.    Grantee shall obtain required permits from the city before commencing construction involving the opening or disturbance of any street or public property. The city shall cooperate with the grantee and use its best efforts in granting any permits required. Grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances, on any street or public property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the usual and customary use of said street or public property of any person.

B.     Methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of the grantee’s cable system shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code to the extent that such code is consistent with local law affecting the construction, installation, and maintenance of electric supply and communication lines.

C.     Any and all streets or public property which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation or maintenance of the system shall be promptly repaired by grantee, at its expense and to a condition reasonably comparable to its condition prior to the disturbance or damage.

D.    Grantee may cut or trim trees and vegetation with National Electrical Safety Code and other clearance requirements.

E.     In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of grantee’s wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to the franchise, in order lawfully to move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of city, upon thirty days prior notice by city to grantee, grantee shall move at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal such of his or her facilities as may be required to facilitate such movement.

F.     Grantee shall at all times take reasonable precautions for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury to the public, to employees of grantee, and to public or private property.

G.    All lines, equipment, and facilities within the service area shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair.

H.    In all other cases, grantee shall be eligible for relocation compensation to the same extent as the grantor compensates any utility companies. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.230 Technical standards.
A.    The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.

B.     The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain FCC technical standards. Should the grantor find that the grantee has failed to maintain FCC technical standards, and should the grantor specifically enumerate those standards with which grantee is not in compliance, the grantee shall make such improvements as are necessary to meet those standards. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.240 Rates.
If during the term of the franchise federal law permits municipal regulation of basic cable service rates, the city shall have the option, upon proper notice to the company and an opportunity for the company to comment, to regulate basic cable service rates, but only to the extent permitted by federal law. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.250 Indemnity.
A.    Pursuant to its franchise, the grantee, for itself and its successors and assigns (referred to in this section as the “indemnitors”), shall be required to covenant and agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, officials, employees, and volunteers (referred to in this section as the “indemnitees”) from and against any and all liabilities and obligations asserted or other claims, actions, judgments, assessments, taxes (including without limitation federal, state and local income taxes and property taxes), charges, lines, penalties, debts, damages, costs or expenses of any kind (including without limitation legal fees and costs) suffered, incurred or accrued by any of the indemnitees (individually, an “Obligation”) by reason of or arising from the following:

1.     The breach of any representation or warranty as of the date made by the indemnitors under the franchise, any exhibit or any document, instrument or certificate delivered by the indemnitors pursuant to the franchise, including the falsity, inaccuracy or incompleteness thereof;

2.     Breach or default by the indemnitors in the observance or performance of any of the indemnitors’ other obligations under the franchise.

B.     Upon the occurrence of any event which may give rise to an obligation for which the indemnitors are or may be liable under this section (any such event, a “claim”), the indemnitees shall promptly, after knowledge thereof, notify the indemnitors in writing and give the indemnitors a reasonable opportunity to attempt to defend or settle such claim, including to employ counsel reasonably satisfactory to the indemnitees and their counsel for the purpose of defending or settling any such claim, provided that the indemnitors shall not settle any claim which would impose any obligation upon the indemnitees without the indemnitees’ prior written consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any indemnitee may, at its election and expense, participate in any attempt by the indemnitors to settle or defend any such claim subject to the understanding that control of the defense of any such claim remains with the indemnitors and their counsel. With respect to any claim which is ultimately determined to be an obligation for which the indemnitors are obligated to indemnify the indemnitees, in the event that the indemnitors fail to defend the indemnitees or to employ counsel for the indemnitees for such purpose, then the indemnitees may defend against such claim in such manner as they may deem appropriate and the indemnitees may settle such claim on such terms as they may deem appropriate. The indemnitors shall promptly reimburse the indemnitees for the amount of all settlements, pavements and expenses, legal and otherwise, incurred by the indemnitees in connection with the defense or settlement of such claim. If no settlement of such claim is made, then the indemnitors shall satisfy any judgment rendered with respect to such claim before the indemnitees are required to do so, and pay all expenses, legal or otherwise, incurred by the indemnitees in the defense against such claim. Except as set forth above, the indemnitees shall not have the right to settle any claim without the approval of the indemnitors, provided that if the indemnitors disapprove such settlement, then they must assume the defense of such claim and reimburse the indemnitees for all expenses of the indemnitees to the date of assumption. The failure of the indemnitors to assume such defense and to pay such reimbursement shall give the indemnitees the right to settle such claim.

C.     Every expense of any attempt to settle or defend a claim, including without limitation expenses for proceedings, negotiations, investigations, settlements or suits, shall be borne solely by the indemnitors. Notwithstanding any such attempt or the outcome thereof, the obligations of the indemnitors to the indemnitees under this section shall not be relieved, reduced or otherwise affected.

D.    No indemnification shall be required of the indemnitors for the initial one thousand dollars of indemnifiable obligations of the indemnitees. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.260 Insurance.
A.    On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, worker’s compensation and property insurance from companies authorized to transact business in California by the Insurance Commissioner of California.

B.     The policy of liability insurance shall:

1.     Be issued to grantee and name grantor, its officers, officials, agents, employees, and volunteers as additional insureds;

2.     Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to coverage for:

a.     Negligent acts or omissions of grantee and its employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or

b.     Use of motor vehicles;

3.     Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement; such insurance policy shall be subject to the review and approval of grantor’s legal counsel;

4.     Be noncancelable without thirty days’ prior written notice thereof directed to grantor; and

5.     Contain such other provisions as required by the franchise.

C.     The policy of worker’s compensation insurance shall:

1.     Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the California Insurance Commissioner;

2.     Cover all employees of grantee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct the franchise operations;

3.     Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the State upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits; and

4.     Contain such other provisions as required by the Franchise.

E.     Grantee shall file with the City Clerk commencement of franchise operations either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to said policy:

1.     The policy number;

2.     The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;

3.     The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by this chapter or the franchise agreement;

4.     The subject of the insurance;

5.     The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and

6.     Amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

F.     Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section, or with the specific insurance provisions that the grantor and grantee agreed to in the franchise agreement.

G.    In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight hours’ notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

Article IV. Reporting Requirements
5.30.270 Records required.
A.    Grantee shall at all times maintain:

1.     A record of all formal written complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, or concern the conduct of an employee of the grantee while performing a service call;

2.     A full and complete set of plans, records and “as-built” maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in sub-scribers’ homes;

3.     A record of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be available to the grantor, upon request, within sixty days following the end of each calendar quarter in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor.

B.     The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.280 Grantor’s right to inspect.
Upon prior written notice, but in no event more than twice in any calendar year, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor, of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this chapter or the grantee’s franchise agreement, subject to grantor’s written agreement to maintain confidential, trade secret or proprietary information, and further subject to grantee’s right to protect information not subject to discovery under standards of civil litigation. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.290 Plant performance report.
Within thirty days after request by grantor, grantee shall submit an annual plant survey report with respect to the preceding calendar year which shall be a complete survey of grantee’s plant and a full report thereon. The requirements of this provision shall be satisfied by grantee providing copies of the system’s most recent proof of performance reports prepared in accordance with the FCC’s technical standards. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.300 Public reports.
If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee’s annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five days of request by grantor. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.310 Reports.
A.    All reports, fillings, documents or responses required of the grantee under this chapter or its franchise agreement shall be provided by the grantee to the city within the period required therefor and shall contain the information specified, provided that the preparation of any such report, filing, document or response does not require excessive time, cost or commitment of personnel and such report, filing, documents or response is reasonably related to the obligations of the grantee under this chapter or its franchise agreement.

B.     The wilful refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise.

C.     Any materially false or misleading statement or misrepresentation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

Article V. Enforcement
5.30.320 Notice of violation.
The city shall provide grantee with a detailed written notice of any franchise violation upon which it proposes to take action, and a ninety-day period within which grantee may demonstrate that a violation does not exist or to cure an alleged violation or, if the violation cannot be corrected in ninety days, to submit a plan satisfactory to the city to correct the violation. In the event that the franchise violation involves one that the city, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, believes to be material, the time periods in Sections 5.30.320 and 5.30.330 shall be changed from ninety days to thirty days. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.330 Default.
If grantee fails to disapprove or correct the violation within ninety days or, in the case of a violation which cannot be corrected in ninety days and grantee has not timely submitted a satisfactory plan, then city may declare the grantee in default, which declaration must be in writing. Grantee will not be deemed in default if it has notified grantor of a failure or inability to cure and grantor fails to object within a reasonable time after such notice. In the event that the city declares grantee in default, the city shall have the right to institute legal proceedings to collect damages from the date of the violation, or to exercise any other rights and remedies afforded the city in law or equity, provided however, that the city may institute such legal proceedings only after the hearing has been held and the written decision issued pursuant to Section 5.30.340 and the grantee opts not to appeal the Section 5.30.340 written decision to arbitration pursuant to Sections 5.30.350 and 5.30.360, and provided further that the city may institute revocation proceedings against grantee only after declaration of default, pursuant to Section 5.30.370 below and only on the grounds set forth therein. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.340 Hearing available to grantee.
Within fifteen days after receipt of a written declaration of default from the city, grantee may request, in writing, a hearing before the city or its agent, in a full public proceeding affording due process. Such hearing shall be held within thirty days of the receipt of the request therefor and a decision rendered within fifteen days after the conclusion of the hearing. The time frame for decision may be extended only upon a clear and convincing showing of good cause. Any decision shall be in writing and shall be based upon written findings of fact. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.350 Appeal of default.
Grantee may appeal a declaration of default to arbitration. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.360 Procedures applicable to arbitration.
Any arbitration help pursuant to the franchise or this chapter shall be conducted as follows:

A.    Grantee and the city (or such substitute party to the arbitration) each shall, within fifteen days of the decision to proceed with arbitration, appoint one arbitrator experienced in the cable television business, which arbitrators shall mutually select a third arbitrator of similar qualifications.

B.     Within thirty days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon fifteen days written notice to the parties to the arbitrator, the arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the dispute.

C.     The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the request of either city or grantee.

D.    At the close of the hearings, and within thirty days, the arbitrators shall prepare written findings and serve such decision upon city and grantee.

E.     The decision of the majority of the arbitrators, which may include assessments of damages, shall be binding upon the parties to the arbitration.

F.     Either party may seek judicial relief to the arbitrator’s decision under the following circumstances:

1.     Either party fails to select an arbitrator;

2.     The arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator;

3.     One or more arbitrators is unqualified;

4.     Designated time limits have been exceeded;

5.     The arbitrators have not proceeded expeditiously; or

6.     Based upon the record, the arbitrator’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, unsupported by substantial evidence, an abuse of discretion, or based upon a mistake of law.

G.    All costs of arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties to the arbitration unless otherwise ordered by the arbitrators. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.370 Revocation.
The city may revoke the franchise only after a declaration of default has been affirmed by a written decision of the arbitrators pursuant to Section 5.6, and only for defaults by grantee arising from the following circumstances:

A.    Material misrepresentation by grantee to city in information required to be provided under the franchise.

B.     Wilful and substantial violation of any material term of this franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.380 Procedures governing revocation.
A.    The city shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise and the lawful ground therefor. Such written notice shall include the date, time, and place for the city council meeting where the city will consider the revocation issue, and shall be given to the grantee. Notice of the city council’s meeting shall also be published by the city at least once, ten days before such meeting in one newspaper of general circulation within the city.

B.     At the designated meeting, the council shall given the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. Grantee may appeal such determination to a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall have the power to review the decision of the council “de novo” and to modify or reverse such decision, as justice may require. Such appeal to the court must be taken within thirty days of the issuance of the determination of the council.

C.     The council may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the city’s rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.390 Unauthorized operations.
It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the service area any video programming by means of a system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.400 Unauthorized use.
A.    No person shall intercept, descramble, decode, or receive or assist in intercepting, descrambling, decoding or receiving any signals from the system unless specifically authorized to do so by grantee. “Assist in intercepting, descrambling, decoding, or receiving” includes the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for unauthorized reception of signals over a system.

B.     No person shall tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires, or devices used with the system unless specifically authorized to do so by grantee.

C.     No person shall intentionally deprive grantee of lawful charge for cable service.

D.    No person shall resell grantee’s cable service without grantee’s expressed written consent.

E.     Grantee may bring an action to restrain or enjoin a violation or threatened violation of this section and for damages resulting from the violation. Grantee shall be entitled to issuance of such an injunction upon a showing that a violation has occurred or will occur, without the need for demonstrating irreparable injury, inadequacy of legal remedies or probability of recovery. The court shall award the greater of five hundred dollars or triple damages and reasonable attorneys’ fees to grantee if grantee prevails in an action hereunder.

F.     A knowing violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each day of infraction.

G.    If an unauthorized device designed to intercept, descramble, or decode a cable television signal is present on the premises or property occupied and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the device to intercept, descramble, or decode cable signals. If an unauthorized cable connection is present on the premises or property occupied and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the connection to intercept cable signals. If equipment of grantee which has been tampered with, changed, or modified is present on the premises or property occupied by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the equipment to intercept, descramble, or decode cable signals.

H.    Grantee is expressly reserved its applicable rights and remedies available in law or in equity. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.410 Abandonment or removal of franchise property.
A.    In the event that the use of any material portion of the system is discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that portion of the system.

B.     Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operator or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore the street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were removed, as near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the performance bond as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.

C.     Upon abandonment of any portion of the system in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the city attorney, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the portion of the system.

D.    At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty days, or within such reasonable additional period as may be required therefor.

E.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground portion of the system in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such portion of the system is located. The grantee shall not be required to remove any portion of the system which has been abandoned or deemed abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless it constitutes a substantial portion of the system. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.420 Receivership and foreclosure.
A.    A franchise granted under this chapter shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty days, or unless: (1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all material terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty days shall have remedied all material faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and (2) such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty days, execute an agreement duty approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise herein granted.

B.     In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the system, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise herein granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty days after service of such notice, unless: (1) grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and (2) such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.430 Waivers.
The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines (1) that it is in the public interest to do so, and (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.440 Rights of individuals.
A.    Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, religion, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, age or sexual orientation. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders, relating to nondiscrimination, including without limitation Section 51 of the California Civil Code and Section 53066.2 of the Government Code.

B.     Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC and applicable state regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. (Amended during 2009 republication; Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.450 Tenant rights.
A.    Definitions.

“Cable operator” means each person franchised to provide cable service over a cable system within the political jurisdiction in which the subdivision is located.

“Developer” means each party responsible for the acquisition, ownership, construction, management, or operation of a residential subdivision.

“Easement” means the streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, easements and riser paths of any subdivision which are dedicated or to be designated for public utility use, whether by formal instrument of dedication or by actual use in the delivery of utility services to residents.

“Subdivision” means:

1.     A real estate development;

2.     A condominium, or cooperative, mobile home or multi-unit apartment;

3.     Any other multiple unit dwelling.

B.     Cable Television Access to Subdivisions.

1.     Each cable operator has the right to use the easements of any subdivision for the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of a cable television system and for the provision of cable services to subscribers;

2.     The developer of each subdivision for which a tentative map or parcel map is required pursuant to Section 66426 of the Government Code shall identify on the map land dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility and cable television use so as to provide a franchised cable television operator a path from which to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision;

3.     Each developer shall assure that each cable operator is provided timely access to:

a.     Jointly-used trenches, at the time that the trenches are opened for utility and/or cable television installation. Access shall be provided on a cost shared basis, without discrimination among users,

b.     Underground easements and all riser paths used for the installation of utility and/or cable television facilities. Access shall be provided prior to the paving or sealing of any pertinent road (if within the road right-of-way) and shall be offered at all other locations no later than the time of installation of telephone or cable television;

4.     No developer shall unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of a cable operator’s rights hereunder, or enter into any arrangement with a third party to do so.

C.     Procedures.

1.     A developer shall assure delivery of reasonable advance notice to each cable operator of intended subdivision construction; and timely notice (within fourteen days) of the issuance of work permits related to use of subdivision easements by utilities or cable television;

2.     A developer shall assure delivery to each cable operator of thirty days’ advance notice of the opening of joint-use trenches by utilities and the use of underground easements and of riser paths by utilities or cable television;

3.     No request for any governmental approval or work permit required for a subdivision shall be accepted unless accompanied by written consent of each cable operator to the adequacy of arrangements under paragraph (2) of this subsection;

4.     All notices sent to a cable operator hereunder shall be sent registered mail, return receipt requested, to the general manager, system manager, or to the address on file with the city. No developer may omit notice without written confirmation from the city that there are no cable operators with respect to that subdivision;

5.     If a cable operator fails to install its conduit within a shared trench within five working days of the date trenching is available, as designated in the developer’s notice, the cable operator shall be responsible for all costs of reopening the trench. Separate trenches created by a cable operator for distribution plant shall be installed during any period of installation by multiple cable operators, and as contiguous as reasonably practicable to other utility trenches.

D.    Eminent Domain. At the request of a cable operator, the franchising authority will exercise its rights of eminent domain, and take possession and title in advance of final judgment, for all rights necessary to assure the availability of that cable operator’s service to residents of a subdivision or any other multi-unit development. Should the cable operator request that the franchising authority exercise its power of eminent domain, the cable operator shall be responsible for all costs and expenses, including attorneys fees and compensation to land owners, incurred by the franchising authority by virtue of its exercise of the power of eminent domain under this section.

E.     Residents’ Choice of Cable Operator.

1.     Each resident of a subdivision shall be provided with the continuing option to receive cable service from any cable operator;

2.     If a developer obtains or supplies cable service to residents of a subdivision on a “bulk” basis, charges to residents for such services may not be combined with any rent, fee, assessment or due. Charges for such services must be separately stated, and may not be charged at less than the developers’ cost of supplying such service. If a resident in such a development elects to receive service from a cable operator which is not party to the bulk agreement, the developer shall make payment to that operator of the unit charge attributable to that resident, and the pro rata share of all other consideration provided to the party to the bulk agreement for rendering cable service;

3.     No developer shall enter into an agreement which has the purpose or effect of interfering with a resident’s or cable operator’s free and complete exercise of the rights hereunder, or enter into any arrangement with a third party to do so.

F.     Remedies. Any developer who violates this section shall be subject to a stop work order; to forfeiture of any cable franchise held by it, its affiliates, or by those with whom it has contractual arrangements; and shall be liable to an aggrieved resident or cable operator for all costs and expenses required to assure the rights afforded hereunder. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

 

5.30.460 Poles.
All poles and conduits installed within the city shall be made available for attachment or use by grantee, at just and reasonable rates applied to public utilities under the formula presently established in Section 767.5 of the Public Utilities Code. If such poles or facilities are not made so available, grantee may erect its own poles. (Ord. 993 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 5.32 FIRE SALES
5.32.010 License—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to represent or hold out that any sale of goods, wares or merchandise is an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvency, assignee’s, executor’s, administrator’s, receiver’s, trustee’s, creditor’s, forced, removal or closing-out sale, or a sale of goods, wares or merchandise damaged by fire, smoke, water, wreck or other calamity in the city unless he or she has first obtained a license from the city clerk. (Prior code § 11-45)

 

5.32.020 License—Application and contents.
Every person managing, conducting or carrying on a sale as specified in Section 5.32.010 shall make a written application to the city clerk so to do. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall state all the facts in regard to the contemplated sale, the period of time during which the sale shall be held, such period not to exceed three months, together with a statement that no goods, wares or merchandise have been purchased or received during the period of thirty days immediately preceding the date of such application for the purpose of adding same to that in stock for sale, the reason for such sale, an inventory of such goods, showing the actual purchase price, names of persons from whom such goods were obtained, the date of purchase, the date of delivery of such goods and all details necessary fully to identify the goods to be sold. (Prior code § 11-46)

 

5.32.030 License—Fee.
Every person managing, conducting or carrying on a sale as specified in this chapter shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars for a period of three months. (Prior code § 11-47)

 

5.32.040 License—Supplemental fee.
If, at any time during the three months’ period, a sworn application is filed with the city clerk, making it appear that all of the goods in the original inventory have not been sold, accompanied by an inventory of what remains, showing actual purchase price, a supplemental license may be issued at the direction of the city clerk, upon compliance by the applicant with the requirements of the original license, the upon the payment of additional license fee of twenty-five dollars per day. Such license shall continue in effect only as long as such daily license fee shall be paid and the provisions of this section complied with. (Prior code § 11-48)

 

5.32.050 Prohibited activities—Exemption.
A.    The city clerk shall file an application for a license pursuant to this chapter and shall endorse thereon the date such license is granted or refused.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement in such application.

C.     A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only for the inventoried goods.

D.    A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable.

E.     It is unlawful for a person managing, conducting or carrying on a sale as specified in this chapter to secure goods other than those enumerated in the inventory filed with the application for the purpose of selling same at such sale.

F.     It is unlawful for any person having a license under this chapter to add any goods to the inventoried stock, and no goods shall be sold except that included in the original inventory.

G.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to public or court officers or to any person acting under the direction of state or federal courts in the course of their official duties. (Prior code § 11-49)

Chapter 5.36 PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS AND PROTECTION DOG OPERATORS
5.36.010 Definitions.
A.    For the purpose of this chapter, a “private patrol operator” or “operator of a private patrol service” is a person, other than an armored contract carrier, who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish, or furnishes, a watchman, guard, patrolman or other person to protect persons or property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person, for any of these purposes.

B.     A “protection dog operator” within the meaning of this chapter is any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in business to furnish, or agree to furnish or train a protection dog for others. A “protection dog” means any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol or defend any premises, area or yard, or any dog trained to protect, defend or guard any person or property, with or without the necessity of direct human supervision.

C.     An “armored contract carrier” within the meaning of this section is a contract carrier operating armored vehicles pursuant to California Highway Patrol and Public Utilities Commission authority. (Ord. 774 § 1, 1987)

 

5.36.020 Identification cards.
Private patrol operators and their employees and protection dog operators and their employees shall, prior to engaging in business in the city, register their names and file a copy of their state identification cards with the city clerk. (Ord. 774 § 1, 1987)

 

5.36.030 Uniforms.
Uniforms and insignias worn by uniformed employees of private patrol operators and vehicles used by a private patrol operator shall be clearly distinguishable from the uniforms worn by, and the vehicles used by, city police officers, and to this end, such uniforms and vehicles shall be approved by the police chief prior to use. (Ord. 774 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 5.40 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Note
*       Prior history: prior code §§ 20-1—20-22; Ord. 1211.

 

5.40.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Driver” means every person in charge of, or operating, any passenger-carrying or motor-propelled vehicle, as defined in this chapter, either as agent, employee or otherwise, or owner, as owner, or under the direction of the owner, as defined in this chapter.

B.     “Limousine” means an automobile having an enclosed compartment for passengers separate from the driver’s compartment, the payment for the use of which is not calculated by use of a taximeter or other mechanical device.

C.     “Owner” means every person having use or control of any passenger-carrying automobile or motor-propelled vehicles, as defined in this chapter, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise.

D.    “Public transportation vehicles” means every motor-propelled vehicle not otherwise defined in this section used in the business of transporting passengers over the street of the city irrespective of whether or not any fee, compensation, or consideration is paid for such transportation, excepting any transportation system operating over a fixed route under a certification of public convenience and necessity issued by the public utilities commission of the state.

E.     “Taxicab” means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle except a limousine as defined in this section, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city and whether or not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such persons hiring the same.

F.     “Taximeter” means any instrument or device attached to a public passenger vehicle for hire by means of which instrument or device the charge authorized for hire of such vehicle is mechanically calculated either on a basis of distance traveled or for waiting time, or a combination thereof, which charges shall be indicated upon such taximeter, by means of figures, in dollars and cents. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.020 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating or causing to be operated any taxicab or public transportation vehicle for hire in the city without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.030 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Application—Contents.
All persons applying for the permit to operate a taxicab business as required by Section 5.40.020 shall file with the chief of police a certified application which should contain the following information:

A.    Name and address of the person making application;

B.     Number of vehicles proposed to be operated under the permit requested;

C.     Number of vehicles presently being operated, if any;

D.    The make, type, year of manufacture, and passenger seating capacity for each vehicle proposed to be operated for which a permit will be requested;

E.     The description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, or other distinguishable characteristics of the taxicab to be used;

F.     Any further facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity requires the granting of a permit;

G.    Proposed rates to be charged. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.040 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Review of application.
Upon receipt of any application referred to in Section 5.40.030, the chief of police shall set a time not less than ten, nor more than thirty days thereafter, for the review of such application before a reviewing officer appointed by the chief of police. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.050 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Hearing results—Declaration of public convenience.
No taxicab business operator’s permit shall be granted until the chief of police has determined that the following conditions exist:

A.    That the applicant is financially responsible, and that the applicant is of good moral character, or where applicant is a corporation, that the officers of the applicant are of good moral character;

B.     That the persons holding permits or licenses for the operation of motor vehicles for hire are under the experienced and efficient management earning a fair and reasonable return of their capital devoted to such service;

C.     That the applicant has complied with the provisions of all city, state and federal laws applicable to the proposed operation;

D.    That the additional service will not result in a greater hazard to the public, and will not create traffic congestion or parking problems. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.060 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Granting—Denial.
A.    If the chief of police finds from its investigation and review that the facts and circumstances justify the granting of permits requested there under, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. Within sixty days thereafter the applicant shall furnish to the chief of police any and all additional information which may be required, and if the chief of police then finds the vehicles proposed to be used by the applicant meet the requirements of this chapter, he shall thereupon issue to the applicant a taxicab business operator’s permit.

B.     If the chief of police finds from such investigation and review that the facts and circumstances do not justify the granting of a taxicab business operator’s permit, it shall forthwith notify the applicant of such finding. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.070 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Necessity for licensing.
Subject to other provisions of this chapter, every owner operating a licensed taxicab or taxicabs or public transportation vehicle for hire prior to February 6, 1963, shall be presumed, in the absence of any contrary evidence presented to the chief of police, to have provided prima facie evidence of a taxicab business operator’s permit for the licensing of the taxicab or public transportation vehicles for hire in operation, and the chief of police, upon application received not later than fifteen days after February 6, 1963, shall grant a taxicab business operator’s permit to such owners for the number of taxicabs or public transportation vehicles held by such owner on February 6, 1963. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.080 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Certificate prerequisite to issuance of license.
No person shall be entitled to receive a business license to operate a vehicle of the class defined in this chapter without first having received a taxicab business operator’s permit as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.090 Taxicab business operator’s permit—Revocation.
A.    A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police if the holder thereof has:

1.     Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;

2.     Discontinued operation for a period of five days or more;

3.     Has violated any provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city or of the state or of the United States, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation.

B.     Before suspension or revocation the holder of the permit shall be given reasonable notice of the proposed action to be taken, and shall have an opportunity to be heard by the chief of police. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.100 Procedure for sale or transfer of business.
If an owner to whom a certificate for convenience and necessity has been issued desires to sell or transfer his or her business, the intended buyer shall make application to the city for a certificate of convenience and necessity as required by this chapter. The seller and holder of the certificate shall file an affidavit of intention to surrender and cancel the existing certificates and licenses conditionally upon and concurrently with consummation of sale and issuance of new certificates and licenses in the name of the buyer. If the buyer applicant meets the requirements as set forth in this chapter for the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the city shall issue a new certificate to the buyer and concurrently therewith shall cancel the seller’s certificate. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.110 Transfer of vehicle—Withdrawal of vehicle from service.
A.    In the event an owner sells or transfers title to a taxicab or vehicle for which a license has been issued, or in the event such vehicle has been destroyed, the owner is entitled as a matter of right to have a new license issued for the taxicab or vehicle replacing the one so sold or transferred upon proper application to the city clerk within forty-five days after such sale, transfer or destruction.

B.     If a vehicle is withdrawn from service for a period of forty-five days without written permission being first secured from the city administrator, the license for such vehicles shall be automatically cancelled and the certificate shall be reduced by one or more, as the case may be. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.120 Insurance required.
No taxicab business operator’s permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect and covering each vehicle classified under this chapter a policy of insurance in such form as the city council shall deem proper, executed by an insurance company approved by the city council, which policy shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result from the operation of the vehicle; provided, that the policy of insurance shall provide for maximum recovery of not less than the following schedule:

A.    For injury or death of any one person in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars;

B.     For injury or death of two or more persons in any one accident, three hundred thousand dollars;

C.     For injury or destruction of property in any one accident, fifty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.130 Taxi operators—Insurance required.
A.    Regardless of the provisions of any other ordinances or provisions of this code, taxicab operators who participate in the subsidized taxicab program shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect liability insurance in the amount of two million dollars for each accident and two million dollars for injuries in any one occurrence and property damage liability in the sum of two million dollars, naming the city of Manteca and its elected officials, employees and volunteers as additional insured, and which policy shall provide that the city shall be given thirty days’ written notice prior to the cancellation of any such policy.

B.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.140 Vehicle inspection and maintenance.
All vehicles for which a taxicab business operator’s permit has been issued under this chapter shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police and no owner or driver shall operate, or permit to be operated, any vehicles in the city while the equipment used therein is defective, damaged, or in any unsanitary condition, and every such vehicle shall be at all times subject to the inspection of any police officer of the city. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.150 Vehicle license suspension.
A.    The chief of police shall suspend the license of the vehicle, without previous notice, any vehicle operating pursuant to this chapter whenever an owner or driver violates any of the sections of this chapter. Any owner may appeal such decision in writing to the city manager, which shall, after due notice to the owner, conduct a hearing, and determine the matter and their decision therein shall become final. The city manager may order continued suspension of such license until such time as the vehicle shall be restored to a safe or sanitary condition.

B.     An owner or driver knowingly permitting any condition prohibited by Section 5.40.140 shall be subject to the penalty provided herein for violation of this code. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.160 Operating regulations.
A.    Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the passengers to their destination safely and expeditiously.

B.     If requested, every driver shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare.

C.     It is unlawful for any person except where credit is extended, to refuse to pay the lawful fare affixed in this chapter for the use of any vehicle covered by this chapter.

D.    It is unlawful for any driver to refuse when the vehicle is in service and not otherwise engaged to transport any person who presents him or herself, or is presented for carriage, in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose.

E.     No driver shall charge a passenger a fare greater than that to which he or she is entitled under the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle licensed under this chapter to conduct his business from any place other than the established place of business set forth in the certificate of convenience and necessity. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.170 Taxicab stands.
A.    The city council may by resolution locate and designate taxicab or vehicle for hire stands, and such stands shall be appropriately designated. The chief of police shall recommend, in writing, to the city council for their approval, the location of such stands.

B.     Open stands may be authorized and designated by action of the city council to be open to any vehicle for hire for which a certificate has been duly issued. The city council may designate stands for specific vehicles for hire and shall state which vehicles and which owners are entitled to use those stands. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any other vehicle for hire, other than the permittee to use a stand designated specifically to such individual. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.180 Certificate not to confer property right.
The full and sole purpose of this chapter is one of regulation for the public good and under no circumstances whatsoever shall any license or permit provided for in this chapter constitute or be deemed to be a property right or right of livelihood vested in the holder of any such certificate, permit or license. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.190 Fares.
A.    Taxicabs. It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the city unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter, the location of which shall be directly in front of the glove compartment or close thereby. It shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep such taximeter in perfect condition so that it will, at all times correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time, and such taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the chief of police. The chief of police is authorized at his instance or upon complaint of any person to investigate or cause to be investigated such taximeter, and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in the meter to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the streets of the city until such time as the taximeter shall have been correctly adjusted.

B.     Receipts for Fare to be Delivered to Passenger. All drivers or operators of public passenger vehicles for hire, upon the demand of any passenger, shall give a receipt for fare paid, such receipt to be in a form satisfactory to the chief of police.

C.     Operation of Taximeter. Every such taximeter shall register the charge to nearest five cents and be equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words “For Hire” printed or stamped thereon, and such flag shall be so attached an connected to the mechanism of the taximeter as to cause the mechanism to operate when such flag is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for hire, and the flag shall, when moved forwards or downwards, start the operation of the taximeter so that the same will operate in the manner defined in this chapter.

D.    Unlawful Practices. It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to display the flag or device attached to such taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is for hire or not employed, or to have such flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter from operating, and it will be unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other device of a taximeter into a position which causes the taximeter to record when such vehicle is not actually employed or to fail to throw the flag or other device on such taximeter into a non-recording position each time a passenger is discharged and a fare collected.

E.     Basis of Charges. All charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the city shall be based on the charges indicated on the taximeter, and it shall be unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to charge any passenger any sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter.

F.     Rates. The city council shall from time to time, or upon the written request of the franchise holder, consider adjustment in the rates to be charged by an owner or driver of a taxicab within the city, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or driver of a taxicab to charge a greater sum for the use of the vehicle than the current rate which shall be set by resolution of council. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.200 Taximeters to be illuminated.
Each taximeter shall, while in use in the city, be equipped with an efficient illuminating device, either flexible or fixed, and so arranged as to enable the passenger or passengers to conveniently observe the meter and the amount of fare registered thereon. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.210 Operator permits required—Qualification for issuance.
A.    No person shall operate a taxi in the city unless the person then holds a permit issued by the chief of police.

B.     No person shall be issued a permit authorizing him to operate a taxi upon the city streets, unless the chief of police determines that the person:

1.     Has a valid class 3 drivers license as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 12804(b)(3);

2.     Has not, within five years of the date of making application for the permit, been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere, to any of the following:

a.     Reckless driving,

b.     Hit and run,

c.     Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs,

d.     Manslaughter resulting from the operation of motor vehicle,

e.     Any offense, an element of which is: force, violence or theft,

f.      The use, possession, cultivation or sale of any controlled substances as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 through 11058;

3.     Is not required to register as a sex offender pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290 or its successor statute or statutes;

4.     Has completed the application form and supplied any reasonable additional information requested by the chief of police; and

5.     Is at least eighteen years old on the date of application.

C.     The application form and its contents shall be as designated by the chief of police. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.220 Revocation of issued permits.
Any driver’s permit issued pursuant to Section 5.40.210 may be revoked by the chief of police when:

A.    The driver’s Class 3 license has been suspended or revoked by any court, or the California Department of Motor Vehicles;

B.     The driver has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, any of the crimes set forth in Section 5.40.210(B)(2); or

C.     The driver has been convicted of or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any act for which his or her registration as a sex offender is required pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290 or its successor statute or statutes.

D.    The driver has been convicted of a violation of any provision of Chapter 5.50 of this code. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.230 Appeal of permit denial or revocation.
A.    Any applicant for a permit or driver whose application is denied or whose permit is revoked, as provided in this chapter, may appeal such denial to the city manager. Any appeal must be in written form, and be received by the city manager within ten days of the effective date of the denial or revocation. The city manager shall set a date and time at which the applicant or driver will have the opportunity to be heard and present evidence to the city manager relative to the denial or revocation. The date shall be no later than fourteen days after receipt of the appeal. Within seven days after that hearing, the city manager shall affirm or reverse the denial or revocation. If the denial or revocation is reversed, the chief of police shall issue or reinstate the permit.

B.     If the city manager affirms the denial or revocation, he or she shall notify the applicant or driver of his or her decision by mail within three days of his or her determination. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 1446 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 5.44 TOWING
5.44.010 Purpose.
The city council finds that it is in the public interest that this chapter be enacted to prescribe basic regulations for the operation of those towing services in the city participating in a rotation system for the removal of and towing away of motor vehicles which are illegally parked, which are abandoned, which are involved in an accident, or which constitute an obstruction to traffic because of mechanical failure. It is the purpose of the council in enacting these regulations to provide a fair and impartial means for the Manteca police department to distribute requests for towing services among qualified firms and to ensure that such service is prompt, reasonably priced, and in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 763 § 1, 1987)

 

5.44.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Abandoned vehicles rotation list” means a list maintained by the Manteca police department of operators from which the police department will make calls for towing services for the purpose of removing abandoned vehicles as authorized by Sections 22651(k), 22651(o) and 22669(a) of the California Vehicle Code, from public to private property.

B.     “Attendant” is an employee of an operator qualified by knowledge and experience to operate a tow car or tow truck.

C.     “Operator” means any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles.

D.    “Rotation list” is a list maintained by the Manteca police department of operators from which the police department will make calls for towing services on a sequential basis.

E.     “Tow car” or “tow truck” means a motor vehicle as defined in Section 615 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

F.     “Towing service” means the business of operating tow cars and/or tow trucks in the city for the purpose of towing, moving or removing vehicles from, over, or on the public streets thereof. (Ord. 763 § 2, 1987)

 

5.44.030 Applicability.
Except as hereinafter provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to those towing service operators who are placed on the rotation list or abandoned vehicle rotation list for towing service authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 3, 1987)

5.44.040 Unlawful responses.
It is unlawful for any person, towing service operator or the agent, attendant or other employee of a towing service operator, whether or not on the rotation list, to respond to any police radio call for the purpose of removing from the public streets and towing away any vehicle subject to the provisions of this chapter unless specifically requested to do so by an officer or representative of the Manteca police department. The owner or operator of any vehicle may request any specific towing service operator be called to remove and tow away his or her vehicle. (Ord. 763 § 4, 1987)

 

5.44.050 Unlawful solicitation.
It is unlawful for any person, towing service operator, or the agent, attendant or other employee of a towing service operator, whether or not on the rotation list, to solicit any towing service work which is regulated by this chapter without first having been requested by the owner or operator of the vehicle or be an officer or representative of the Manteca Police Department to provide such towing service work. (Ord. 763 §5, 1987)

 

5.44.060 Rotation list.
Within sixty days after the effective date of this chapter, the police chief shall establish and thereafter maintain a rotation list of towing service operators. Such rotation service operators that meet the requirements of this chapter and who make application to be included on the list. Each operator of a towing service placed on the rotation list shall sign an agreement to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 6, 1987)

 

5.44.070 Abandoned vehicle rotation list.
Within sixty days after the effective date of this chapter, the police chief shall establish and thereafter maintain an abandoned rotation list of towing service operators who have agreed to remove abandoned vehicles as authorized by Section 22651(k), 22651(o) and 22669(a) of the California Vehicle Code. Such list shall be compiled by the police chief and consist of the towing service operators that meet the requirements of this chapter and make application to be included on the list. Each operator of a towing service placed on the abandoned vehicle rotation list shall sign an agreement to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 7, 1987)

 

5.44.080 Abandoned vehicles.
In the event that no towing service operator agrees to be placed on the abandoned vehicle rotation list, then all tow service operators that are on the rotation list will be required to provide towing services to remove abandoned vehicles as directed by the police department. (Ord. 763 § 8, 1987)

 

5.44.090 Towing service operator—Application.
A.    Each operator of a towing service desiring assignment to the rotation list or abandoned vehicle rotation list shall pay to the director of finance a processing fee as each application. A copy of the receipt for fees shall be filed along with the application with the police chief. Applications shall be filed on forms supplied by the Manteca police department, which applications shall contain the following information:

1.     The name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence address and telephone number of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of each director, each officer and the general manager;

2.     The applicant’s date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair. If the applicant is a partnership, the date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair of each director, each officer and the general manager;

3.     The name under which the towing service operates and the business address and telephone number of the towing service;

4.     The make, year, model, color and license number of every tow truck that will be operated by the towing service;

5.     The name of each city, county and state, including the specific addresses therein, in which the applicant has been engaged in or has conducted a towing service, or has been employed as a towing service operator or attendant within the last five years. If the applicant is a partnership, such information shall be provided for each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, such information shall be provided for each director, each officer and the general manager;

6.     A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors (including moving traffic violations and excluding parking violations) for which the applicant has been convicted within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, such information shall be provided for each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, such information shall be provided for each director, each officer and the general manager;

7.     Such other information as the police chief may deem relevant and necessary to investigate and evaluate the qualifications of the applicant.

B.     All applications shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 763 § 9, 1987)

 

5.44.100 Towing service operator—Application—Investigation.
The police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of each application by a towing service operator, and a report of such investigation shall be attached to the application. (Ord. 763 § 10, 1987)

 

5.44.110 Towing service operator—Consideration.
The police chief, upon consideration of an application by a towing service operator and the investigative reports and documents attached thereto, shall approve or reject the application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 11, 1987)

 

5.44.120 Towing service operator—Application—Approval.
The police chief shall approve the application by a towing service operator for consideration for assignment to the rotation list if the police chief finds:

A.    That the vehicles described in the application and proposed to be operated by the towing service meet the minimum standards set forth in Section 5.44.130;

B.     That the applicant meets all of the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations;

C.     That the applicant has adequate experience in the operation of a towing service;

D.    That the applicant has not yet been convicted within five years immediately preceding the application of crime involving honesty, or veracity, violence, dangerous or deadly weapons, or more than once during the five-year period has been convicted of the use or possession of narcotics, or for operating a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 763 § 12, 1987)

 

5.44.130 Equipment—Minimum standards.
Each tow car or tow truck shall meet the following standards:

A.    Truck Chassis. Vehicles shall have at least one-ton capacity with rear dual wheels or equivalent.

B.     Company Name. Vehicles shall be marked pursuant to Section 27907 of the California Vehicle Code.

C.     Lights. Vehicles shall at all time be equipped with lighting equipment required by Sections 25253 and 24605 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California and may be equipped with such other lights as the operator may desire which are not forbidden by law.

D.    Radio. Each vehicle shall have in good operating condition a two-way communication system approved by the police chief, capable of communicating with the parent company dispatcher.

E.     Additional Equipment. Each vehicle shall have a flashlight in operating condition, a dustpan, crowbar, pry-bar, rope or strapping implement for securing steering wheels, hammer, screwdriver, wrenches, safety chain and other miscellaneous hand tools. (Ord. 763 § 13, 1987)

 

5.44.140 Driver’s license—Required.
No person shall drive or be permitted to drive upon the streets of the city a tow car or tow truck regulated by this chapter unless the person shall have a current valid drivers license issued by the state. (Ord. 763 § 15, 1987)

 

5.44.150 Attendant—Required.
Each tow car or tow truck shall be operated by an attendant with a valid current attendant’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 14, 1987)

 

5.44.160 Attendant—Permit—Required.
No person shall operate or be permitted to operate a tow car or tow truck regulated by this chapter without first obtaining an attendant’s permit to do so from the police chief. (Ord. 763 § 16, 1987)

 

5.44.170 Attendant—Permit—Application.
A.    An application for attendant’s permit shall be made upon blank forms furnished by the city and shall contain:

1.     The applicant’s full name, present residence address, and any other residence address during the past year;

2.     Age, date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair and drivers license number;

3.     A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors (including moving traffic violations and excluding parking violations) for which the applicant has been convicted with the five years immediately preceding application for the permit; and

4.     A statement of past experiences as a tow car or tow truck operator or attendant, including the name and address of each employment as a towing service operator or attendant within the five years immediately preceding application for the permit.

B.     All applications shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 763 § 17, 1987)

 

5.44.180 Attendant—Permit—Application fee.
Applicants for attendant’s permits shall pay to the director of finance a processing fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council for each application. A copy of the receipt for fees paid shall be filed along with the application with the police chief. When the application is processed, fingerprints shall be submitted as required by the Bureau of Identification, state of California. (Ord. 763 § 18, 1987)

 

5.44.190 Attendant—Permit—Investigation.
The police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of each application for an attendant’s permit; and a report of such investigation, including a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. (Ord. 763 § 19, 1987)

 

5.44.200 Attendant—Permit—Application consideration.
The police chief, upon consideration of an application for an attendant’s permit, and the investigation reports and documents attached thereto, shall approve or reject the application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 20, 1987)

 

5.44.210 Attendant—Permit—Issuance.
The police chief shall issue an attendant’s permit if the police chief finds that the applicant:

A.    If the age of eighteen years or over;

B.     Is able to speak, read and write the English language;

C.     Has a safe driving record. Applicant must possess a valid California Driver’s License. Applicant shall be disqualified if:

1.     Applicant has more than two convictions for hazardous traffic violations in the prior twelve months, or

2.     Applicant has been involved in more than two accidents in which the applicant was the primary cause of the accident or significantly contributed to the cause of the accident in the prior twelve months, or

3.     Applicant has more than one conviction for a hazardous misdemeanor traffic violation in the past twelve months, or

4.     Applicant has more than three convictions or accidents in any of the above listed categories;

D.    Has met all of the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations;

E.     Has not been convicted within the five years immediately preceding application for a permit of a crime involving honesty or veracity, violence, dangerous or deadly weapons, or more than once during the five-year period has been convicted of the use or possession of narcotics, or for operating a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 763 § 21, 1987)

 

5.44.220 Attendant—Permit—Contents—Requirements.
The attendant’s permit shall be in the form of a card which shall bear the signature, photograph and fingerprint of the applicant. Such card shall be issued in duplicate; and one copy with the fingerprint, photograph and signature of the applicant shall be placed on file with the police chief. The other card shall be carried on the person of the permittee at all times while operating a tow car or tow truck. The permit, when issued, remains the property of the Manteca police department. If an attendant changes employment from one towing service to another, he or she shall notify the Manteca police department of that change. If an attendant leaves the towing service for other employment, he or she shall turn in his or her permit to the Manteca police department. (Ord. 763 § 22, 1987)

 

5.44.230 Attendant—Permit—Revocation.
The police chief may suspend or revoke any attendant’s permit for the same reasons that the police chief can deny a permit, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 23, 1987)

 

5.44.240 Service permit suspension or revocation.
The police chief may suspend or revoke any towing service from the rotation list on any one or more of the following grounds:

A.    That the towing service operator fails to meet the requirements for the approval of an application by a towing service operator, as set forth in this chapter;

B.     That the operator has failed to operate the towing service in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter;

C.     That the operator has ceased to operate the towing service for a period of ten consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the police chief, except for short term absences when prior notice has been given to the police department and provisions have been made for the release of vehicles during this time; short term absences is defined as a period of time less than twenty-one days;

D.    That any of the operator’s insurance required by this chapter has been cancelled, not renewed or been materially changed in coverage, terms or conditions;

E.     That the operator has failed to respond to a towing service request made by the police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and

F.     Failure to comply when towing service has been sold to a new owner. Written notice of the reasons for removal of an operator’s service from the rotation list shall be given seventy-two hours prior to actual suspension or revocation. (Ord. 763 § 24, 1987)

 

5.44.250 Business and storage lot requirements.
A.    Vehicle Storage. Each towing service operator shall have a storage lot located within a six-mile radius of the city limits of the city which is adequate to store not less than five vehicles. A storage building must also be available to the operator capable of storing a minimum of two vehicles. Such storage lot and building shall be enclosed by a fence or wall which is of sufficient height and strength to be capable of protecting stored vehicles and their contents from pilfering or tampering and comply with all zoning and building requirements of the city. Such fence shall be at least six feet in height and shall be provided with at least one door or gate with the bottom edge of any fence to be not more than two inches above the parking surface of the storage lot and the top edge of the fence or wall enclosure, including all gates and doors thereto, to be equipped with not less than two barbed wires installed so as to discourage access over the top of the fence or wall. All gates or buildings shall be securely locked when not in use and storage lots shall be screened from public view.

B.     Hours. Each towing service operator shall have an attendant on call, capable of responding to requests from the Manteca police department for towing service and to citizens’ requests for release of vehicles, twenty-four hours each day, seven days per week including holidays.

C.     Insurance. Towing service operators shall maintain in full force and effect policies of insurance as protection against:

1.     Public liability including:

a.     Garage liability coverage providing towing and wrecker liability,

b.     Garage keeper’s legal liability or equivalent protection affording fire, theft, vandalism and malicious mischief, covering the vehicles stored and/or impounded while in the care, custody and control of the towing service operator,

c.     Contractual liability;

2.     Worker’s Compensation.

D.    Certificates of insurance evidencing such insurance as required by this chapter shall be filed with the police chief of the city prior to assignment of a towing service operator to the rotation list. The certificate(s) shall provide that the city shall receive a thirty-day written notice prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal or any material change in coverage, terms or conditions of the policy(s).

E.     Regardless of the provisions of any other ordinances or provisions of this code, towing service operators who participate in the rotation list or abandoned vehicle rotation list shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars for each accident and five hundred thousand dollars for injuries in any one occurrence and property damage liability in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars, naming the city and its elected officials, employees and volunteers as additional insureds, and which policy shall provide that the city shall be given thirty days written notice prior to the cancellation of any such policy. Towing service operators who are insured at the above listed limits shall not carry passengers in or on their tow car or tow truck, or in the vehicles being towed, at any time while engaged in towing service pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

F.     If the towing service operator elects to provide transportation for passengers as part of the towing service, the requirement for liability insurance shall be one million dollars for each accident and one million dollars for injuries in any one occurrence. The other requirements for insurance and limits of liability remain the same.

G.    Worker’s compensation insurance shall be carried in compliance with the laws of the state. (Ord. 981 § 1, 1993; Ord. 763 § 25, 1987)

 

5.44.260 Fees and charges.
A.    The maximum fees and charges which may be charged by towing service operators for services rendered pursuant to this chapter shall be established by resolutions of the city council adopted from time to time. Such rates and charges shall be established after a review of rates and charges used in comparable communities and operating data supplied by towing service operators on the rotation list established pursuant to this chapter. The rates and charges shall provide for extra fees in case of unusual circumstances. Towing service operators on the rotation list established pursuant to this chapter may periodically, but not more frequently than annually, request such schedule of rates and charges by review for possible adjustment.

B.     No rates, charges or other fees shall be charged for towing services provided pursuant to this chapter other than those authorized by the schedule of rates and charges established pursuant to this section. Each towing service operator shall keep full and complete records of all such fees and charges charged for towing service provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 26, 1987)

 

5.44.270 Response time requirements.
Tow service operators shall respond to all calls for towing service within twenty minutes or less. If a towing service operator is unable to respond within such time and notifies the police department of that fact at the time the call for service is received, the operator will be assigned an alternate turn. (Ord. 763 § 27, 1987)

 

5.44.280 Vehicle protection.
A.    Vehicles impounded by the Manteca police department shall be held by the operator until the vehicle is released in writing by the Manteca police department. Contents of vehicle impounded shall not be removed without the prior written approval of the Manteca police department. Impounded vehicles shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Manteca police department until released in writing by the Manteca Police department, and in the interim shall be stored for safekeeping by the operator. The Manteca police department may require such impounded vehicles to be stored inside a locked building. Tow service operators shall have a storage building available to the Manteca police department that will store no less than two vehicles.

B.     The storage building must be located within two miles of the city limits. If the storage building is already filled to capacity by police department impounds then the next operator on the rotation list having such storage facilities available will be called, without loss of rotation turn to those passed over. (Ord. 763 § 28, 1987)

 

5.44.290 Damage appraisals.
All vehicles, except impounded vehicles, stored pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be made available for the purpose of estimating or appraising damages by the owner of the vehicle or his or her representative during normal business hours. All vehicles shall be accessible at all times to the Manteca police department and other law enforcement personnel. The operator may be required to assist making vehicles accessible upon request of the Manteca police department. (Ord. 763 § 29, 1987)

 

5.44.300 Rotation—Turn determination.
Requests for towing of vehicles, emergency road service, and other similar services will be considered to be a rotation turn except when an operator or attendant requests no compensation for the services rendered or when services of a specific operator are requested by a citizen. (Ord. 763 § 30, 1987)

 

5.44.310 Rotation—Deviation.
The police department may deviate from the normal rotation schedule if the operator next on rotation is, in the judgment of the department, incapable of or not properly equipped for handling a specific task requiring special skills or equipment. If none of the operators on the rotation list have the necessary skills or equipment to handle a specific task, the police department may request service from any other person or company capable of handling the request. A deviation from the normal rotation for such reason shall not cause a loss of rotation turn by either the operator who was determined to be incapable or not properly equipped for handling the request or by another rotation operator who does respond. In the event that the police chief or his or her authorized representative determines that there is an emergency, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply and the Manteca police department may obtain towing service from any source deemed appropriate. (Ord. 763 § 31, 1987)

 

5.44.320 Appeals.
A.    Any applicant for or holder of a permit whose application is denied or whose permit is suspended or revoked, as provided in this chapter, may appeal such denial to the city manager. Any appeal must be in written form, and be received by the city manager within ten days of the effective date of the denial, suspension or revocation. The city manager shall set a date and time at which the applicant or permit holder will have the opportunity to be heard and present evidence to the city manager relative to the denial, suspension or revocation. The date shall be no later than fourteen days after receipt of the appeal. Within seven days after that hearing, the city manager shall affirm, modify or reverse the denial, suspension or revocation. If the denial, suspension or revocation is modified or reversed, the police chief shall take action consistent therewith.

B.     If the city manager affirms the denial, suspension or revocation, he or she shall notify the applicant or permit holder of his or her decision by mail within three days of his or her determination. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the city manager’s determination to the city council. Any appeal must be in written form, and be received by the city clerk within ten days of the effective date of the mailing of the notice of the city manager’s decision. The city clerk shall then set the appeal as a public hearing item on the council agenda at a regular or special meeting of the city council. The date the appeal is set for hearing shall be no sooner than fifteen or later than forty-five days following the receipt of the appeal. During the hearing of the appeal any person shall be entitled to be heard relative to the denial or revocation. If the council reverses the denial, suspension or revocation, the police chief shall issue or reinstate the permit. (Ord. 763 § 33, 1987)

 

5.44.330 Supplemental regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as supplemental to the business license tax and any other pertinent laws and ordinances of the city. The city and the Manteca police department shall not be responsible for costs incurred by the removal of abandoned vehicles either from public or private property. (Ord. 763 § 34, 1987)

Chapter 5.48 FIREARMS SALES
5.48.010 Licensing requirements.
A.    All applications for licenses permitting the licensee to sell, at retail within the city, pistols, revolvers and other firearms capable of being concealed upon the person shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall cause the application to be set for hearing before the city council. The city council may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. If a license is granted, it shall be in the form prescribed by the attorney general, effective for not more than one year from the date of issuance, and be subject to the following conditions, for breach of any of which the license shall be subject to revocation:

1.     The business shall be carried on only in the building designated by the license.

2.     The license, or a copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority shall be displayed on the premises where it can be easily seen.

3.     No pistol or revolver shall be delivered:

a.     Within fifteen days of the application for the purchase, or, after notice by the Department of Justice pursuant to Penal Code 12076(c), within fifteen days of the submission to the Department of Justice of corrected copies of the register required by Penal Code 12073 or within fifteen days of the submission to the Department of Justice of any fee required pursuant to Penal Code 12076, whichever is later;

b.     Unless unloaded and securely wrapped;

c.     Unless the purchaser either is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his or her identity;

d.     Whenever the dealer is notified by the Department of Justice that a purchaser is in a prohibited class described in 12021 and 12021.1 or Welfare and Institutions Code 8100 and 8103.

4.     No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer thereof, shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can be readily seen from the outside.

B.     As used in this section, “clear evidence of his or her identity” includes, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a state identification card, an armed forces identification card, and employment identification card which contains the bearer’s signature and photograph, or any similar documentation which provides the seller reasonable assurance of the identity of the purchaser. (Ord. 1247 § 5, 2003; Ord. 775 § 5, 1987; prior code § 11-57)

Chapter 5.50 SMOKING IN VEHICLES FOR HIRE
5.50.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Driver” means every person in charge of, or operating, any passenger-carrying or motor-propelled vehicle, as defined in this chapter, either as agent, employee or otherwise, or owner, as owner, or under the direction of the owner as defined in this chapter.

“Owner” means every person having use or control of any passenger-carrying automobile or motor-propelled vehicles, as defined in this chapter, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise.

“Public transportation vehicle for hire” means “limousines” and “taxicabs” as defined in Section 5.40.010 of this code. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 2002)

 

5.50.020 Smoking in public transportation vehicles for hire prohibited.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in a public transportation vehicle for hire, while in the city of Manteca, to smoke any tobacco product or any other plant product. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 2002)

 

5.50.030 Sign.
Every owner or driver of a public transportation vehicle for hire in the city of Manteca shall post a sign or signs in the interior of each vehicle stating the following:

“IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SMOKE IN THIS VEHICLE.”

Said sign or signs shall be posted in a conspicuous spot and be of sufficient size so as to enable passengers in all seats to be able to read said signs. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to operate a public transportation vehicle for hire without the sign set forth in this section. (Ord. 1211 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 5.52 COMMERCIAL FILMING PERMITS
5.52.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Charitable films” means commercials, motion pictures, television, video tapes or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.

B.     “Motion picture, television, still photography” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials.

C.     “News media” means the filming or video taping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or cameramen. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

 

5.52.020 Permits and exemptions.
A.    Permit Required. No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures or television pictures or commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the city manager or designee.

B.     Exemption:

1.     News Media. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest;

2.     The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private-family use;

3.     Charitable Films. Projects which qualify under Section (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

4.     Education, government and public access, and local origination programs for cable television services franchised within the city. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

 

5.52.030 Rules and regulations.
A.    Change of Date. Upon the request of the applicant, the city manager or designee shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location.

B.     Rules. The city manager or designee is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the council, governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He or she shall also provide for the issuance of permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria:

1.     The health and safety of all persons;

2.     Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area;

3.     The safety of property within the city; and

4.     Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

 

5.52.040 Applicants and issuance.
A.    Issuing Authority. The issuing authority shall be the city manager of designee.

B.     Applications. The following information shall be included in the application:

1.     The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted;

2.     The specific location at such address or place;

3.     The inclusive hours and date such activity will transpire;

4.     A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

5.     The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity;

6.     The exact number of personnel to be involved;

7.     Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and

8.     The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved.

C.     No use fees are required.

D.    Reimbursement for Personnel. The production company shall reimburse the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, fire, traffic) for purposes of assisting the production. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

 

5.52.050 Liability provisions.
A.    Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required for a minimum amount of one million dollars naming the city as a coinsured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths and property damage. The city officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate will remain on file.

B.     Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

C.     Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.

D.    Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined) at the time application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the bond may be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

 

5.52.060 Violation.
If an applicant violates any provision of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of the film permit is considered a misdemeanor. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 5.56 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DANCES
5.56.010 Purpose and intent.
Public and private dances in the city of have attracted large numbers of persons. Occurrences at or in connection with these public and private dances have included criminal conduct, disturbances, vandalism, crowd control problems, traffic control problems, excessive noise generation, and public safety impacts or the surrounding businesses and residential community. It is the purpose and intent of the city in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city through the enactment of regulation for public and private dances. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.020 Permit required.
It in unlawful for any renter, lessee or owner of any premises to conduct, permit or allow a public or private dance without the dance permit required by this chapter. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining a dance permit. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter:

“Applicant” means any person, persons, or business entity that seeks a public dance permit as required by this chapter.

“Dance” and “dancing” means movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm.

“Disorderly conduct” means any of the following: consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, public drunkenness, obstructing the free passage of pedestrians over public sidewalks, the obstruction of free passage of vehicles within the public right-of-way, littering, fighting, and such other conduct that constitutes a public nuisance or a violation of law.

“Establishment” means the premises or location where the public dance is being conducted.

“Permittee” means a person, persons, or business entity that has been issued a permit as provided in this chapter. No permittee may be a person under eighteen years of age.

“Police chief” means the police chief of the city and designee.

“Private dance” means a dance of twenty or more individuals which is limited to those persons individually invited to which no admission charge is made or a dance conducted by a bona fide club, society or association, organized or incorporated for the benevolent, charitable, dramatic, literary or dancing purposes, having an established membership and which holds meetings other than such dances at regular intervals and when the proceeds, if any, of such dance are used for the purposes of such club, society or association.

“Public dance” means any dance open to the general public, whether or not a fee or cover charge is imposed, and shall also include live musical performances, whether or not a fee cover charge is imposed, where fixed seating nor chairs are provided for the seating of each patron or customer attending the event. A “public dance” shall not include the presentation of non-recorded or recorded musical selections in connection with any public gathering where the presentation of such musical selection is only incidental to such public gathering and neither the music nor dancing is the primary purpose of the event.

“Reasonable efforts” means any of the following:

1.     The provision of any adequate number of licensed security personnel;

2.     The adoption and posting of operating policies that are consistent with the requirements of this code and the permit and the adherence to those policies;

3.     The documental training of employees in the carrying out of the established operating policies;

4.     Notifying the police department of apparent criminal activity; and

5.     The taking of all additional measures, consistent with sound business judgment, necessary to accomplish the required result.

“Responsible person” means the permittee, owner, proprietor, promoter, manager, assistant manager or other person exercising control over the operation of a public dance, whether or not that person is a named permittee. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.040 Exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to require a permit for the following:

A.    For any dance conducted in a park or recreational facility owned and operated by the city;

B.     For any dance conducted by a religious organization or association;

C.     For any dance conducted by or sponsored by a bona fide organization or association organized for charitable, dramatic or literary purposes having an established membership and which holds meetings for purposes other than such entertainment at regular intervals, when one hundred percent of the proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used for the purposes of such club, society or association;

D.    For any dance conducted by a school. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.050 Applications.
A.    All applications for permits shall be filed with the police chief. The application shall be made under penalty of perjury.

B.     Any application for a permit shall include the following information:

1.     The full name, present address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2.     Previous addresses for the past five years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

3.     Submittal of a business plan consistent with the requirements of the police chief which includes the following:

a.     A description of the proposed public dance, including approximate number of persons who may attend the public dance(s), and any further information about the location or the activity that will occur on the premises as the police chief may deem necessary,

b.     The date, hour and location where the public dance is proposed and the admission fee to be charged, if any, and

c.     The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business;

4.     Submittal of a security plan consistent with the requirements of the police chief which includes the following:

a.     The proposed security arrangements for control of patrons or customers within the establishment and persons within fifty feet of the establishment,

b.     The name of the security company that applicant intends to use for the proposed public dance,

c.     The number of security guards applicant intends to hire, and

d.     The proposed arrangements for the provision of emergency medical services;

5.     Whether the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business have been convicted of a crime(s), the nature of such offense(s), and the sentence(s) received therefor;

6.     Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to obtain verification of the information contained within the application;

7.     A statement in writing by applicant that he or she has read, understands, and agrees to abide by this chapter and the city’s noise ordinance;

8.     A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

(Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.060 Term of permit.
Annual permits issued under this chapter shall expire one year following their issuance. Annual permits may be renewed by the police chief for additional one-year periods upon application by the permittee, unless the permit is suspended or revoked. Special event permits issued under this chapter shall expire at the conclusion of the public dance for which the special event permit was issued. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.070 Fees.
Every application for a permit or renewal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.080 Application and permit issuance—Investigation.
A.    Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the fees, the police chief shall make an investigation of the application. If the applicant has completed the application improperly, or if the application is incomplete, the police chief shall, within ten days of receipt of the original application, notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of ten days or more to submit a complete application. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

B.     Within thirty days of receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall complete the investigation and either:

1.     Issue a special event permit for a one-time dance; or

2.     Issue an annual permit to a licensed business which regularly conducts dances; or

3.     Issue a conditional one-time or annual permit which outlines specific conditions relating to security, noise, public safety, and lighting that must be complied with in order for the dance permit to be valid.

4.     Deny the permit if the police chief finds that facts upon which a denial of said permit is authorized pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Applications for a special event permit shall be made at least thirty days before the dance.

D.    Violation of a condition listed on the conditional permit invalidated the permit and subjects the owner, renter and/or leasee to Manteca Municipal Code violations. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.090 Security guards.
As a condition of the permit, the police chief may establish the number of security guards the permittee is required to hire in order to maintain the public peace and safety. Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the police and shall possess a valid and current security guard registration card as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this chapter shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.092 Disturbing the peace—Disorderly conduct.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to prevent the admittance of any person whose conduct is described in Penal Code Section 415 as amended (fighting, loud noise, offensive words in public places) or 647 as amended (disorderly conduct) at the premises or in any parking lot or similar facility used by the establishment. Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to remove any persons exhibiting such conduct from the establishment. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.094 Intoxicated patrons.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to prevent the admittance of any obviously intoxicated person. For purposes of this section, a person is “obviously intoxicated” when he or she exhibits readily apparent outward manifestations of drugs or alcohol intoxication, including, but not limited to, inability to walk or stand in a normal manner, bloodshot or glassy eyes, flushed face, incoherent or slurred speech, alcoholic breath, belligerent or other loud or boisterous conduct, extreme agitation or nervousness or mental confusion, where such manifestations lack other apparent cause. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.096 Disorderly conduct within fifty feet prohibited.
Each responsible person shall make reasonable efforts to control of patrons or customers so as to prevent or minimize disorderly or unlawful conduct within the establishment and within fifty feet of any area owned, leased or controlled by the responsible person. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.098 Orderly dispersal required.
Each responsible person shall use reasonable efforts to cause the orderly dispersal of persons from the vicinity of the establishment at closing time, and shall not allow persons to loiter or congregate in a disorderly fashion within fifty feet of any area owned, leased or controlled by the responsible person. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.100 Permit renewals.
A.    Applications for renewal shall be made at least forty-five days before the expiration date of the permit and shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council. When an application for renewal is made less than forty-five days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed.

B.     After making and filing of said application for renewal and the payment of the fee the police chief shall conduct a review of the public dance permit issued to assess the permittee’s compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit, the business plan, and the security plan and requirements. The police chief shall have the authority to renew, further condition or deny the public dance permit. The police chief shall also have the authority to make adjustments to the number of security guards required. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.110 Grounds for denial of permit.
A.    The grounds for denial of a permit shall be one or more of the following:

1.     The business or conduct of the business at a particular location is prohibited by any local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation;

2.     The applicant has knowingly made a false statement of material facts or has knowingly omitted to state a material fact in the application for a permit;

3.     The applicant has failed to demonstrate that the issuance of the permit will not adversely impact nearby institutions or businesses;

4.     The applicant, his or her agent or employees, or any person who is exercising managerial authority on behalf of the applicant has engaged in misconduct or has been convicted of a crime substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a permittee, including, but not limited to, violent crimes, crimes against children, and drug-related crimes. A conviction within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere;

5.     The applicant has committed an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit him or herself or another or substantially injure another;

6.     Commission of any act, which, if done by a permittee, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit.

7.     The applicant has refused to meet the security plan or requirements established by the police chief;

8.     The required application or renewal fees have not been paid.

B.     Notwithstanding the above, the applicant shall not be denied a permit solely on the basis that he or she has been convicted of a felony if he or she has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation under Section 4852.01 of the Penal Code or on the basis that he or she has been convicted of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.120 Suspension or revocation—Notice.
A.    Any permit issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended, conditioned or revoked by the police chief when it shall appear to him or her that the permittee has committed any one or more of the acts or omissions constituting the grounds for suspension or revocation under this chapter.

B.     No permit shall be revoked or suspended by virtue of this section until a hearing shall have been held by police chief. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was granted at least five days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending such permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery to the person to be notified, or by depositing it in the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her address as it appears in his or her application for a permit.

C.     It is grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit if any permittee or person, his or her agent, or employee:

1.     Does any act which violates any of the grounds set forth in Section 5.56.110 which sets forth the grounds for denial of a permit; or

2.     Violates any other provision of this chapter or any statute, ordinance, or regulation relating to his or her permittee;

3.     Engages in or permits misconduct substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the permittee; or

4.     Conducts the permitted business in a manner contrary to the peace, health, or safety of the public; or

5.     Fails to take reasonable measures to control the patrons’ conduct resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control problems occurring inside of or outside the premises, traffic control problems, or creation of a public or private nuisance, or obstruction of the business operation of another business; or

6.     Operates or permits the operation of any musical instruments, sound amplifiers, or sound in general, in violation of the provisions of the city’s noise ordinance, or

7.     Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, business plan, or security plan and requirements.

(Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.140 Appeal from police chief determination.
Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by the decision of the police chief in denying, refusing to renew, conditioning, suspending, or revoking a permit may, within ten calendar days, appeal the decision in writing to the city manager who shall, following a hearing, take action as provided in this chapter. If such appeal is not taken within ten days, the decision of the police chief shall be final. The decision of the city manager under this section shall be final. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.150 Suspension or revocation without hearing.
If any person holding a permit or acting under the authority of such permit under this chapter is convicted of a public offense in any court for the violation of any law which relates to his or her permit, the police chief may revoke said permit forthwith without any further action thereof, other than giving notice of revocation to the permittee. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.160 New permit application after denial or revocation.
When the permit of any person is revoked for cause or surrendered, no new application for a permit from the same person shall be accepted within one year after such revocation. When an application for a permit is denied for cause, no new application for a permit from the same person shall be accepted within one year after denial unless the applicant can show a material change in his or her situation that would justify the issuance of such permit. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.170 Display of permit.
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises so that it may be easily seen by any person on the premises. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.180 Nontransferable permit and change of address.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is valid only at the address and for the person or business specified therein and is not transferable to any other person or business. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. Change of the establishment address, or change of the permittee’s address if no fixed establishment, requires the permittee to notify the police chief in writing ten days prior to the establishment’s or permittee’s moving to a new location. Failure to notify the police chief of the change of address shall render any permit void and any operation of a public dance unlawful. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.190 Separate offense for each day.
Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues to permit, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.200 Penalties.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Violation of this chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.210 Civil injunction.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.220 Administrative remedies.
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth by the city ordinance. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.230 Immediate threat to public safety.
A.    The police chief may require a permittee or responsible person to immediately close down operations or a special event and disperse all patrons for the remainder of its daily operation or special event whenever conduct by disorderly patrons reaches a magnitude that presents an immediate threat to the public safety or well-being of the patrons and general public in the vicinity.

B.     Circumstances constituting an immediate threat to the public safety include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     There is an immediate threat of bodily harm or injury to a person or persons.

2.     There is a clear and present danger of riot, disorder or unlawful interference with traffic upon the public streets.

3.     When the occupancy rules are being violated.

C.     It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any directive issued by the police chief under authority of this section. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.250 Time limit for filing application for permit.
All persons conducting or permitting public dances as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter must apply for and obtain a public dance permit within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Continued operation of public dance without a permit more than ninety days after the effective date of said ordinance shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

 

5.56.260 Judicial review.
Judicial review of a decision made under this chapter may be had by filing a petition for a writ of mandate with the superior court in accordance with the provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Any such petition shall be filed within ninety days after the day the decision becomes final as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, which shall be applicable to such actions. (Ord. 1442 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 5.60 HOTELS, MOTELS, RESIDENTIAL HOTELS/MOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES
5.60.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Hotel, Motel, and Residential Hotel/Motel Permit Ordinance.” (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.020 Purpose.
A.    The city council hereby finds that it is of the utmost importance to improve the conditions of the city’s hotel and motel stock, which, in addition to serving the transient guests, often serves as temporary housing for the city’s low-income residents. There is a tremendous concern to ensure that this housing stock meets all applicable housing and building standards that will provide its residents with safe and decent places to live. The city council also recognizes that some hotels and motels within the city limits may at times also serve as long-term housing for some residents, and, for this reason, the city council adopts a separate category of “residential hotel/motel” with additional regulations that will ensure that the buildings meet long-term housing requirements.

B.     The purpose of this chapter is to require the issuance of a permit to operate to conduct, own, or operate hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel establishments within the city; to require manager permits for the hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel managers employed therein; to establish standards for the issuance of said permits; to establish rules and regulations under which such permits shall remain in force, be suspended or revoked; and providing penalties for violations thereof. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms, and phrases hereinafter set forth shall have the meanings given them in this section:

“Bathroom” means a room with a minimum of thirty square feet containing a toilet, sink, and shower or tub.

“Bed” means mattress and box springs, which shall be off of the floor.

“Common indoor space” means a common gathering space within a residential hotel/motel establishment for use by the residents, which has no less than two hundred square feet, unless, under certain specified conditions, a variance is granted, and which has air conditioning and heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit three feet above the floor.

Excessive Calls for Service. The “calls for service” included in a case by case analysis are those defined as calls for service generated by guests or as a result of actions by guests, their visitors, or the operator. The calls for service analyzed would not normally include calls such as emergency medical service calls, public information service requests, auto accidents, or police initiated contact not involving criminal activity.

“Furnishings” means and includes a minimum of a bed, mirror, minimum lighting, and adequate place for clothes storage.

“Hotel” means a facility (in one or more buildings on the same legal parcel) providing transient lodging accommodations at a daily rate and where access is provided through a common entrance, lobby or hallway and over fifty percent of the revenue derived from the rental of lodging accommodations in the previous calendar year was subject to the transient occupancy tax.

“Kitchen” means that area used or designated to be used for the purposes of preparing food.

“Management plan” means a plan that addresses the establishment’s management, including staffing, equal access to housing, internal security, and other items that include, but are not limited to, the following components:

1.     Rental rates;

2.     Housekeeping schedules and cleaning provisions to ensure that the premises are in a clean, healthy, and presentable condition, free of litter, pests, and vermin at all times;

3.     Grounds and landscape maintenance;

4.     Acknowledgment of adherence to prompt collection and payment of transient occupancy taxes;

5.     Schedules of linen changes if a hotel or motel;

6.     Identification of the role of each staff member, especially in emergency situations, such as fires and police responses;

7.     A staff training program;

8.     Any condition that is imposed as a result of the permit application for an individual hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel; and

9.     Any additional requirement for a residential hotel/motel.

“Manager” means any person who is the proprietor of any hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, operator or agent of any of the foregoing. The person who, in connection with the activities of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel, manages the business operations, including the collection of rental charges, issuing of keys, direction of maintenance personnel, assigning of rooms to guests, or handles guest affairs and oversees security. The term shall also include resident manager and assistant manager.

“Manager’s quarters” means any dwelling unit contained in any hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel meant for year-round habitation by the manager, resident manager, or owner of the premises.

“Motel” means a facility (in one or more buildings on the same legal parcel) providing transient lodging accommodations at a daily rate and where access is individually available from outside the building. The term shall also include “motor lodge” and “motor hotel.” In addition, over fifty percent of the revenue derived from the rental of lodging accommodations in the previous calendar year was subject to the transient occupancy tax.

“Operator” means those persons or person responsible for the daily operation and management of the premises and all functions related thereto.

“Owner” means any person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation, which is the record owner of real property as listed on the last equalized assessment roll as maintained by the San Joaquin County assessor. It shall also mean any part owner, joint owner, or lessor of the whole or part of the land or buildings situated thereon.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, receiver, trustee, estate trust, business trust, organization, or association.

“Pest control certification” means an annual certification, issued within thirty days of submission of the application, from a fully licensed pest control company that the proposed premises are free of insect and/or pest infestation.

“Residential hotel/motel” means a single building or group of detached or semidetached buildings providing transient accommodations at a daily rate and where fifty percent or more of the revenue derived from the rental of lodging accommodations in the previous calendar year was not subject to the transient occupancy tax.

“Room charges” means and includes, but are not limited to, the amounts charged by the premises for providing such services as laundry, cleaning, appliance rental, linen services, phone, additional person cost or meal service. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.040 Permit required.
No person shall operate a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel without first having obtained a written permit from the city. There shall be only one permit for each hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate a hotel, motel or residential hotel/motel without a valid permit to operate. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.050 Application.
An application for a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee, be in writing on forms provided by the city, and be accompanied by payment of an annual fee in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Any such application shall be under oath, in duplicate, and shall contain such information pertinent to the applicant and the business as the city may require. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.060 Documents accompanying application.
The permit to operate application shall also include as attachments to the application for a permit to operate, the following documents:

A.    Written evidence that the applicant(s) is eighteen years of age or older;

B.     Proposed management plan, including provision of twenty-four hour manager and/or designee;

C.     Name of manager(s) of the establishment, along with proof of required city issued management certificate(s) for every manager;

D.    Pest control certification issued within thirty days of application submission;

E.     Existence of required common indoor space or request for variance; and

F.     Receipt from San Joaquin County environmental health showing full compliance with its requirements for operation of the premises. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.070 Additional information required for residential hotel/motel.
In addition to the information required for hotels and motels, the following information must also be included as an attachment to an application to operate a residential hotel/motel:

A.    Proof of compliance with all applicable zoning requirements;

B.     Proof of adequate parking for long-term residency;

C.     Proof of adequate bathroom and kitchen facilities, required of individual dwelling units, equivalent to those features required of an efficiency dwelling unit as such is defined under the uniform codes; and

D.    Signed statement that the residential hotel/motel shall not operate without an on-site manager or designee in charge of the premises at all times. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.080 Investigation.
A.    Beginning January 1, 2011, the city manager or designee shall conduct an investigation, and shall refer all applications for a permit to the police chief, fire chief, building official, and San Joaquin County environmental health for their investigation and recommendations.

B.     1.     The police chief shall investigate and ascertain the following:

a.     Whether the applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had any hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel permit, which has been issued within the state of California, suspended or revoked; or

b.     Whether the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application for the permit to operate; or

c.     Whether the applicant has had a turnover in management personnel of more than two employees within the prior one hundred eighty days.

2.     The police chief shall also review the records pertaining to the premises on which the hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel is located, including a review of the number of calls for service involving crimes, disturbances, and public nuisance activities occurring on the premises, and take this information into consideration when issuing recommendations.

3.     The police chief shall make a report of the findings to the city manager or designee, together with recommendations for conditions of approval of the permit to operate, if any.

C.     The fire chief, building official, and city manager or designee, within the jurisdictions and duties of their particular departments, shall ascertain whether or not the premises to be used are suitable, proper, and adequate, and comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. The fire chief, building official, and city manager or designee shall make a report of their findings, together with their recommendations for conditions of approval for the permit to operate, if any. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.090 Required conditions of the premises—Required management plan.
A.    As part of the investigation conducted by the city manager or designee in conjunction with an application for a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel permit to operate, the premises shall be inspected to verify the existence of all of the following items:

1.     Full compliance with all applicable housing code requirements, including electrical and plumbing requirements;

2.     Full compliance with all applicable fire code requirements, including life safety measures, emergency exiting, and panic hardware requirements;

3.     Required heating facilities for each individual dwelling unit;

4.     Required bathroom facilities;

5.     A bed in good and clean condition and maintained in such a condition as to not be a detriment to the health of guests, as determined by county environmental health;

6.     Clothes Storage. Space shall be provided in good working order for hanging clothes and/or storing personal belongings;

7.     Required common indoor space, and/or approved variance as defined above;

8.     For hotel/motels, a schedule of linen changes that, at a minimum, provide for weekly changes and/or change of linen whenever a guest departs and before another guest arrives;

9.     Immediate access for police, fire, and emergency personnel for those premises that have secured entries; and

10.   Screens on all exterior windows.

B.     There shall not be an infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents, as determined by the public health department.

C.     In addition, the application for a permit to operate must also be accompanied by a management plan as defined above, which shall include items such as housekeeping schedules, facility maintenance, grounds and landscape maintenance, emergency provisions, and contacts. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.100 List of room charges.
In addition to the listing and posting of room rates, a list of all other room charges shall be made available to residents and the public and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.110 Quarterly inspections—Exemptions.
A.    Upon the filing of an application for a permit to operate, investigations by the requisite departments shall commence. Said investigation shall include an inspection of the premises by designated city staff for the purposes of determining whether the premises meet all applicable codes, including the uniform code requirements, such as the housing and building codes, and all applicable requirements of the Manteca Municipal Code, including the zoning and health and safety codes. No permit to operate shall issue until all of the required codes are met. A fee, as from time to time may be set by resolution of the city council, will be required for each inspection.

B.     In addition to the initial inspection, quarterly inspections shall be conducted of the premises as a condition of retention of the permit to operate. In the event that the initial inspection reveals full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Manteca Municipal Code and adopted uniform codes, as well as full endorsement without conditions by the fire, police, city of Manteca building official, and public health departments, no quarterly inspections will be required as a condition for retention of the permit to operate for the remainder of the year, or, for the next three quarters, absent the existence of a subsequent violation. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.120 Business license.
Nothing herein shall constitute a waiver of the requirements of Title 5 of the Manteca Municipal Code requiring issuance and possession of valid business license. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.130 Time within which to grant or deny permit to operate.
Within forty-five days after the filing of an application for a permit to operate, the city manager or designee shall review the application, together with reports and recommendations of the police chief, fire chief, city of Manteca building official, and county environmental health, and shall grant said permit to operate or notify the applicant of the intent to deny the permit to operate, together with the grounds for denial as set forth in Section 5.60.140, or grant a conditional permit to operate, as set forth in Section 5.60.150. Said notice shall be in writing and sent by mail to the applicant’s mailing address set forth in the application. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.140 Grounds for denial of a permit to operate.
The following grounds may constitute grounds for denial of a permit to operate:

A.    The establishment as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the applicable building, zoning, housing, fire, safety, and health regulations;

B.     Any of the following exist:

1.     The applicant is or has been a registered sex offender, or

2.     Five years has not expired from either the date the applicant was convicted of, or completed parole or probation for any offense which relates directly to the operation of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment, whether as an owner, operator, or manager, or from any offense constituting a misdemeanor or felony involving weapons, narcotics, assault, or crimes of moral turpitude;

C.     The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel permit to operate, or manager’s permit, or related permit, which was issued within the state, suspended or revoked;

D.    The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit to operate;

E.     There have been excessive calls for service to the police department within the twelve months preceding the application with inadequate response by management or the owners or operators, involving the commission of crimes, disturbances, public nuisances, or applicable Manteca Municipal Code violation investigations, which are located, committed, or generated on the premises of the establishment;

F.     There have been an excessive number of false fire alarms at the property with inadequate response by management or the owners or operators;

G.    Failure to get clearance from San Joaquin County environmental health. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.150 Alternate procedure—Issuance of permit with conditions imposed.
As an alternative to a denial of a permit to operate for failure to meet the requisite housing, building, health, and fire codes, or failing to pass an investigation conducted by the police, fire, city of Manteca building official, or San Joaquin County environmental health, the city manager or designee may issue a conditional permit to operate. Said conditional permit to operate shall be issued with conditions imposed on the operation of the premises. All conditions shall be complied with in order to maintain the conditional permit to operate in a valid status. Failure to comply with the imposed conditions will subject the conditional permit to operate to a suspension and/or revocation procedures or any other remedy authorized by law. A conditional permit shall mandate four quarterly inspections, the cost of which is to be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.160 Inspection.
Any person operating a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment shall, during business hours, be responsible for and provide that any premises used for the purposes of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment shall be readily accessible and open for inspection by law enforcement officers or other employees of the city and San Joaquin County environmental health, who are charged with enforcement of health and safety or penal laws of the city of Manteca or state of California. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.170 Business name.
No person shall operate a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the permit to operate. Any proposed changes shall be submitted in writing to the city manager or designee at least two weeks prior to the date the change is to take place. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.180 Business location change.
Upon a request to change the location of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment, an application to the city manager or designee shall be made, and such application shall be granted, provided all applicable provisions of this code have been complied with and the change of location fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city council, has been paid to the city. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.190 Sale or transfer of hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel establishment interest.
The sale or transfer of any majority interest in any hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment shall be reported to the city manager or designee at least two weeks prior to such sale or transfer. A new application, pursuant to Section 5.60.050, shall be filed and an investigation conducted pursuant to Section 5.60.080 as to the person obtaining such interest. If such person satisfies the requirements related to permit to operate applicants, the existing permit to operate shall be endorsed to include such person. A fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city for the investigation necessitated by such sale or transfer. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.200 Display of permits.
The operator shall display the permit to operate, together with the permit of each hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel manager employed in the establishment, in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the operator and permittee shall be affixed to the respective permit to operate and permits on display pursuant to this section. Residence addresses of operators or permittee need not be displayed. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.210 Records.
The owner and/or operator of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment shall maintain a current file of all persons employed therein. This file shall contain true names and aliases used by such employees; the age; birth date; height; weight; color of hair and eyes; home address; phone numbers; Social Security number; the date of employment and termination; the name and addresses of the recognized school of hotel/hotel management attended, the date attended, and the written proof that the hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel manager has completed a residence course of study in motel/hotel management. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.220 Pre-existing operators and managers.
All operators of existing hotel/motel, and all persons engaged in the operation of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment, including managers, in the city, upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall file an application and comply with all requirements of this chapter within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.230 Summary suspension of a permit to operate.
A.    Any permit to operate issued hereunder may be summarily and temporarily suspended by the city manager or designee in the event it is determined that the holder of such permit has committed any act, which would constitute grounds for denial of a permit to operate pursuant to Section 5.60.140. Any such suspension shall be accomplished by written notification of the suspension and the reasons therefor, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the operator’s business address as approved in the permit to operate.

B.     Within twenty-four hours thereafter, a copy of such notice, together with the reasons for the suspension, shall be transmitted to the administrative hearing officer for setting of a hearing, in accordance with the procedures outlined in Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code. All hearings shall be held within fifteen business days of the date of mailing of the written notification, unless continued by the mutual consent of the parties.

C.     The findings and decisions of the administrative hearing officer, upon an appeal, shall be final and conclusive, but nothing in this code shall be construed to deprive any person of recourse to the courts as such person may be entitled to under the law. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.240 Suspension or revocation by city manager.
As distinguished from the provisions of Section 5.60.230, the city manager or designee may initiate suspension or revocation procedures by sending written notice setting forth the grounds for such suspension or revocation. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the operator’s business address as approved in the permit to operate. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.250 Grounds for revocation or suspension of permit to operate.
Any permit to operate may be suspended and/or revoked by the city manager or designee after a review, where it is determined that:

A.    The operator has violated the provisions of this chapter; or

B.     The operator has committed any act or engaged in action, which would constitute grounds for denial of the permit to operate pursuant to Section 5.60.140; or

C.     The operator has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in conducting the hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel establishment; or

D.    The operator has failed to correct a violation within the time period ordered by the city; or

E.     The operator has operated or continued to operate the hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment without a permit to operate or after a permit to operate has been suspended; or

F.     The operator has allowed a person to work as a hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel manager who:

1.     Does not have a proper, valid permit in his or her possession, or

2.     Has committed any offense described in Section 5.60.140 where the operator has actual or constructive knowledge of such act. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.260 Rights of appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation of permit to operate/hearing procedure.
A.    The notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit to operate may be appealed by filing the proper appeal in accordance with Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code. An appeal must be made in writing, on the proper form, to the City of Manteca, Code Enforcement Department, 1001 W. Center Street, Manteca CA, 95337. There is a nonrefundable administrative hearing fee as established by resolution of the council, which must accompany the appeal form.

B.     The hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be held within fifteen business days following the filing of an appeal. The applicant shall be given notice of said hearing at least ten business days prior to the hearing date. Said notice may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.

C.     At the time and place fixed in said notice, or at any time to which the matter may be continued by the mutual consent of the parties, the administrative hearing officer shall hear the applicant and all witnesses, together with any proper documentary evidence offered in support of or against the granting or continuation of a permit to operate. The administrative hearing officer shall, at the conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact based upon the evidence submitted and determine whether grounds exist for denial of a permit to operate, as set forth in Section 5.60.140, or for the suspension and/or revocation of the permit to operate, as set forth in Section 5.60.250. If, from the evidence, the administrative hearing officer finds grounds exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit to operate, the hearing officer shall deny the permit to operate or order the suspension and/or revocation thereof. If, following the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines that no proper grounds exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit to operate, then the administrative hearing officer shall grant the appeal and cause a permit to operate to be issued or terminate any prior suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.270 Action of administrative hearing officer as to permit to operate—Final and conclusive.
Action taken by the administrative hearing officer with respect to the granting, denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit to operate a hotel, motel, and/or a residential hotel/motel establishment shall be final and conclusive, but nothing in this code shall be construed to deprive any person of recourse to the courts as such person may be entitled to under the law. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.280 Return of permit to operate—Closure of premises.
If revocation or suspension shall occur, the permit to operate shall be returned to the city manager or designee for cancellation or holding pending the period of suspension. The city manager may direct or cause the premises to be closed and locked against use by the public when deemed reasonably necessary by the city manager in order to ensure compliance with an order of suspension or revocation. Said closure of premises to the public shall not exceed ninety days and may be terminated prior to the expiration of such period upon request of the owner of the premises accompanied by a statement under oath that the premises will not be used as a hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel establishment during the remainder of the suspension period. In the event the premises are occupied, relocation benefits may be due and payable as determined by the city manager or designee, pursuant to applicable provisions contained in this code. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.290 Hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel manager’s permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to act as a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel manager, as defined herein, or night clerk without first having acquired a valid permit from the city manager or designee and complying with all of the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.300 Manager’s permit eligibility.
Any person to be eligible for a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel manager’s permit must have completed, within sixty days of the application for said permit, a review of an instructive video tape; and, within one hundred eighty days, a residence course of study in hotel/motel management. The residence course of study shall include eight hours of training, consisting of (1) a total of six hours of training to be provided by the city of Manteca fire, police, and code enforcement departments; the San Joaquin County environmental health department; and (2) an additional two hours of hotel/motel management training to be provided by the Manteca Hotel/Motel Association or other recognized group. A certificate of successful completion of this course (or written proof that the applicant has begun a course of study within one hundred eighty days of the date of the applicant’s first request for a permit) is to be included with the initial and/or annual application as required by Section 5.60.310(B). (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.310 Application for a manager’s permit.
A.    An application for a manager’s permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee and shall be in writing on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount as established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Any such application shall be under oath, in duplicate, and shall contain such information pertinent to the applicant as the city may require.

B.     The following items shall accompany the application for a hotel, motel, and/or residential hotel/motel manager’s permit:

1.     Two prints of a recent passport-size photograph of the applicant;

2.     Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

3.     Written proof that the applicant has completed/or begun the residence course of study in hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel management as required by Section 5.60.300. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.320 Investigation of manager permit applications.
A.    In addition to the investigation undertaken by the city manager or designee, all applications for work permits for hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel managers shall also be referred to the chief of police for investigation and recommendation. The chief of police shall investigate and ascertain:

1.     Whether the applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had any hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment operator’s or manager’s permit suspended or revoked;

2.     Whether the applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit.

B.     The police chief shall make a report of the findings to the city manager or designee, together with any recommendations. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.330 Time within which to grant or deny a manager’s permit.
Within twenty days after the filing of an application for a permit, the city manager or designee shall review the application, together with the report and recommendation of the chief of police and shall grant said permit or shall notify the applicant of the denial of the permit and the grounds for such denial. Said notice shall be in writing and sent by certified mail to the applicant’s mailing address as set forth in the application. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.340 Grounds for denial of a manager’s permit.
The following may constitute grounds for denial of a manager’s permit:

A.    If either of the following exist:

1.     The applicant is or has been a registered sex offender, or

2.     Five  years has not expired from either the date the applicant was convicted of, or completed parole or probation for any offense which relates directly to the operation of a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment, whether as an owner, operator, or manager, or from any offense constituting a misdemeanor or felony involving weapons, narcotics, assault, or crimes of moral turpitude;

B.     The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had any similar manager’s permit, which was issued within the state of California suspended or revoked;

C.     The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement on the application for a permit;

D.    The applicant has permitted or allowed violations of applicable Municipal Code violations on the premises of other hotels, motels, or residential hotel/motel establishments where the applicant served as manager and has failed to respond, address, and/or correct the violations within a reasonable time when notified by the city. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.350 Summary suspension of permit.
Any manager’s permit issued hereunder may be summarily and temporarily suspended by the chief of police or the city manager or designee in the event that it is determined that the holder of said permit has committed an act or engaged in action, which would constitute grounds for denial of a permit pursuant to Section 5.60.340. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.360 Notice of summary suspension.
A.    Summary suspensions shall be accomplished by written notice of the suspension and the reasons therefor sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee’s residence address as set forth in the application for manager’s permit.

B.     Within twenty-four hours thereafter, a copy of such notice, together with the reasons for the suspension, shall be transmitted to the administrative hearing officer for setting of a hearing, in accordance with the procedures outlined in Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code. All hearings shall be held within fifteen business days of the date of mailing of the written notification.

C.     The findings and decisions of the administrative hearing officer, upon an appeal, shall be final and conclusive, but nothing in this code shall be construed to deprive any person of recourse to the courts as such person may be entitled to under the law. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.370 Suspension and revocation by city manager.
As distinguished from the provisions of Sections 5.60.350 and 5.60.360, the city manager or designee may initiate suspension or revocation procedures by sending written notice setting forth the grounds for such suspension or revocation. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee’s residence address, as set forth in the application for manager’s permit. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.380 Grounds for revocation or suspension of manager’s permit.
Any manager’s permit may be suspended and/or revoked by the city manager or designee after a review where it is determined that:

A.    The permittee has violated any provisions of this chapter; or

B.     The permittee has committed an act or engaged in action that would constitute grounds for denial of the permit, pursuant to Section 5.60.340; or

C.     The permittee has continued to function as a hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel manager after the permit has been suspended; or

D.    The permittee has failed to complete the course of study as set forth in Section 5.60.300 of this chapter. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.390 Return of permit.
Upon revocation or suspension, the manager’s permit shall be returned to the city manager or designee for cancellation or holding during the period of suspension. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.400 Rights of appeal from denial, suspension, or revocation of a manager’s permit—Hearing procedure.
A.    The notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of a manager’s permit may be appealed by filing the proper appeal in accordance with Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code. An appeal must be made in writing, on the proper form, to the City of Manteca, Neighborhood Services Division, 1001 W. Center Street, Manteca, 95337. There is a nonrefundable administrative hearing fee as established by resolution of the city council, which must accompany the appeal form.

B.     The hearing before the administrative hearing officer shall be held within fifteen business days following the filing of an appeal. The applicant shall be given notice of said hearing at least ten business days prior to the hearing date. Said notice may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.

C.     At the time and place fixed in said notice, or at any time to which the matter may be continued by the mutual consent of the parties, the administrative hearing officer shall hear the applicant and all witnesses, together with any proper documentary evidence offered in support of or against the granting or continuation of a manager’s permit. The administrative hearing officer shall, at the conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact based upon the evidence submitted and determine whether grounds exist for denial of a manager’s permit, as set forth in Section 5.60.340, or for the suspension and/or revocation of the manager’s permit, as set forth in Section 5.60.380. If, from the evidence, the administrative hearing officer finds grounds exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of the manager’s permit, the administrative hearing officer shall deny the manager’s permit or order the suspension and/or revocation thereof. If, following the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines that no proper grounds exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of the manager’s permit, then the administrative hearing officer shall grant the appeal and cause a manager’s permit to be issued or terminate any prior suspension. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.410 Action of administrative hearing officer as to manager permits final and conclusive.
Action taken by the administrative hearing officer with respect to the granting, denial, suspension, or revocation of work permits of hotel, motel, and residential hotel/motel managers shall be final and conclusive, but nothing in this code shall be construed to deprive any person of recourse to the courts as such person may be entitled to under the law. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.420 Renewal of manager’s permit.
Any person who holds a valid manager’s permit may obtain a new permit for the succeeding year by applying for said new permit during the thirty days preceding the expiration date of the current permit. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.430 Administrative procedure and authority of administrative hearing officer.
A.    In the event of a violation of any of the provisions set forth herein, or upon evidence that there has been a failure to comply with any required conditions of any permit pursuant to these provisions, in addition to any other remedies available by law, a hearing shall be scheduled before the administrative hearing officer, in accordance with Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code. Notification of the hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions contained in Title 1 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

B.     The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony and evidence on whether violations of any of the conditions of the permit, pursuant to these provisions, have occurred. After the taking of evidence, the administrative hearing officer may modify conditions of the permit as part of the decision, based upon the evidence presented; or alternatively, may suspend or revoke the permit, pursuant to these provisions. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.440 Violations and penalties.
A.    In the absence of an imminent health and safety hazard for which immediate corrective action shall be taken, a violation notice shall be sent to the operator and manager detailing the corrective action required and the time frame within which the corrective action shall be taken.

B.     In addition to any other remedy available by law, any person who violates, or causes or permits another person to violate any of these provisions, including any condition of a permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of these regulations is committed, continued, permitted, maintained, or caused.

C.     Every day any portion of the premises are not in compliance with the requirement of this code, shall be considered a separate violation for the purposes of the preceding penalty schedule. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.450 Appeal of administrative citation issued hereunder.
Any administrative citation issued pursuant to these provisions is appealable under the same procedures set forth in Manteca Municipal Code Section 1.10.440. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.460 Permits issued for one year.
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually, and are not transferable. Applications for renewal shall be filed thirty days from the expiration of the current permit in the same manner as applications for initial permits and subject to the same procedures, rules, and regulations provided for in this chapter. For initial permits beginning January 1, 2011, applications shall be filed prior to December 1, 2010. Each hotel, motel, or residential hotel/motel establishment shall be issued a temporary permit until an inspection is made of that premises. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.470 Other licenses, permits required.
The permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any other licenses or permits that may be required by other provisions of the Manteca Municipal Code or rules, laws or regulations of the state or federal government. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2010)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS GENERALLY
Chapter 6.08 DOGS
Chapter 6.10 MANDATORY SPAYING AND NEUTERING OF PIT BULL BREEDS
Chapter 6.12 LIVESTOCK AND FOWL
Chapter 6.16 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.20 KILLING AND BUTCHERING

Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS GENERALLY
6.04.010 No relief from zoning requirements.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, it is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained any animal or fowl, unless the keeping of such animal or fowl is permitted in the particular district as provided in the zoning code of the city. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; prior code § 3-1)

 

6.04.020 Sanitation requirements.
No person shall at any time maintain any lot or other premises, or any portion thereof, in the city, upon which any animal is kept in an unsanitary condition. No person shall maintain any such lot or other premises, or portion thereof, upon which any animal is kept, in such condition as to cause the same to be infested with flies or insects or to create any noxious or offensive odors. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; prior code § 3-2)

 

6.04.021 Defecation removal.
It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or controller of any animal to refuse or fail to remove promptly excrement deposited by said animal upon any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, play area, park, other public property or any private property when permission of the owner or tenant of said property has not been obtained. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1)

 

6.04.030 Vicious animal—Designation.
A.    Any animal, except one assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the following behavior, is vicious within the meaning of this title:

1.     An attack which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury or property damage when such person is conducting him or herself peacefully and lawfully;

2.     An attack which results in property damage or in an injury to a person when such a person is conducting him or herself peacefully and lawfully;

3.     An attack on another animal, livestock, or poultry which occurs on property other than that of the owner of the attacking animal;

4.     Any behavior which constitutes a threat of bodily harm to a person when such person is conducting him or herself peacefully and lawfully.

B.     For the purposes of this section, a person is conducting him or herself peacefully and lawfully upon the private property of an owner or possessor of the animal when he or she is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed on such person by state or local law or by the laws of postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property upon invitation, either expressed or implied. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 766, 1987; prior code § 3-14)

 

6.04.031 Possession of vicious animal—Prohibited—Penalty.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to own or have the care, custody, control or possession of a vicious animal, as defined in Section 6.04.030, within the city limits.

B.     A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor, and is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or imprisonment in the County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 862 § 1, 1990)

 

6.04.040 Vicious animal—Investigation.
Any animal quarantined for biting a human being and any incident reported to the animal services officer concerning a vicious animal may be investigated by the animal services officer. If, based on the investigation, the animal services officer concludes that there is probable cause to believe that the animal is vicious, he or she shall so certify in writing within ten days following completion of the investigation to the person owning or controlling the animal. Upon completion of an investigation by the animal services officer, a complete report, including comments from neighbors regarding the vicious animal, shall be submitted to the police chief or designee, along with the recommendation regarding prosecution. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 1495 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; Ord. 766, 1987; prior code § 3-14.1)

 

6.04.050 Vicious animal—Confinement.
If there is probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, and the animal services officer so certifies, such officer or any police officer or other authorized employee of the city may enter upon private premises, in accordance with state and federal law, in order to seize any such vicious animal, whether running at large or not, and shall confine the animal at an appropriate animal shelter. The confinement shall continue pending the decision of the court, or other authorized body, as to whether the animal shall be deemed vicious. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 1495 § 1, 2011; Ord. 766, 1987; prior code § 3-14.2)

 

6.04.060 Public nuisance—Abatement.
Any violation of this title shall be considered a public nuisance and, upon direction of the city council, the city attorney shall take action to abate the nuisance. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 766, 1987; prior code § 3-14.3)

 

6.04.061 Limitations on number of dogs and cats.
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more than three dogs and three cats which are over the age of four months on any lot, premises, dwelling, building, structure, boat or living accommodation, except as provided for in Section 6.08.150. Owners who have more than the stated number of dogs (three) and cats (three) as of the passing of the ordinance codified in this section are exempt for those animals only as long as they are currently licensed with the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1)

 

6.04.070 Violation—Penalty.
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction, and is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars. Each additional violation of this chapter within twelve months shall constitute a misdemeanor, and is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or imprisonment in the County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 862 § 2, 1990; Ord. 840 § 2, 1989; Ord. 766, 1987; prior code § 3-14.4)

 

6.04.080 Fees.
The city council shall set, by resolution, the fee dollar amount for all services provided to carry out the provisions of this title. Such resolution may be amended from time to time by further resolution of the city council. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 1077 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 6.08 DOGS
6.08.010 Running at large prohibited.
No person owning any dog, or having the care, custody, or control or possession of any dog shall suffer, allow, or permit such dog to run, be, or remain at large on any public street, road, alley, park, square, or other public place or upon any private property other than the property of the owner or custodian of such dog without the consent of the owner of such property, within the corporate limits of the city; and all dogs may be deemed running at large within the meaning of this section unless tied or restrained by chain, strap or cord, not to exceed six feet in length, attached to their collars and actually held by some person, or staked away from the public walkway or thoroughfare. Any such restraining device shall be of sufficient strength as to prevent being broken, severed or otherwise rendered ineffective by the weight and/or strength of the dog. For purposes of this section, any dog in or upon any vehicle shall be deemed to be on the premises of the operator thereof. (Ord. 766 (part), 1987; prior code § 3-13)

 

6.08.020 Control or containment.
No person owning or having care, custody, control or possession of any dog shall allow the dog to remain outside of a secure building or dwelling on the premises of the person unless the dog is within a fenced enclosure which is adequate to contain the dog, or unless the dog is securely tethered so as to prevent the dog from leaving the premises at will. Any dog so tethered shall be secured in such a manner as to be unable to cross the property line of such premises and shall further be restrained from entering onto any sidewalk, street, road, or other such place designated for the use of the public. (Ord. 766 (part), 1987; prior code § 3-13.1)

 

6.08.030 Dogs in vehicles.
No dog, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, shall be transported on any public thoroughfare or left unattended in any vehicle parked on any street, road, alley or off-street parking facility, whether public or privately owned, unless such dog is totally enclosed within such vehicle, within a secured container carried upon such vehicle, or securely cross-tethered to such vehicle in such a way as to prevent a falling out of, or off, such vehicle. No dog shall be left completely enclosed in a parked vehicle without adequate ventilation, or in a way as to subject the dog to temperatures sufficiently above the ambient to affect the dog’s health and welfare. Any dog found in violation of this section may be impounded for the safety and protection of the dog and the public by the animal services officer. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; Ord. 766 (part), 1987; prior code § 3-13.2)

 

6.08.040 Female dogs in heat.
It is unlawful for any person owning or having the possession of any female dog in heat to permit the same to run at large or to run loose on or within the premises of such person. Running loose is defined for the purposes of this section as being outside of a house, closed garage, or other closed building, whether tied or not. (Prior code § 3-15)

 

6.08.050 Barking—Nuisance.
Any dog which continually and habitually barks, whines, or howls to the discomfort and inconvenience of other citizens is a public nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to own or possess a dog which is a public nuisance. (Prior code § 3-16)

 

6.08.060 Prohibited in food establishments.
No person shall allow, permit or take any dog whether loose, on leash or in arms, into any restaurant, grocery store, meat market, fruit store or food establishment of any kind in the city. (Prior code § 3-17)

 

6.08.070 Health service dog—Exemptions.
Health service dogs are any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items. Any person having custody of such a health service dog may keep and harbor the dog within the city without purchasing a permit to keep a dog from the finance director and may lawfully take the dog into any food establishment, restaurants, schools, buses, taxis, airplanes, stores, movie theatres, concerts, sporting events, doctor’s offices, and any other public place. (Ord. 1463 § 1, 2010; prior code § 3-18)

 

6.08.080 License—Required—Vaccination.
It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring or having the care, custody or possession of any dog past the age of four months to keep or harbor such dog within the city unless such dog is vaccinated against rabies and the owner or person having control of such dog has secured a license to keep a dog as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; prior code § 3-19)

 

6.08.090 License—Application fee.
Every person keeping or harboring any dog past the age of four months within the city shall secure a license to keep a dog by causing the dog to be registered in the following manner:

A.    Upon first time licensing, the dog and its current official certificate of rabies vaccination shall be brought to the animal services division where a description of the dog shall be recorded and kept by the animal services division;

B.     Pay the animal services division a registration fee as established from time to time by resolution of the council;

C.     Upon presentation of a certificate, signed by a licensed veterinarian, that a dog cannot be spayed or neutered for medical reasons, the registration fee shall be equivalent to the fee that would have been charged for a dog that was successfully spayed or neutered;

D.    No registration shall be required to be paid for health service dogs as defined in Section 6.08.070. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; prior code § 3-20)

 

6.08.100 License—Issuance—Tag.
Subject to Sections 6.08.020 through 6.08.140, the animal services division shall, upon proper registration and payment of the fee as provided in Sections 6.08.020 through 6.08.140, issue to the owner or person having control of the dog a license to keep a dog and a metal identification tag having a number corresponding with the registration number of the dog. The holder of a license to keep a dog shall preserve the same and shall, upon demand of the animal services officer or police officer, show such license. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-21)

 

6.08.110 License—Rabies certificate.
No license to keep a dog shall be issued unless there exists a valid official certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian that indicates the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. The certificate shall be accepted as valid if the date of expiration exceeds the requested registration period and the vaccine used is approved by the state for the length of time indicated on the certificate. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; prior code § 3-22)

 

6.08.120 Collars required—Tags—Impoundment.
Every registered dog shall be provided by the owner or possessor thereof with a suitable collar or other device to which shall be attached the metal identification tag issued pursuant to Section 6.08.100. Every dog not registered and not provided with such collar or other device and metallic identification tag found upon any of the streets, alleys, lanes, courts or other public places in the city or upon any private property, whether leashed or unleashed, or whether or not it is in any manner under the control of any person, may be taken into custody of the animal services officer or his or her assistants and lodged in the public animal services shelter. It is unlawful for any person to use any metallic identification tag for any dog other than the dog for which it was specifically issued. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-23)

 

6.08.130 Duplicate tags.
Lost identification tags may be replaced by paying the finance director a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the council. After paying the established fee, the finance director shall issue a new metallic identification tag, with a new number, under the existing license. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; prior code § 3-24)

 

6.08.140 Registration fee—Penalty for late registration.
A.    Every person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog over four months old shall maintain a current, valid license for each dog and the appropriate license fees shall be paid. Fees and charges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the council.

B.     The fee may be prepaid for a one-year, two-year or three-year period, provided that the applicant presents a valid vaccination certificate extending through the period for which the applicant is paying.

C.     Failure to renew a license and pay the required fee prior to the expiration date of the license shall cause such fee to become delinquent and penalties shall be added to the regular fee and collected at the time of such delinquent registration. The delinquent fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the council. Any delinquency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1495 § 2, 2011; prior code § 3-25)

 

6.08.150 Kennels.
A.    Any person, except as hereinafter provided, proposing to construct or locate a dog kennel in the city for the purpose of breeding, raising, boarding, or harboring dogs, must first obtain a permit to conduct a dog kennel from the finance director. Such permit shall be issued only after review by a department designee. Such permit shall not be issued until a notice has been posted by the police chief or designee in a conspicuous place on the premises for ten days, during which time any person owning or living on property within two hundred feet of the property on which the kennel is proposed to be constructed or located, may file a protest with the police chief or designee and, upon receipt of such protest, the police chief or designee shall refuse to approve the application. The police chief or designee may prescribe which of the aforesaid activities mentioned may be allowed in the kennel for which the permit to conduct a dog kennel is granted.

B.     Any person having more than three dogs in possession which are four months of age or older shall be considered as operating a dog kennel and must obtain a permit to conduct a dog kennel as set forth in subsection A of this section.

C.     The provisions of this section pertaining to the posting of notice and protest of any person owning or living in property within two hundred feet shall not apply to kennels which were established and operating on April 5, 1954. This exception shall apply only so long as such kennels remain established at same location and on the same lot or lots as they were on that date. (Ord. O2019-02 § 1; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-26)

Chapter 6.10 MANDATORY SPAYING AND NEUTERING OF PIT BULL BREEDS
6.10.010 Findings.
The city council adopts this chapter based upon the following findings:

A.    The legislature of the state of California approved of breed specific mandatory spaying and neutering by adopting Senate Bill 861 (SB 861), codified at California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31683 and California Health and Safety Code Section 122331.

B.     The intent of SB 861 was to enable local governments to pass ordinances restricting the breeding of specific dog breeds by mandating the spaying and neutering of specific dog breeds.

C.     It is the city council’s intention that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with state law as contained in the California Food and Agricultural Code and California Health and Safety Code.

D.    It is the city council’s intention that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent dog owners in compliance with this section from maintaining intact breeds.

E.     Pit bull breeds and pit bull mixes constitute a majority of unadopted dogs held in animal shelters.

F.     To protect the public health, safety and welfare, it is the desire of the city council to modify the Manteca Municipal Code consistent with SB 861, regarding the mandatory spaying and neutering of pit bull breeds and the permissive maintenance of and breeding of intact pit bull breeds.

G.    Restricting the maintenance of and breeding of intact pit bulls and requiring the spaying and neutering of pit bull breeds will not prevent responsible pet owners and pet breeders from owning, breeding, or showing pit bull breed. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.020 Purpose and intent.
A.    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to require the mandatory spaying and neutering of all pit bull breeds whose owners have not obtained a permit to maintain an intact breed.

B.     It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a permit system allowing responsible owners to maintain an intact pit bull breed and to breed pit bulls. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.030 Definitions.
A.    Whenever the word “Pit Bull” is used in this chapter, it shall mean the any dog that is a Bull Terrier, Miniature Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, or any other dog displaying the physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds, or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics that conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (“AKC”) or United Kennel Club (“UKC”) for any of the above breeds. The AKC and UKC standards for the above breeds are listed on their websites.

B.     Whenever the word “City” is used in this chapter, it shall mean the city of Manteca.

C.     Whenever the word “Department” is used in this chapter, it shall mean the city of Manteca animal services unit.

D.    Whenever the word “Municipal Code” is used in this chapter, it shall mean the city of Manteca Municipal Code. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.040 Determination of breed.
A.    If an owner, guardian or keeper is unsure as to whether or not his or her unspayed and unneutered dog is a pit bull, he or she may make an appointment with department at which a department staff member shall make a determination as to whether or not the dog is a pit bull.

B.     If the dog owner, guardian or keeper wishes to appeal the determination that the dog is a pit bull, within five business days of the staff member’s determination he or she may request a hearing before the department’s director or designee. The hearing shall be held no more than thirty days after the director receives the request. The hearing may be informal and rules of evidence not strictly observed. The decision of the director or designee is final. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.050 Mandatory spaying and neutering of pit bulls—Exceptions.
No person may own, keep, or harbor any dog within the city that the person in possession knew, or should have known, was a pit bull that has not been spayed or neutered unless:

A.    The pit bull is under eight weeks of age.

B.     The pit bull cannot be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to a physical abnormality. A veterinarian must certify such a condition and determine the time frame after which the pit bull can be spayed/neutered. Within thirty days of the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days of, taking possession or ownership of an unspayed or unneutered pit bull, the owner, guardian or keeper must submit such documentation to be verified by the department.

C.     The pit bull has been present in the city for less than thirty days.

D.    The owner, guardian or keeper has obtained, or has submitted an application for a breeding permit in accordance with Section 6.10.090 of this chapter.

E.     Determination of breed is under appeal pursuant to Section 6.10.040 above.

F.     The pit bull is a show dog. Within thirty days of the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days of taking possession or ownership of an unspayed or unneutered pit bull, the owner, guardian or keeper must submit a copy of the organization papers (AKC or UKC) to the department demonstrating the pedigree information and show dog registration and that the dog conforms with the same breeding permit guidelines set forth in Section 6.10.080 of this chapter below. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.060 Penalties.
Violation of Section 6.10.050 may result in the following penalties:

A.    A first violation may result in the department impounding the pit bull and disposing of the pit bull in accordance with Sections 6.04.031 and 6.04.050 of the municipal code. A first violation shall be an infraction punishable by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code. In order for the owner, guardian or keeper to reclaim the pit bull from the department, in addition to paying the other charges and fees set out in Section 6.40.080, one of the following must occur:

1.     The department shall have a veterinarian spay or neuter the dog. The dog owner, guardian or keeper shall pay a deposit of one hundred dollars prior to the procedure and will be charged the fee for such services consisting of the actual expense incurred as established by the department. There may be additional fees for any extraordinary care provided.

2.     In the alternative, the owner, guardian or keeper shall arrange for another veterinarian within the city or San Joaquin County to spay or neuter and shall pay the department a fee of sixty dollars, which shall cover the department’s costs of delivering the dog to a vet of the owner, guardian or keeper’s choosing. The department shall deliver the dog to the vet, and the vet shall release the dog to the owner, guardian or keeper only after the spaying or neutering is complete.

3.     At the discretion of the director, or designee, the director may release the dog to the owner, guardian or keeper provided that the owner, guardian or keeper signs an affidavit that he or she will have the dog spayed or neutered within two weeks and will provide documentation verifying that the spaying or neutering occurred upon completion. If the owner, guardian or keeper fails to have his or her pit bull spayed or neutered as agreed in the affidavit, the department shall have the authority to impound the dog, and the owner, guardian or keeper may be charged with a second violation under subsection B, below.

4.     In the event that the director or designee determines that payment of any fees by the owner, guardian or keeper of a pit bull which is impounded or otherwise taken into custody would cause extreme financial difficulty to the owner, guardian or keeper, the director or designee may, at his or her discretion, waive all or part of the fees necessary for compliance with this section.

B.     A second violation of this section by the owner, guardian or keeper, shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, a second violation may result in the department impounding the pit bull and disposing of the pit bull in accordance with Sections 6.04.031 and 6.04.050 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.070 Allocation of fees and fines collected.
All fees and the city’s share of all fines collected under Section 6.10.060 shall be used only by the department to fund the implementation and enforcement of the pit bull spaying/neutering program. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.080 Requiring permit for the breeding and transferring of pit bull puppies.
A.    No person shall cause or allow any pit bull, as defined in Section 6.10.030 of the municipal code, which is owned, harbored or kept within the city to breed or give birth without first obtaining a permit as described in this chapter.

B.     Keeping an unaltered male adult dog together with a female dog in heat in the same dog run, pen, room, or any other space where the two dogs are allowed contact with one another that would allow the dogs to breed is considered prima facie evidence of an owner, guardian or keeper’s intent to allow the dogs to breed. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.090 Granting or denying a permit.
A.    An owner or keeper of a pit bull may obtain a nontransferable permit that lasts for one year. If more than one owner, guardian, or keeper is involved in the breeding process, each party must apply for and be granted a breeding permit. The permit may be obtained from the department if all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The applicant has submitted the appropriate forms and fees required by the department in order to seek consideration for a breeding permit.

2.     The applicant has a space in which to breed pit bulls and raise the puppies that the department is satisfied will contain the animals as well as provide them with safe, sanitary, and humane conditions, appropriate for breeding pit bulls, which satisfies all applicable provisions of this title of the municipal code and all applicable state animal welfare laws.

3.     The department has evaluated and reached a positive conclusion regarding the suitability of the particular pit bulls to be bred, including consideration of their lineage, age and health condition. The department shall utilize the following guidelines in making a determination:

a.     Owners, guardians or keepers shall provide verification that any pit bull to be bred is registered as a Bull Terrier, Miniature Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or American Staffordshire Terrier with the appropriate registry for its breed (American Kennel Club, United Kennel Club, American Dog Breeders Association (“ADBA”) or any other valid registry as determined by the department.

b.     Any pit bull to be bred must meet the pit bull breed standard, as defined by the appropriate registration agency (AK, UKC, or ADBA), for physical conformation as well as temperament.

c.     The registered pit bull has participated in at least one approved dog show during the previous three hundred sixty-five day period or the owner, guardian or keeper has given written notice to one of the dog registries listed above stating his or her intention that the dog will participate in an approved dog show. A dog show is defined as an event that is sanctioned in writing by one or more of the dog registries listed above.

d.     Any pit bull to be bred shall have the appropriate health screenings for its breed. For pit bulls this is, at a minimum, the following health tests: Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (“OFA”) or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program (“PennHIP”) certification on hips, OFA on heart by a certified cardiologist and must have passed the American Temperament Testing Society temperament test.

4.     Breeders shall not allow female pit bulls to have more than one litter per year.

5.     Upon approval of his or her application, the applicant must pay the one hundred dollar permit fee.

B.     The department shall automatically deny the permit if one or more of the following occurs, and that decision shall be final:

1.     The applicant fails to pay the permit fee within two weeks of notification that the application has been approved. Applicant may reapply for a permit after ten months.

2.     The applicant has a history of allowing dogs to run loose or escape, or has otherwise been found to be neglectful; or has had his or her dog identified as a nuisance.

3.     The applicant has violated any provisions of this title.

4.     The applicant has applied for a permit within the last ten months.

C.     The department may on one or more occasions, up to a year after issuing the permit, perform an inspection of the dog’s living quarters to ensure that the standards required to receive a permit are met. The department will give the owner, guardian or keeper a twenty-four hour notice and will conduct such inspection at a reasonable time when the owner, guardian or keeper, or his or her representative, is present. The owner, guardian or keeper shall allow the department access to conduct the inspection. If the property does not meet the required standards, or the owner, guardian or keeper cannot be contacted for an inspection within two weeks of the department’s initial attempt, or the owner, guardian or keeper fails or refuses to allow an inspection, the department shall not issue a permit. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.100 Revocation of permit.
A.    The department may, after conducting a hearing, revoke a breeding permit for violations of the provisions of this title of the municipal code. Within five days of the department’s knowledge of any such violations, a hearing officer, who is any designated representative of department or the city of Manteca police department, shall notice the owner, guardian or keeper of the pit bull in writing that he or she is in violation and subject to penalties under this chapter, including revocation of his or her breeding permit. Unless the hearing is waived by the owner, guardian, or keeper of the dog, or the hearing is scheduled on an agreed-upon date, the hearing officer shall fix a time not less than ten or more than thirty days from the date of the violation notice. The hearing officer shall fix a place for said hearing and cause all parties to be notified, not less than five days before the date of such hearing. The hearing may be informal and the rules of evidence not strictly observed. Within fifteen days following the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue his or her decision to all parties. The decision of the hearing officer is final. Upon a finding of a violation, the hearing officer may impose appropriate remedies on the owner, guardian, or keeper. Any violation(s) may also be considered in future permitting decisions.

B.     After the department has issued a permit, it may revoke the permit pursuant to procedures set forth in subsection A of this section if a subsequent inspection of the premises under Section 6.10.090(C) reveals the area to be below the standards required for the permit, or if the owner, guardian or keeper cannot be contacted for an inspection within two weeks of the department’s initial attempt, or if the owner, guardian or keeper refuses the department access for an inspection. If the dog is already pregnant or the puppies are born, the department may, pending a hearing, impound the pit bull and/or its puppies in accordance with Section 6.40.050 of the municipal code. After a hearing, the department may fine the owner, guardian or keeper an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars, permanently confiscate the puppies and dispose of them in accordance with Section 6.40.050 of the municipal code, and consider the violation in future permitting decisions. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.110 Transference and sale of pit bull puppies.
A.    Any owner, guardian or keeper residing in or conducting a transaction within the city of Manteca who offers any pit bull puppies under six months old for sale, trade, or adoption, must prominently post his or her valid breeding permit number with any offer of sale, trade, or adoption. The permit number must also be supplied in writing to the individual, firm, corporation, or other entity that acquires a puppy.

B.     The breeder shall not remove puppies from the litter until the puppies are at least eight weeks of age, are fully weaned, have their first set of vaccinations, have been dewormed and are in good general health.

C.     Breeders and any party that acquires a pit bull puppy through purchase, trade or adoption shall enter into a written agreement for the transaction and must include language that the acquiring party shall, at any time during the dog’s life, return the puppy to the breeder if the acquiring party cannot keep it, and that the breeder shall accept any such returned dog.

D.    Pit bull puppies that do not have show dog papers as defined in Section 6.10.050(F) must be spayed or neutered by the breeder prior to transfer.

E.     Within three weeks of the time that the litter is whelped, the breeder shall send to the department a head count of how many puppies were live born. Within three weeks after the breeder transfers physical possession of each puppy, the breeder shall notify the department of the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, guardian or keeper of each puppy. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.120 Fines for failure to comply with permit requirements.
A.    A violation of the breeding permit provisions of Chapter 6.10 shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. Such violations must be corrected within thirty days.

B.     After thirty days of a first citation, if the owner, guardian or keeper fails to correct a violation of Chapter 6.10, it shall be an additional violation and shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Subsequent violations will be considered part of a continuous sequence of offenses and each violation after thirty days of a prior conviction will be punishable as a misdemeanor. The punishment shall be imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.     Failure to include a prominently posted permit number when transferring pit bull puppies under Section 6.10.110(A) shall be an infraction punishable by a one hundred dollar fine for the first violation, a two hundred dollar fine upon a second violation within a year of the first offense, and a five hundred dollar fine upon the third and subsequent violations within a year of the second offense.

D.    Failure to provide the department with the number of puppies born and information about a new owner, guardian or keeper of each puppy in accordance with Section 6.10.110(E) shall be an infraction punishable by a one hundred dollar fine for the first violation, a two hundred dollar fine upon a second violation within one year of the first offense, and fine of five hundred dollars for the third and subsequent violations within one year of the second offense. Failure to provide the department with the new owner, guardian or keeper’s information for each puppy, will be considered a separate and individual violation. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.130 Allocation of fees and fines collected.
All fees and the city’s share of all fines collected under Section 6.10.120 shall be used only by the department to fund the implementation and enforcement of the pit bull breeding permit program. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.140 Exceptions to permit posting requirements.
The department or a valid 501(0)(3) animal welfare and rescue organization that seeks adoptive homes for pit bulls may transfer ownership and place ads without displaying or supplying a permit number as described in Section 6.10.110(A). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

 

6.10.150 Operative date.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.10.050, the provisions of this chapter mandating the spaying and neutering of pit bulls shall not be operative until the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 6.10.080 through 6.10.110, the provisions of this section requiring a permit for the breeding and transfer of pit bull puppies shall not be operative until the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 6.12 LIVESTOCK AND FOWL
6.12.010 Goats, sheep, cows and horses—Keeping restrictions.
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause or permit to be kept or maintained within the corporate limits of the city any goats, sheep, cows or other bovine animals, or horses, mules, donkeys, ponies or other equine animals, within any pen or stable, the exterior boundaries of which are within fifty feet of any school, church, public building, hotel, restaurant, lunchroom, or the dwelling house of any person other than the dwelling house or residence occupied by the owner of the animal or animals or within one hundred feet of any hospital or other building especially designed or used for the care of the sick or injured. (Prior code § 3-6)

 

6.12.020 Goats, sheep, cows and horses—Permit required.
No person shall keep any of the animals mentioned in Section 6.12.010 under any conditions without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city finance officer who is empowered to issue such permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 3-7)

 

6.12.030 Goats, sheep, cows and horses—Sanitary requirements.
No permit shall be granted to any person for the keeping of any animal described in Sections 6.12.010 through 6.12.040 unless proper provisions have been made for a sanitary building or yard where the animal may be kept and, unless the premises are maintained in a sanitary manner, the permit may be revoked by the officer granting the same. (Prior code § 3-8)

 

6.12.040 Goats, sheep, cows and horses—Permit expiration—Nontransferable.
The permits shall be made to expire and be renewed on the first day of May of each year, and shall be nontransferable. (Prior code § 3-9)

 

6.12.050 Domestic fowl and rabbits—Restrictions.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any chickens, ducks, pigeons, geese, turkeys, rabbits, Belgian hares, guinea pigs or other domestic fowls or animals in any enclosure in the city unless the exterior boundaries of the enclosure are more than twenty feet from any dwelling, church or school, or to permit the accumulation of offal, or manure in any coop or enclosure in which such fowls or animals may be kept. (Prior code § 3-3)

 

6.12.060 Domestic fowl and rabbits—Exceptions.
The terms of Sections 6.12.050 through 6.12.070 shall not be construed to apply to such domestic fowls or animals kept in any enclosure within twenty feet from any dwelling with the written consent of the owner thereof, or to domestic fowls or animals kept in a bona fide produce market. (Prior code § 3-4)

 

6.12.070 Domestic fowl and rabbits—At large—Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having possession of any pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, rabbits, Belgian hares, guinea pigs, or any other domestic fowls or animals, to permit the same to run or go upon the premises of any other person, firm or corporation within the city. (Prior code § 3-5)

 

6.12.080 Hogs, shoats, pigs and roosters—Prohibited.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation to keep in any sty, pen or other enclosure, or to have in his, her, their, or its possession, within the limits of the city any live hog or hogs, shoat or shoats, pig or pigs, or any rooster or roosters or cockerel or cockerels over one hundred days in age. (Prior code § 3-10)

 

6.12.090 Hogs, shoats, pigs and roosters—Exceptions—Transportation.
It is not unlawful under the provisions of Sections 6.12.080 through 6.12.100 to transport or carry through the city any live hog or hogs, shoat or shoats, pig or pigs, or any rooster or roosters or cockerel or cockerels over one hundred days in age. (Prior code § 3-11)

 

6.12.100 Hogs, shoats, pigs and roosters—Time limit within city.
Any live hog or hogs, shoat or shoats, pig or pigs, or any rooster or roosters or cockerel or cockerels over one hundred days in age, being transported or carried through the city, shall not remain within the limits of the city for a longer period of time than twenty-four hours from the time of entry thereof into the city. (Prior code § 3-12)

 

6.12.110 Potbelly pigs exception.
Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, it is lawful to possess or own potbelly pigs in the city subject to the following limitations:

A.    It is unlawful to possess or own more than two potbelly pigs. It is further unlawful to have more than two potbelly pigs at any one residence, establishment or dwelling.

B.     It is unlawful to possess or own any potbelly pig which exceeds a height of nineteen inches at the shoulder or weighs more than one hundred pounds.

C.     All potbelly pigs shall be kept securely enclosed in a room, pen or other enclosure or such potbelly pigs shall be kept securely tethered or on a leash. No person owning, or having care, custody or control or possession of any potbelly pig shall suffer or allow or permit such potbelly pig to run, be or remain at large on any public street, road, alley, park, square or other public place or upon any private property other than the property of the owner or custodian of such potbelly pig without the consent of the owner of such property, within the corporate limits of city; and all potbelly pigs may be deemed running at large within the meaning of this section unless securely tethered or on a leash of sufficient strength as to prevent being broken.

D.    All person who possess or own potbelly pigs shall obtain a license therefore from the finance department and pay the fee as, from time to time, set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 971 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 6.16 IMPOUNDMENT
6.16.010 Animal services shelter.
A public animal services shelter is established in the city at a place to be designated by the city manager. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-27)

 

6.16.020 Animal services officer and assistants—Appointments.
There is created the office of the animal services officer who shall be appointed by the city manager. The city manager is authorized to employ assistants for the animal services officer as the need arises. The animal services officer and his or her assistants are authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of Part V of the Health and Sanitation Code. For such purpose they shall have the powers of peace officers. The compensation of the animal services officer and assistants shall be fixed by the city manager and approved by the city council. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-28)

 

6.16.030 Animal services officer—Police chief or designee to supervise animal service officer’s work.
The animal services officer shall report to and be supervised in his or her work by the police chief. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-29)

 

6.16.040 Animal services officer duties generally—Animals running at large prohibited.
A.    No person owning or having the care, custody, control or possession of any animal set forth in this title shall suffer, allow, or permit any such animal to run, be, or remain at large on any unenclosed lot or ground within the city, or any public street, road, alley, park, public square or other public property or upon any private property other than the property of the owner or custodian of such animal without the consent of the owner of such property. It shall be the duty of the animal services officer to take up and impound as provided in this title, any cow, horse, mule, ass, swine, sheep or goat that may be found in or upon any public street, road, alley, park, public square, unenclosed lot or ground or upon any private property, other than the property of the owner or custodian of such animal, or private property with the consent of the owner of such private property.

B.     An animal shall not be considered to be at large if such animal is securely fastened with a tether not exceeding four feet in length if on public grounds, highways or alleys; and if on private property, of such lengths as to prevent their reaching the streets, alleys, or public squares. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1182 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-30)

 

6.16.050 Biting animals—Impoundment—Fee.
Any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or biting animal, shall be surrendered to the animal services officer or, on request of the owner, placed in a veterinary hospital licensed under the laws of the state. Such animal shall remain impounded or in such a hospital for that period as prescribed by law. During the period it shall be the duty of the district health officer to determine whether or not such animal is suffering from rabies, and by reason of such disease is dangerous to persons, or other animals. If so, he or she shall require that the animal be confined until death ensues. If the district health officer shall determine that such animal is not so diseased, he or she shall notify the animal services officer and the animal services officer shall notify the owner or person having control of the animal that further impounding is unnecessary. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-31)

 

6.16.060 Redemption of impounded animals—Fees.
Any impounded animal listed in Section 6.16.040, may be redeemed and taken away upon the payment of so many of the following fees and charges as may have accrued:

A.    For taking up and impounding each large animal, including, but not limited to, a horse, mare, gelding, ox, steer, cow, mule or ass a fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of the council.

B.     For taking up and impounding each small animal including, but not limited to, a cat, goat, rabbit, bird and other small animals, a fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of the council, to include separate fees for a first impound, second impound and three or more impounds. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; prior code § 3-32)

 

6.16.070 Sale of impounded animals—Generally.
A.    The animal services officer shall retain any impounded animal listed in Section 6.16.040 for a mandatory holding period as prescribed by law. If the animal is not redeemed within that time, the animal services officer shall be at liberty to dispose of the animal. Any animal, whose value, in the opinion of the animal services officer, will exceed the expense for which the animal may be liable, may be advertised for sale. The advertisement shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city and shall contain a complete description of the animal to be sold. Advertisement shall give notice that the sale is to be at public auction to be conducted by the animal control officer, shall give the location, time and date of the sale and set forth that the animal will be sold to pay the charges that have or will have accrued against it, together with advertising costs. The date set for the conduct of the sale shall be not less than two nor more than ten days from the date of the first publication of the advertisement. If the animal has not been redeemed prior to the sale, the animal services officer shall sell the animal for cash to the highest bidder and, upon the payment of the purchase money, he or she shall deliver the animal, together with a bill of sale therefor, to the purchaser.

B.     Any owner redeeming an animal after advertisement for sale has begun shall be required to pay the advertising costs which have accrued, in addition to the fees and charges set forth in Section 6.16.060.

C.     Whenever any animal has been sold pursuant to this section, the animal services officer shall maintain a record of the date it was sold, the name and address of the party buying the animal, the total cost and expense incurred, specifying each item, and the sale price. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-33)

 

6.16.090 Impoundment of dogs—Generally.
It is made the duty of the animal services officer to take up and impound, and/or prosecute the owners of, any dogs found or kept in the city in violation of any of the sections of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the license and annual registration sections. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-35)

 

6.16.100 Care of impounded animals.
All animals impounded will be provided with food and water and held for a period as prescribed by law, unless previously redeemed. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; prior code § 3-36)

 

6.16.110 Dogs—Unclaimed.
A.    All dogs not claimed or redeemed within the mandatory holding period, shall become the property of the city and may be adopted, euthanized, placed with a rescue organization or otherwise disposed of in a manner prescribed by law.

B.     Any person may adopt an unclaimed dog by securing a license and paying both an adoption fee and microchip fee, both of which will be established from time to time by resolution of council.

C.     Exception. Any person (purchasing) adopting a dog and who has an out-of-town address will be required to purchase a license from the city/county in which they reside to keep a dog. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; prior code § 3-37)

 

6.16.120 Dogs—Redemption of unlicensed.
The owner or person having had control of an unlicensed dog impounded by the animal services officer, may redeem such dog within the mandatory holding period by showing adequate proof of ownership, paying for the license, redemption fee, impound fee, plus a fee per day for each day such dog has been kept by the animal services officer in excess of the mandatory holding period. All such fees will be established from time to time by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-38)

 

6.16.130 Dogs—Out-of-town redemption.
The owner or person having had control of an out-of-town dog taken up and impounded by the animal services officer, may redeem his or her dog within the mandatory holding period by showing adequate proof of ownership, paying the impound fee, plus a per day fee for each day such dog has been kept by the animal services officer in excess of the mandatory holding period. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-39)

 

6.16.140 Dogs—Registered—Redemption.
The owner or person having had control of a registered dog found in the city, in violation of this chapter, and impounded by the animal services officer, may redeem the dog within the mandatory holding period upon payment of the appropriate redemption fees as established from time to time by resolution of council. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-40)

 

6.16.150 Cats—Impoundment generally.
It is made the duty of the animal services officer to impound all cats delivered to the city animal control shelter. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-41)

 

6.16.160 Cats—Unclaimed.
A.    All cats not claimed or redeemed within the mandatory holding period, shall become the property of the city and may be adopted, euthanized, placed with a rescue organization or otherwise disposed of in a manner prescribed by law.

B.     Any person may adopt an unclaimed cat of more than three months of age that has been neutered or spayed after paying both the adoption fee and microchip fee as established from time to time by resolution of council.

C.     Any person may adopt an unclaimed cat less than three months of age upon payment of the adoption fee, cost of neutering/spaying fee, and the microchip fee. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-42)

 

6.16.170 Cats—Redemption.
The owner or person having control of a cat impounded by the animal services officer may redeem such cat within the mandatory holding period by showing adequate proof of ownership and upon payment of the associated redemption fees. (Ord. 1495 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1077 § 3, 1998; prior code § 3-43)

Chapter 6.20 KILLING AND BUTCHERING
6.20.010 No killing or butchering within residential areas.
No person shall kill or butcher any animal within a residential area of the city except as specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. 839 § 1, 1989)

 

6.20.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Butcher” means bleeding, eviscerating, skinning, splitting, cutting or carving the body, or any portion of the body, of an animal.

B.     “Game birds” means doves, quail, grouse, sage hens, partridges, pheasants, coots, gallinules and jacksnipe.

C.     “Game mammals” means deer, elk, prong-horned antelope, feral pigs, wild boars, bears, mountain lions, hares and tree squirrels.

D.    “Residential area” means any place located within an area zoned by the city as residential estate district, single-family residential, single-family attached patio homes, garden apartment district, multiple-family, institutional district or residential planned unit development district. (Ord. 839 § 1, 1989)

 

6.20.030 Certain killings permitted.
Chickens, turkeys, ducks, pigeons, geese, game birds and rabbits may be killed in a residential area of the city provided:

A.    The meat of such animal is for the personal consumption of the occupant of the property or his or her immediate family; and

B.     The act of killing is not visible or audible off the property. (Ord. 839 § 1, 1989)

 

6.20.040 Certain butchering permitted.
Chickens, turkeys, ducks, pigeons, geese, game birds, game mammals, goats, sheep, cattle and pigs may be butchered in a residential area of the city provided:

A.    The meat of such animal is for the personal consumption of the occupant of the property or his or her immediate family; and

B.     The act of butchering is not visible or audible off the property. (Ord. 839 § 1, 1989)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.08 FIREWORKS
Chapter 8.16 WEEDS AND TRASH
Chapter 8.17 NUISANCES
Chapter 8.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 8.22 SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.24 RIGHT TO FARM
Chapter 8.30 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 8.35 ADULT MARIJUANA USE AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Chapter 8.37 INCLEMENT WEATHER CENTERS

Chapter 8.04 BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
8.04.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls for the various types of intrusion, hold-up and other emergency signals from alarm systems which may prompt police response or investigation, and for the businesses and persons installing and servicing said systems in order to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply and are listed below alphabetically:

“Alarm agent” means a person employed by an alarm company operator whose duties include selling on premises, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding or monitoring an alarm system, or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm company to perform any of the duties described herein.

“Alarm company operator” means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in business or accepts employment to install, maintain, alter, sell on premises, monitor, or service alarm systems or who responds to alarm systems except for any alarm agent. Alarm company operator, however, does not include a business which merely sells from a fixed location or manufacturers alarms systems unless the business services, installs, sells on premises, monitors, or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises.

“Alarm system” means any mechanical and/or electrical device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both; and when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a signal to indicate that an emergency situation exists, and which may prompt police to respond. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, silent alarms, audible alarms, proprietor alarms, and direct dial telephone devices. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this section:

1.     Devices which are not installed, operated, or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency to the police department;

2.     Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles, trailers or trailer coaches (as defined in California Vehicle Code Sections 415, 630 and 635), vessels, or aircraft;

3.     Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department.

“Alarm user” means any person using an alarm system at his or her place of business or residence.

“Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on, or an attempted entry into premises or a structure; or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and which, when actuated, generates an audible alarm on the premises.

“Automatic calling/dialing system” means an alarm system which automatically sends over telephone lines, by direct connect or otherwise, a recorded message indicating an emergency situation exists.

“Central monitoring station” means any office, station, or telephone answering service where person(s) monitor and/or receive emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter, relay messages from such signals by live voice to the Manteca police department telecommunications center.

“Direct connect” means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to, and receiving them at, an agency maintained by a local government entity such as the city at its Manteca police department 911 center.

“False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or the negligence of the owner, lessee, or of his/her employees or agents, which necessitates response by the police when an emergency condition does not exist; provided, however, alarms caused by acts of nature such as earthquakes, floods, tornadoes, or other violent, uncontrollable acts of nature shall not be considered false alarms.

“Non-priority” means that police response to the activation of an alarm shall not be given precedence over other calls and will be predicated upon availability of police units and other service needs.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity.

“Police chief” means the police chief of the city or designated representative.

“Proprietor alarm” means an alarm system which does not anticipate a police response when activated. It is a device which is not designed or used to register an audible, visible, or perceptible signal outside or away from the protected premises.

“Silent alarm” means any mechanical and/or electrical device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting another of the commission of an unlawful act which transmits a signal to a monitored, remote location.

“Standby power backup” means any auxiliary, secondary, or backup power source capable of supplying adequate power to properly operate an alarm system should the primary power source be interrupted. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.030 Alarm company operator registration.
It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct, or carry on the business of selling, leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving, removing, or monitoring of an alarm system in any building, place, or premises within the city without first having registered with the police department; provided, however, such registration shall not be required for any business which only sells or leases said alarm systems from a fixed location unless such business services, installs, monitors, or responds to such alarm systems at the protected premises. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing the full name of the business and a copy of the state-issued license for the business. State-issued licenses are required by Sections 7590 through 7599 of the Business and Professions Code and Sections 680 through 689 of the Code of Regulations, commonly known as the “Alarm Company Act.” (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.040 Alarm agent registration.
It is unlawful for any person to engage directly in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing of an alarm system in or around any building, place, or premises within the city without first having registered his or her full name and having filed with the police chief a copy of his or her state-issued identification card pursuant to Sections 7590 through 7599 of the Business and Professions Code, Sections 680 through 689 of the Code of Regulations, commonly known as the “Alarm Company Act” and Section 8.04.030 of this code; provided, however, nothing herein shall require a person to be so registered in order to install, service, repair, alter, replace, or move an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by that person, and, further provided, nothing herein shall require a person to so register when that person is merely a salesperson for any business which is not required to register as an alarm company operator, under the provisions of this chapter, if such salesperson does not engage in any other activity related to alarm systems apart from selling. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.050 Notification of changes.
Any alarm business registered with the police department shall, within thirty days, report to the police chief or designee any change of business name, address, or ownership. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.060 Alarm user’s permit.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate or install, cause to be installed, use, maintain, or possess an alarm system on the premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the city without first having obtained an alarm user’s permit from the police chief of the city, as herein specified.

B.     Alarm systems which are not designed to summon public and/or Manteca police department attention, but which are privately monitored and responded to, are exempt from this requirement.

C.     The application for an alarm user’s permit shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the police chief and shall include the address of the premises wherein the system is to be located and the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the person(s) who will respond to an alarm, provide access, or render services or repairs to the alarm system on a twenty-four-hour a day basis, and any such additional information that the police chief shall deem necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the permit application.

D.    Any permittee who operates or maintains more than one alarm system upon any particular property may, at the permittee’s option, apply for a single permit for that particular property or for separate permits for each alarm system operated or maintained; provided, however, that if such permittee chooses to secure separate permits for each alarm system, a separate application shall be submitted for each such system and a separate permit fee shall accompany each such application. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.070 Permit application fee.
A.    An alarm user permit fee may be established by a resolution of the city council of Manteca. The permit shall expire according to the schedule of permits and fees established by the city council, at which time a renewal fee will be collected in accordance with the schedule of permits and fees applicable at the time of renewal.

B.     If required, permit fees shall be paid in full at the beginning of each calendar year according to the schedule of permits and fees established by the city council. Permit fees shall not be prorated.

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any police response to alarm devices. The issuance of the alarm user’s permit does not entitle the holder to any special level of police service to an alarm device. The fees will be used to offset the costs to maintain records of existing alarm systems in the city. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.080 Fee exemptions.
The United States Government, the state of California, counties, municipal corporations, and departments thereof are exempt from the fees required in this chapter. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.090 Issuance of permits.
Alarm use permits shall be issued by the police chief. The police chief may issue an alarm use permit only after the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. Alarm use permits may be issued to the person(s) who is/are the owner of, or in possession of, the property which the alarm system is designed to protect. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.100 Revocation and reissuance of alarm use permits.
A.    An alarm use permit may be revoked if good cause exists. Good cause for revocation shall include, but not be limited to:

1.     Failure to take corrective measures to prevent false alarms;

2.     Failure to pay service charges resulting from excessive false alarms as authorized by this chapter.

B.     Notice of alarm use permit revocation shall be made by the Manteca police department to the permittee by certified or registered mail.

C.     Use of an alarm system after permit revocation notification has been issued is unlawful and may result in an administrative fine of five hundred dollars for each documented occurrence.

D.    Revoked permits may be reissued by the Manteca police department if the former permittee can show that action has been taken to correct the cause or causes which resulted in the revocation of the original alarm use permit. Reissuance of an alarm use permit shall be accomplished by the same procedure as the issuance of a new permit. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.110 Change of ownership.
Permits for residences shall automatically expire upon change of ownership of the real property where the alarm is located unless the permit is revoked at an earlier time. The date of issuance of the permit is the date shown on the permit. If a permit is not renewed, or it is revoked, the alarm system may not be operated until a new permit is issued. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.120 Expiration and renewal of permit.
A.    Length of Permit Period. Each residential alarm use permit is valid from the date of issuance until December 31st of the following year unless the permit is revoked at an earlier time and must be renewed in compliance with current regulations. The date of issuance is the date shown on the permit. If a permit is not renewed, or if it is revoked, the alarm system may not be operated until a new permit is secured. Commercial alarm use permits are valid from the date of issuance until December 31st of that year.

B.     Application for Renewal. Odd number residential addresses must file a renewal application by January 31st of odd numbered years. Even number residential addresses must file a renewal application by January 31st of even numbered years. Commercial alarm use permits must file a renewal application by January 31st of each year. If an application for renewal is not forwarded to the police chief by January 31st of the appropriate year, the permit will be canceled and the permittee will be guilty of an infraction each day of continued use of the alarm after the date of cancellation

C.     Notice to Alarm Companies. If an alarm permit is not renewed as stated above by January 31st, or is suspended or revoked, the police chief shall give notice of nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation to the servicing alarm company. (Ord. O2018-32 § 1; Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.130 Notice of name of serviceperson or occupant.
Every person maintaining an alarm system shall either post or file with the police department a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency or alarm activation or to render service to the alarm system on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. The person’s name shall include the occupant of the premises or the alarm business, or the agents responsible for the maintenance of the system. If posted, such notice shall be placed near the front door of the structure containing the alarm system or at the front gate if the structure is fenced; said notice shall be posted in such a position as to be clearly visible and legible from the ground level adjacent to the structure or fence. It shall be the duty of the alarm user to maintain such notice current, whether posted or filed, with the police department. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.140 Transferability of permit.
Any alarm user permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only as to the permittee named on the permit. No alarm permit shall, in any manner be transferred to another without the prior written consent of the police chief. Any request to transfer a permit to another shall be in writing on the standard Manteca police department form. Transfer of a permit shall in no way affect the date of expiration of said permit. False alarms previously charged to the transferor shall not be charged to the transferee. However, the police chief may deny any request to transfer an alarm system permit where, after investigation, it appears that the transfer is requested for the purpose of allowing the transferor to evade responsibility for prior false alarms. Alarm permits may only be transferred from one person to another at the address shown on the permit or from one property to another under the name of person shown on the permit. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.150 Impermissible systems and uses.
A.    No person shall use or operate, cause to be used or operated, arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide for, or install any device or combination of devices that, upon activation of an alarm system, either mechanically, electrically, or automatically, or by other means, will initiate the intrastate calling, dialing, or connection to any police number, line or instrument assigned to the Manteca police department.

B.     No person shall operate or use any alarm system that emits a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle, siren, or civil defense warning system.

C.     No person shall use or operate any alarm system that emits an exterior audible sound which such emission does not automatically cease within fifteen minutes.

D.    No person shall operate or use an alarm system for any other purpose than detecting and reporting an unauthorized entry upon the property protected by that system. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.160 Alarm system standards.
On the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter all alarm businesses shall install on all new installations and all service replacements only alarm panels that meet the UL CP-0l listing and comply with ANSI/SIA CP-0l standard for alarm control panels. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.170 False alarms.
A.    A service fee will be charged by the city for false alarms or failure to respond to alarms by alarm owners or their designated representative.

B.     Multiple false alarms occurring in any twenty-four-hour period may be charged as one call, if shown that the owner was not notified and provided the opportunity to correct the defect.

 

C.     The service charges will be based on an escalating scale determined by the frequency of false alarms, and shall be in the amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council.

D.    The chief or designee may suspend law enforcement response or revoke the alarm user permit if it is determined that the alarm user has five false alarm responses in a twelve-month period excluding holdup or panic alarms.

 

E.     The chief or designee may waive a service fee if the alarm owner/ operator successfully completes a false alarm reduction class presented by the police department. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.180 Standby power back-up source.
A.    No alarm system shall be installed or connected on or after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective which does not have a standby backup power supply which will automatically assume the operation of the alarm system should any interruption occur in power to the system. The transfer of power from the primary source to the back-up source and reverse must occur in a manner which does not activate the alarm. The backup power supply shall be capable of powering the alarm system on a continuous basis for a minimum of two hours.

B.     On or after one year from the effective date said ordinance, no owner of an alarm system within the city shall have in operation any alarm system unless such alarm system is equipped with a standby power backup source as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.190 Responsibility for alarm service—Audible or silent.
In case of either an audible or a silent alarm, the person or persons named in the posted notice or a person whose name is on file with the police department as a designated responding party as required under this section shall, upon proper notification, proceed immediately to the location of the activated alarm and provide access to the premises to allow the police department to properly secure such premises. All alarm service companies which contract to provide alarm response services shall maintain service personnel on duty twenty-four hours a day to provide for such responses. Should a responsible owner or his/her designated representative fail to respond to an alarm location within a reasonable amount of time (normally twenty minutes) upon proper notification, or fail to respond to the alarm location at all, the responsible party will be subject to a service fee to be determined by the city council. The service fee will be for the services rendered in determining the cause of the failure to respond to the alarm or the alarm service company. Failure to pay the required service fee will be a violation of this chapter, and, in addition, may result in termination of response by the police department to future alarms at the permitted alarm location. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.200 Monitoring alarm services.
Every alarm business which monitors an alarm system located within the city shall maintain on file a current listing of all such alarm systems, including the name, address, and telephone number of the individual or individuals from whom entry to the premises can be obtained. On the effective date of the ordinance codified in this ordinance all alarm companies with clients in the city will provide a list of their current customers to the alarm administrator of the police department. On the effective date said ordinance all alarm companies conducting business in the city will be responsible for informing all new customers of the requirement to obtain an alarm permit from the police department and will not request police response until such time as the alarm is registered with the alarm administrator. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.210 Alarm agents—Registration in possession.
Every person engaged in installing, repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, moving, or removing an alarm system as defined herein on any premises within the city, other than those owned or occupied by said person, shall carry on his or her person at all times, while so engaged, a valid state of California alarm agent’s registration card and shall display such card to any police officer or authorized city representative upon request. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.220 Automatic calling devices.
No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated any device or combination of devices that is arranged, adjusted or programmed so that it will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, initiate, call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to the Manteca police department 911 center without the prior written consent of the police chief, nor shall any person so arrange, adjust, or program such device without such permission. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.230 Instruction on operation of alarm systems.
It shall be the responsibility of the company installing an alarm system to instruct and reinstruct his or her subscriber and/or the occupant of the premises wherein said system is installed in the proper use and operation of said device of alarm, whether silent or audible, specifically including all the necessary instruction in turning off said alarm and avoiding false alarms. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.240 Appeals.
Any person who is denied an alarm use permit, or whose alarm use permit has been revoked, or who is denied an alarm use permit reissuance, or who has been assessed an administrative fine after revocation of an alarm permit or who has received an alarm service charge assessment, may appeal the action in writing to the police chief or designee within fifteen  days of denial, revocation, denial of reissuance or assessment of a service charge or administrative fine. Within ten days of receipt of an appeal, the police chief or designee shall render a written decision on the appeal. If the appeal is denied, such decision shall be effective immediately upon personal service to the applicant/permittee or shall be effective five calendar days after being deposited in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.250 Police response.
A.    Police will continue to respond to all robbery and panic alarms.

B.     Police have the option to discontinue response to any alarm site that has had more than five false alarm responses during any permit term.

C.     All alarm businesses shall verify all intrusion (burglary) alarms by either one of the following methods prior to requesting police response:

1.     Enhanced Call Verification (ECV) as per ANSI/CSAA standard whereby at least two calls to two different phone numbers have been made to verify that an actual emergency exists.

2.     Video verification (W) where a video signal is sent to the alarm company and there is visual evidence of activity at the premises.

3.     Listen in or audio technology is employed and the alarm monitoring operator hears evidence that there is potential criminal activity at the premises.

4.     Multi-zone activation when there has been alarm activation in two or more separate monitoring zones and the alarm company’s monitoring station has been unsuccessful in its attempt to contact the premises.

(Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.260 Liability limitation.
The city shall be under no duty or obligation to holders of alarm use permits or to any other persons by reason of any provision of this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, delays in transmission, and/or responses to an alarm call. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.270 Administration, regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police chief or representative. He or she is authorized to make inspections of the intrusion detection devices and the alarm systems, and of the premises whereon said devices or systems are located. He or she shall have the power and shall enforce such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.280 Violation of chapter.
A.    Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

B.     Enforcement. The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent administrative or criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any permit fee shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee. All permit fees shall be deemed delinquent thirty days after they are due and payable. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

 

8.04.290 Applicability to existing alarm systems.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems which were installed, connected, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective; provided, however, that the alarm permit user fee shall not apply to existing user permits that were issued prior to the enactment of said ordinance. (Ord. 1431 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 8.08 FIREWORKS
Article I. Fireworks—Administrative Provisions
8.08.010 Prohibition on sale, use or discharge of fireworks without permit.
The sale, use, possession or discharge of any fireworks or pyrotechnic devices, including, but not limited to, “safe and sane” fireworks, anywhere within the incorporated area of the city of Manteca is prohibited unless otherwise allowed by this article. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.020 Sales and use by minors.
A.    It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen to sell, or handle for sale, any classification of fireworks.

B.     It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen to purchase or be allowed to purchase any classification of fireworks.

C.     It is unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor under the age of eighteen to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire, or set off any fireworks, as defined herein, unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a parent or guardian, or such other person having care, custody or control of such minor. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.030 Locations for discharge.
A.    No fireworks shall be discharged on public, semi-public or private open areas such as parking lots, vacant properties, or open commercial or industrial areas except in those areas approved by the fire chief.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, any fireworks, or to permit the ignition, explosion or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his or her consent.

C.     It is unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks within one hundred feet of a fireworks booth. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.040 Dangerous fireworks.
No fireworks classified as “dangerous fireworks” by Section 12505 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California or listed in Section 8.08.090 may be sold or discharged within the city. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.050 Violation to discharge fireworks except as permitted by Fire Marshal.
It is a violation of this code for any person to cause, allow, permit, aid, or abet any discharge of fireworks (including a public display) without having first obtained a permit therefor from the Fire Marshal, including a property owner who knows or should know of the violation. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.060 Improper storage of fireworks—Violation.
It is a violation of this code for any person to store fireworks, including those classified as safe and sane by the California State Fire Marshal, except as expressly allowed by 8.08.110 of this code. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.070 Abatement.
As a public nuisance, an unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks may be summarily abated by law enforcement by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination, including, but not limited to:

A.    Issuance of an administrative citation or written notice that a violation of this chapter has occurred, as set forth in Section 8.08.180(C); and

B.     Issuance of a citation for recovery of response costs for violations as set forth in Section 8.08.180(H); and

C.     Public nuisance abatement procedures as set forth in Section 1.10.300, et seq.; and

D.    Any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.080 State definitions adopted.
For purposes of this article, all words not herein defined shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as under the State Fireworks Law (Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.090 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Enforcement officer” means any city employee, or law enforcement officer with the authority to enforce any provision of this code. Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this code determines that a violation has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation.

“Fireworks” means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term “fireworks” includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits. For the purposes of this chapter, “fireworks” includes both “dangerous fireworks” and “safe and sane fireworks” as defined by the California Health and Safety Code.

“Property” means private property, rented residential premises, or rented commercial residences; including, but not limited to, a home, yard, or field, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether or not occupied as a dwelling and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

“Response costs” means those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred by public safety personnel for a response to an unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and include the cost of providing law enforcement, firefighting, and/or other emergency services at the scene of the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks including, but not limited to:

1.     Salaries and benefits of public safety personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and the administrative costs attributable to the response(s); and

2.     The cost of any medical treatment to or for any public safety personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks; and

3.     The cost of repairing any public safety equipment or property damage, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of an unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks.

“Residence or other private property” means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, a hall or meeting room, or commercial property, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

“Responsible party” includes, but is not limited to:

1.     The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has possession of the residence or other private property;

2.     The person(s) in immediate control of the residence or other private property; and

3.     The person(s) who organizes, supervises, sponsors, conducts, allows, controls, or controls access to the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks.

If the residence or other private property is rented or leased, the landlord or lessor is not covered by this chapter unless they fall within the category of persons described under paragraph 2 or 3 of this definition. A landlord or lessor can only be held responsible under paragraph 3 of this definition if he or she has knowledge that fireworks (including a public display) are being discharged or illegally stored on the property without obtaining a permit therefor from the Fire Marshal.

“Safe and sane fireworks”, are defined in Sections 12529 and 12562 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

Article II. Discharge of Public Fireworks Display
8.08.100 Permits.
The Fire Marshal, or designee, may issue a permit for the use or discharge of fireworks and pyrotechnic devices only where the persons in charge of the display have obtained a license from the State Fire Marshal for a public display or special effects. The application, investigation and decision process shall be as follows:

A.    Permit Application. All permit applications shall include the following:

1.     The name of the person or organization sponsoring the proposed activities, together with the names and license numbers of persons actually in charge of the activity;

2.     A full description of all proposed activities;

3.     The date and time of day the proposed activities would occur;

4.     The exact location of the activities;

5.     The size and number of all fireworks to be involved in the proposed activities, including the number of set pieces, shells and other items. Shells shall be designated by diameter specifying single, multiple break or salute;

6.     The manner and place of storage of all fireworks;

7.     A diagram of the grounds on which the activities are proposed to occur showing all points at which fireworks are proposed to be stored or discharged, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation to and from the site, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, and the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines and other overhead obstructions;

8.     Proof that satisfactory workers’ compensation insurance is carried for all employees in compliance with Labor Code Section 3700;

9.     Documentary proof of conformance with the insurance requirements of Health and Safety Code Sections 12610 and 12611; and additional insurance requirements identified by the city;

10.   A State Fire Marshal license for the public display of fireworks or special effects; and

11.   The name and license number of the wholesaler(s) supplying all items used in the display.

B.     Investigation. When evaluating whether a permit should be granted, the Fire Marshal, or designee, shall evaluate the following:

1.     Whether the proposed activity will be of such character or so located that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person.

2.     Whether the activity will comply with all requirements of the California Fire Code, and the State Fireworks Law (Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder.

C.     Grant or Denial. The Fire Marshal, or designee, shall exercise reasonable discretion to either grant or deny the permit, and may impose any conditions he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure there is no adverse impact to the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

Article III. State Fire Marshal Approved—Safe and Sane
8.08.110 Permit—Sales of State Fire Marshal approved.
A.    The city council is authorized to establish, by resolution or ordinance, the process by which the city will issue permits and the condition that permit applicants and permittees must satisfy in order to receive the permits.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in the sale or distribution of fireworks within the city without first having secured a permit to do so from the fire department.

C.     It is unlawful to store fireworks within the city without first having secured a permit to do so from the fire department.

D.    The annual permit fee for the sale of fireworks and/or the public display of fireworks as may be authorized under this chapter shall be three hundred fifty dollars per year, per fireworks stand or public display, payable in advance.

E.     Organizations selected for permits shall produce and distribute to each customer, at their cost, fireworks rules and regulations and informational flyers, as directed by the fire chief or designee. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.120 Time limit.
Subject to the provisions of the State Fireworks Law, Sections 12500 through 12726 of the State Health and Safety Code, and any regulations promulgated thereunder, safe and sane fireworks, as defined in Sections 12529 and 12562 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, may be sold and discharged within the city limits of the city of Manteca during the period beginning at noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending at midnight on the fourth of July, each year. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.130 Maximum number firework sales booths—Permits issued.
A.    The maximum number of permits which the city may issue during any one calendar year shall not exceed one sales permit for each five thousand population or portion thereof, in addition to one permit for the city, based on the fire chief’s approval.

B.     The city council is hereby authorized to establish, by resolution, a lottery process for which the permits will be issued. The permit will be effective for the year in which it is issued. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.140 Applications.
Applications to store or sell safe and sane registered fireworks may only be filed during normal business hours from November 1st of each year up to and including first Friday of December of the same year, at which time the filing period for that year will close. All applications shall be submitted in writing to the fire chief, or designees, on forms provided by the city and meet the following conditions:

A.    The applicant is a local nonprofit organization which shall mean any nonprofit association, club, or corporation organized for veteran, patriotic, welfare, religious, civic betterment, youth or charitable purposes as defined by Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, or affiliated with a public school located within the city limits of Manteca. Each organization shall provide the city with a copy of their “Letters of Incorporation” as proof of their nonprofit status and establish status as a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization as recognized by the Internal Revenue Service, or equivalent documentation from the Secretary of State. Equivalent documentation shall be determined by the city attorney.

1.     Public school organizations shall provide current written verification from affiliation from the school each year.

2.     Each organization may file an application for one sales permit for which there is only one tax ID number.

B.     The organization must possess a nonprofit identification number; however, a given identification number may not be used by more than one organization. Should the city determine that more than one organization has submitted the same nonprofit identification number; the fire chief’s office shall notify the organizations in writing and give each of them the opportunity to correct the situation to ensure compliance with this section. If such compliance is not achieved, none of the affected nonprofits organizations shall be eligible to receive a permit.

C.     A local nonprofit organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the city. The organization must have obtained nonprofit status and have been organized and established in the city for a minimum of one continuous year preceding the filing of the application for permit. The organization must also have a bona fide membership of at least twenty members who reside in the city, which will be verified each year. Applications shall be signed by two bona fide officers of the eligible organization, wherein the officer, on behalf of the organization and its agents, agrees to abide by state laws, administrative regulations, and all stipulations of this code and the permit if permission to operate a fireworks stand is granted to the organization.

D.    Should the city determine that an organization selected for permit issuance does not satisfy these requirements or otherwise comply with the intent of the requirements of this chapter; the organization’s application shall be denied. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.150 Documents and fees required for permit issuance.
A.    In addition to all other requirements contained in this chapter, each permittee shall comply with each of the following requirements:

1.     Apply for a permit to store or sell fireworks on a form approved by the fire department with the required permit fee as established by city council resolution before five p.m. on May 1st of each year.

2.     State Fire Marshal’s firework retail license.

3.     Provide proof of a temporary sellers permit to the State Board of Equalization.

4.     Sign a form provided by the city whereby the permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from any and all claims, damages, demands, liability, costs, losses, and expenses, including without limitation court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees, arising out of or in connection with the permittee’s sale of fireworks pursuant to a city-issued permit, except such loss or damage which was caused by the active negligence, sole negligence, or willful misconduct of the city, its officers, employees, or agents.

5.     Furnish to the city proof of coverage by a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. The policy shall provide limits of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than five million dollars combined single limit for each occurrence annually as payment for damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by the public sale or display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the permittee or his or her agents, servants, employees or subcontractors relating thereto.

6.     Identification of the proposed location of the sale booth, and storage of same, including the seven digit parcel number (APN) of the San Joaquin county assessor and other information as may be required by the fire chief.

7.     Property owner’s, or designee’s, written permission to sell fireworks at the location shall accompany the permit application.

8.     Booth location with the exact placement of fireworks.

9.     Plot plan of storage.

B.     Permits for retail sales of safe and sane fireworks issued pursuant to the provisions of this section is not transferable to any other person or organization and is issued for the purpose of operating a single fireworks sales booth at the approved location. The permit may be used only by the organization to which it is issued. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.160 Operation of fireworks stand only by permittee.
A.    It is unlawful for the permittee organization to allow any person or entity other than the permittee organization to operate the fireworks stand for which the permit is issued, whether by agreement, assignment or otherwise, or to otherwise participate in the profits of the operations of such fireworks stand. Violations will result in the immediate loss of the organization’s permit.

B.     It is unlawful for a nonprofit organization to allow any person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee organization, their spouses or adult children, to sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such fireworks stand. Individuals under the age of eighteen are not allowed in the fireworks stand.

C.     It is unlawful for any nonprofit organization to pay any consideration to any person for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such fireworks stand, except the hiring of a night watchman or security officer.

D.    A minimum of one hundred feet shall be maintained from any building used as a school, day care, hospitals, place of detention, public garage or place of assembly that can accommodate three hundred or more occupants and the fireworks booth.

 

E.     A minimum of twenty feet of separation shall be provided between the fireworks booths and the parked vehicles of the public. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.170 Permit—Revoke.
A.    The fire chief, or designee, may revoke, immediately and without notice or hearing, the safe and sane fireworks permit of any location or organization when any of the provisions of this code, Health and Safety Code, International Fire Code or the California Code of Regulations are violated. The fire chief shall inform the permittee that permittee may seek review of the fire chief’s decision, by the city manager, on the next business day. At the earliest opportunity on the next business day after revocation, the fire chief shall provide the city manager with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. If requested by the permittee, the city manager, or designee, shall meet with the permittee and the fire chief, or designee, that day to review the fire chief’s decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

B.     Revocation of any permit will be effective for that calendar year. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

Article IV. Enforcement
8.08.180 Penalties.
A.    Any person who allows, permits, aids, or abets any discharge of fireworks (including a public display) without having first obtained a permit therefor from the Fire Marshal, or designee, shall be in violation of this section, unless otherwise permitted by ordinance.

B.     Any person who stores fireworks, including those classified as “safe and sane” by the California State Fire Marshal, except as expressly allowed by this code, shall be in violation of this section.

C.     Administrative Citation. Upon identification of an unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, law enforcement may issue an administrative citation as set forth in Section 1.10.010, and/or a notice of violation to all responsible person(s) present at the unpermitted discharge of fireworks. Law enforcement shall notify those responsible persons present at the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage that further violation of the ordinance may result in the issuance of increased fines and assessment of response costs.

The administrative fines shall be:

1.     Seven hundred fifty dollars for the first administrative citation issued to the responsible person.

2.     One thousand dollars for the second and/or each subsequent administrative citation issued to the responsible person.

D.    Upon identification of an unpermitted discharge of fireworks, law enforcement may also issue a written notice to all other identifiable responsible persons not present at the unpermitted discharge of fireworks that a violation of the fireworks ordinance has occurred and that further violations may result in the assessment of response costs.

E.     Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to limit any of the penalties provided for under the California Health and Safety Code or Penal Code with regard to the sale, use, possession, delivery, storage, and/or transportation of dangerous fireworks.

 

F.     The penalties set forth herein are intended to be nonexclusive and are intended to be in addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter or any other law, statute, ordinance or regulation.

G.    Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

H.    Response Costs. A responsible person(s) who has been issued a second administrative citation and/or written notice of violation of this chapter may be liable for response costs incurred in responding to the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks. All responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred in the response and all subsequent responses.

If a responsible person is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, the responsible person for the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks need not be present at the event that causes the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a responsible person.

I.      Payment of Administrative Fines.

1.     The administrative fines and/or response costs shall be paid pursuant to Chapter 1.10, Administrative Enforcement Provisions.

2.     Payment of a fine and/or response costs under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation.

J.      Hearing Request. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible person per the procedures outlined in Chapter 1.10, Administrative Enforcement Provisions.

Advanced deposit of the fine shall not be required if the administrative citation was issued pursuant to Section 8.08.190. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.190 Third-party administrative citations.
A.    Whenever one or more private persons observe a violation of this code, they may request that an administrative citation be issued to a responsible party (as defined in Section 8.08.090 of this code) by any of the officers or employees named in Section 8.08.090 of this code, or any other officer designated by the city attorney. The private persons will be required to sign an affidavit under penalty of perjury verifying that they personally observed a violation of this code by a responsible party, and may be required to testify at an administrative hearing as provided in Section 1.10.440 if the administrative citation is appealed. Failure of the private persons to testify at an administrative hearing if required by the department prosecuting the violation on behalf of the private parties may result in a dismal of the administrative citation. The officer or employee shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to the responsible party upon the basis of this affidavit.

B.     Each third-party administrative citation shall contain:

1.     The date of the violation;

2.     The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

3.     The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

 

4.     The amount of the fine for the code violation;

5.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine must be paid;

6.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrences of the code violation described in the administrative citation;

7.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing to contest the administrative citation may be obtained;

8.     The name, signature and department issuing the citation on behalf of the private persons.

C.     Each third-party administrative citation shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the private persons setting forth a description of the violation as observed by the private persons signed under penalty of perjury.

D.    Third-Party Administrative Citation. Upon identification of an unpermitted discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, law enforcement may issue an administrative citation or a notice of violation to all responsible person(s) present at the unpermitted discharge of fireworks. Law enforcement shall notify those responsible persons present at the unpermitted discharge or illegal storage that further violation of this chapter may result in the issuance of increased fines and assessment of response costs.

E.     The administrative fines for third-party administrative citations shall be the same as in Section 8.08.180. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

 

8.08.200 Compliance with other federal, state and county laws and regulations.
In addition to obtaining a permit from the fire marshal, any use or discharge of any fireworks and pyrotechnic devices shall comply with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The issuance of a permit from the fire marshal, or designee, pursuant to this article shall not obviate the need for a permit for an entertainment event if such a permit is required. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 8.16 WEEDS AND TRASH
8.16.010 Nuisance declared—Prohibited.
A.    It is found and expressly declared that the existence of any weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation, or other material which is dangerous or is injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents of the vicinity, is a public nuisance.

B.     All persons owning, leasing or occupying real property within the city are required to keep and maintain the same free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation or other materials which constitute a public nuisance. “Real property” as used in this chapter shall also include those areas defined as sidewalks, parking strips between sidewalks, parking strips between sidewalks and curb lines and alleyways from fence line to center of right-of-way. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-1)

 

8.16.020 Alleys to be kept clean.
It is unlawful for any person occupying, leasing or owning property fronting or abutting on any public alleyway in the city to fail, refuse or neglect to keep the portion of such alley between the centerline thereof and the property line of such property free from materials which constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-2)

 

8.16.030 Nuisance abatement—Notification process.
A.    If any person shall allow any public nuisance to accumulate on any real property owned, leased or occupied by such person in the city, the fire chief shall give or cause to be given to the person(s) owning or leasing such real property, and the occupant thereof, if any:

1.     A fire inspection warning issued by mail or personally delivered allowing thirty days to abate the nuisance which shall contain the property street address, the inspection and reinspection dates, the nature of the nuisance, the fire department address and telephone number and it shall be signed by the inspector.

2.     If not compliant with initial fire inspection warning, a fifteen-day notice to remove the same and clean up the real property, reading approximately as follows:

 

NOTICE

 

YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT UNLESS YOU CLEAN UP YOUR PROPERTY WITHIN FIFTEEN (15) DAYS FROM AND AFTER THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, BY REMOVING ALL WEEDS, RUBBISH, DIRT, TRASH AND VEGETATION OR OTHER MATERIAL WHICH CONSTITUTES A PUBLIC NUISANCE THEREFROM, THE SAME WILL BE CLEANED UP BY THE CITY OF MANTECA AND THE COSTS THEREOF, INCLUDING ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS, WILL BE BILLED TO YOU AND A LIEN IN THE AMOUNT THEREOF WILL BE PLACED AGAINST YOUR PROPERTY, PURSUANT TO GOVERNMENT CODE SEC. 3901 ET SEQ.

APPEAL: WITHIN TEN (10) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF MAILING SUCH NOTICE THE OWNER OR ANY PERSON INTERESTED IN SUCH REAL PROPERTY AFFECTED BY SUCH NOTICE MAY APPEAL TO THE FIRE CHIEF SUCH APPEAL SHALL BE IN WRITING AND SHALL BE FILED WITH THE FIRE DEPARTMENT. IF RESOLUTION IS NOT MET WITH THE FIRE CHIEF, THE PROPERTY OWNER CAN APPEAL TO THE CITY MANAGER WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS. CITY MANAGER SHALL PROCEED TO HEAR AND PASS UPON SUCH APPEAL AND ITS DECISION THEREON SHALL BE FINAL AND CONCLUSIVE.

ADDRESS: ___________________________________________________________________

PARCEL #: _________________________________________ OF THE CITY OF MANTECA

DATE: _____________________

FIRE INSPECTOR: ______________________________

FIRE CHIEF: ______________________________

 

B.     The notice shall be mailed, together with a copy of this chapter, to the person to whom such real property is assessed in the county assessor’s office; provided, however, that the failure to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any lien provided for under the provisions of this chapter. If at the end of such period mentioned in such notice, such owner has failed to comply with the notice and if he or she has failed to file an appeal with the fire chief, as hereinafter provided, the fire chief shall contract to have such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation, or other materials removed. A failure to file a written appeal within the time stated in the notice with the fire chief shall be deemed a waiver of all objections to the proposed removal or destruction.

C.     For the purpose of this chapter the owner is the person to whom such real property is assessed in the county assessor’s office.

D.    The fire chief may upon a reasonable belief that the public health, safety or welfare requires that the nuisance be abated in less than fifteen days, shorten the notice requirements set forth in this chapter.

E.     If at the end of such period mentioned in such notice, such owner has failed to comply with the notice and if he or she has failed to file an appeal with the fire chief, as hereinafter provided in Section 8.16.040, the fire chief may issue or cause to be issued a citation into the municipal court citing this chapter as being violated for the particular nuisance to be abated or; the fire department may manage the citation process administratively using the established court fine or cost recovery of the fire department as established by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-3)

 

8.16.040 Appeal.
Within ten days from the date of mailing such notice, the owner or any person interested in such real property affected by such notice may appeal to the fire chief. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the fire department. If resolution is not met with the fire chief, the property owner may appeal to the city manager within five days. The city manager shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-4)

 

8.16.050 Removal of nuisance.
Unless within fifteen days from the date of mailing the notice provided for in Section 8.16.030, or in case of appeal to the fire chief within ten days from the date of determination and an additional five days if appeal goes to the city manager thereof (unless the same is sustained) the weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash and vegetation or other material as the case may be, are removed from such real property as directed by such notice, the fire chief shall remove or contract to have the same removed. If, upon appeal, the requirements of the original notice are modified, the fire chief in removing or causing to be removed such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash and vegetation or other material, shall be governed by the determination of the city manager so made. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-6)

 

8.16.060 Charges—Filing with city clerk.
As soon as the amount of the charge for removing such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation or other material is determined, the fire chief shall file or cause to be filed with the city clerk, a statement of the amount of the charge for removing such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation or other material, together with an affidavit of mailing of the fifteen-day notice provided in subsection A of Section 8.16.030. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-7)

 

8.16.070 Charges—Payment.
The citation fines and charge for removing such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation or other material, including the administrative cost, shall become immediately due and payable to the city, through the fire department. Additionally, a one hundred dollar citation fine will be issued for all repeat offenders of two years in a row. A two hundred dollar citation fine will be issued for all repeat offenders of three years in a row or more. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-8)

 

8.16.080 Charges—Lien against property.
If payment is not received by the city within ninety days of the citation fine or the charge for removing such weeds, rubbish, dirt, trash, grass and vegetation or other materials shall become a lien against the real property or parcel of land from which the aforesaid materials are removed. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-9)

 

8.16.090 Charges—Right of city to bring suit.
The city may also bring suit against the owner or any occupant of the real property cleaned up, as provided in this chapter, for the full amount of the cost of cleaning up of such real property and all applicable penalties. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2010; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-10)

Chapter 8.17 NUISANCES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1110 and 1111.

 

8.17.010 Purpose.
The city of Manteca has an important interest in setting and enforcing certain standards within the community as a whole in order to better promote property values through improved community aesthetics as well as provide for the general welfare and quality of life of its citizens. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards and procedures for the maintenance of property in the city of Manteca in order to protect the public’s health and safety, as well as aesthetic, economic, and quality of life issues for the residents of the city. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.020 Definitions.
As used in this section:

Attractive Nuisance. Any condition which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot.

Code Enforcement Officer. One who engages in the prevention, detection, investigation and enforcement of violations of statutes or ordinances regulating public health, safety, and welfare, public works, business activities and consumer protection, building standards, land use, or municipal affairs.

Inoperative Vehicle. Any abandoned, dismantled, nonfunctional, unlicensed, or wrecked vehicle or parts thereof, or any vehicle incapable of being safely or legally operated upon a highway, roadway, public street, or waterway.

Neglected Vacant Structure. Any structure which is vacant and is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

Owner. Any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized county tax assessment roll.

 

Person. Any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject for rights or duties.

Property. Any real property or improvements thereon.

Responsible Person. Any person who owns, inhabits, rents, uses, controls, or otherwise has the authority to act on behalf of any real property, building, or structure, which is subject to this code, and further includes any lender or other financial institution in possession of any property by virtue of any judicial or non-judicial action such as probate or foreclosure, regardless of a new deed transfer being recorded or not.

Vacant Structure. A residential or commercial building which has remained unoccupied for a period of more than thirty days. This also includes manufactured housing or mobile homes located in a mobile home park.

A structure is not deemed to be vacant for purposes of this chapter if any of the following circumstances exist:

1.     Any unit or portion of the structure is lawfully occupied;

2.     Construction or alteration is in progress pursuant to a valid, unexpired building permit. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.030 Hazardous substances or wastes.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit any hazardous substances which because of their quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause or substantially contribute to an increase in mortality or serious illness or pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly managed, or if hazardous waste to be unlawfully released, discharged, placed or deposited upon any premises or onto any city property. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.040 Neglected vacant structure.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to abandon or vacate, or cause to be abandoned or vacated, any building or structure, so that it becomes accessible to unauthorized persons for unlawful or hazardous use, or to allow the same to become infested with vermin or rodents, or to become a menace to the health or safety of the public.

A.    Appearance. All exterior surfaces, including any boarded windows or doors, shall be covered with sufficient paint, siding, stucco or other finishes, in the same color or similar color as the adjoining areas, to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation.

B.     Security Standards.

1.     All vacant structures shall be maintained in a way which secures it from any unauthorized entry.

2.     The owner, lienholder, or other responsible agent of a vacant structure which has suffered an unauthorized entry must provide security which meets the following minimum standards:

a.     All windows and sliding doors shall be adequately secured and provide either intact glazing or boarded as set forth in the specifications on file with the Manteca police department;

b.     Doors and service openings with thresholds located ten feet or less above the grade, stairway, landing, ramp, porch, roof or similarly accessible area shall provide resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a closed single panel or hollow core door one and three-eighths inches thick equipped with a half-inch throw deadbolt or boarded as set forth in the specifications on file with the Manteca police department;

c.     Exterior doors, if openable, may be closed from the interior of the structure by toe nailing them to the door frame using 10d or 16d galvanized nails;

d.     There shall be at least one operable door into each structure and into each housing unit. If an existing door is operable, it may be used and secured with a suitable lock such as a hasp and padlock or a one-half inch deadbolt or deadbolt;

e.     All locks shall be kept locked. When a door cannot be made operable, a door shall be constructed of three-quarter inch CDX plywood and shall be equipped with a lock as described above;

f.      In lieu of requiring the owner, lienholder, or other responsible agent to board a vacant structure as set forth in subsections (B)(2)(a) through (e) of this section, the code enforcement officer may allow the boarding of the vacant structure in a manner that the code enforcement officer determines to adequately prevent unauthorized entry or vandalism.

A code enforcement officer may require the owner to erect a fence, and to dictate the specifications of said fencing based on the specific situation, on the property where the vacant structure is located. Any fence erected in accordance with this section shall be maintained in a safe condition without tears, breaks, rust, dangerous protrusions, or general dilapidation.

C.     Structural and Building Standards. All vacant structures shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and all electrical, natural gas, sanitary and plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a condition which does not create a hazard to public health or safety.

D.    Fire Safety.

1.     All vacant structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds which may constitute a fire hazard.

2.     No vacant structure or portion thereof shall be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard.

3.     Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant structures shall either be removed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes or ordinances. If heating equipment is removed, any fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances.

E.     Abatement.

1.     Summary Abatement.

a.     Summary abatement shall be executed when the code enforcement officer determines that the public nuisance constitutes an immediate and/or imminent threat to public health, safety or general welfare.

b.     Summary abatement is the abatement of the nuisance by the city, or a contractor on behalf of the city, by removal, demolition, repair or other acts with or without notice to the owner, agent, or occupant of the property. The abatement shall be at the expense of the person causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance or the owner of the property on which it is occurring and shall constitute a lien against the property.

2.     Nonemergency Abatement of Nuisances by Repair, Rehabilitation, Demolition or Removal. All or any part of a premises found to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. However, such procedure shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law, including a situation in which, due to emergency conditions, the city manager or designee, in consultation with the city attorney, determines that a public nuisance must be abated summarily without proceedings before the council, as set forth herein. In such situations, the city may nevertheless abate the nuisance and seek judgment from a court of competent jurisdiction to confirm that a public nuisance had existed and to recover, based on the authority of this section, the expenses of summarily abating the nuisance, including any attorney fees or administrative costs associated therewith, from the person who created, caused, committed or maintained the nuisance.

3.     Abatement by Proceedings Before City Council and Notice of Public Hearing. Whenever the city manager or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager, determines that any premises within the city are being maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of Section 8.17.090, then he or she shall cause notice to be given as provided in this chapter, of a public hearing before the council to ascertain whether the same does in fact constitute such public nuisance, the abatement of which is appropriate under the police power of the city. The hearing date shall be no less than twenty days after service of the notice.

4.     Notice of Hearing Before City Council.

a.     Notice of the time and place of hearing before the city council shall be titled “NOTICE OF HEARING,” and shall be substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF

PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ORDER ABATEMENT TO:

 

1.     Hearing to Determine Existence of Public Nuisance.

 

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the ____ day of ____, 20____, at the hour of ____, the city council of the city of Manteca will hold a public hearing in the council chambers of Manteca City Hall, Manteca, California, to determine whether certain premises situated in the City of Manteca, known and designated as (street address and such other description as is required to identify the premises) constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement. You are hereby ordered to appear to show cause why the premises should not be declared a public nuisance and the same abated in accordance with the Manteca Municipal Code.

 

Failure to appear shall be deemed a waiver of your right to appear and present evidence. Said alleged violations consider of the following:

——————————————————————————

——————————————————————————

——————————————————————————

Said methods of abatement available are:

——————————————————————————

——————————————————————————

——————————————————————————

If you choose to voluntarily abate the conditions described above, you must advise the city manager in writing of the date for completion of such abatement. You may request a continuance of the hearing if, for good cause, the voluntary abatement cannot be completed prior to the hearing date.

 

2.     If So Determined, Order of Abatement. If said premises, in whole or in part, are found to constitute a public nuisance, you shall be ordered to abate the conditions constituting the nuisance by rehabilitation, removal, repair or demolition.

 

3.     Abatement by City Authorities. If said conditions constituting the nuisance are not abated within the time schedule as established by order of the city council, such nuisance may be abated by city authorities.

 

4.     Reimbursement of Costs to the City of Manteca. In addition, if said premises, in whole or in part, are found to constitute a public nuisance, you may be required to reimburse the City of Manteca for its full actual and reasonable costs of identifying this nuisance and ordering its abatement, or, if necessary, conducting such abatement. The City of Manteca (has/has not) elected to include its full actual and reasonable attorney’s fees, if any, as part of the costs for which you may be responsible.

 

5.     Notice of Hearing Before City Council. All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the city council of the City of Manteca to be held on the ____ day of ____, 20__, at the hour of ______ when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.

 

DATED: This____ day of ____, 20__.

 

b.     Posting and Servicing Notice. The city clerk or such other city official as may be designated by the city manager shall cause to be served upon the owner of the affected premises a copy of the notice of public hearing and shall cause a copy of the notice to be conspicuously posted on each of the affected premises.

i.      The notice shall be posted and served at least twenty days before the time fixed for the public hearing. Proof of posting and service of such notices shall be made by declaration under penalty of perjury filed with the city clerk.

c.     Form of Proper Service of Notice. Service of the notice shall be by personal service upon the owner of the affected premises or by mail. If notice is served by mail, it shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, registered or certified, signature requested, addressed to the owner, and if there is no known address for the owner, then to the owner at the property address. The service is complete at the time of such deposit. “Owner,” and “property owner” have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably and shall mean the owner or owners of record of the subject real property as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll of San Joaquin County or as otherwise actually known to the chief of police. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder.

d.     Hearing by City Council. At the time stated in the notice, the council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance and to the proposed rehabilitation, removal, repair, demolition, or other abatement appropriate under the legal powers of the city. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

e.     Decision of City Council—Resolution Ordering Abatement.

i.      Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained constitutes a public nuisance. If the council finds that such public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, remove, demolish or repair the same, the council shall adopt a resolution setting forth its findings. This resolution shall order the owner and any other person having charge or control of such premises to abate the conditions determined to be a nuisance and shall state the abatement methods. Such resolution shall set forth the time within which such abatement work shall be commenced and completed. The resolution shall inform the owner or owners that if the nuisance is not abated within the specified time, the nuisance may be abated by the city and the expense thereof made a lien on the property involved.

ii.     The resolution shall also inform the owner that the time for judicial review is governed by Section 1094.6 of the state Code of Civil Procedure. Otherwise, all objections to the order shall be deemed waived.

iii.    The decision and order of the council shall be final.

f.      Service of Resolution Ordering Abatement.

i.      A copy of the resolution of the council ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owner or owners of the property in accordance with the provision of Section 8.17.040. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated in accordance with the resolution and at his own expense provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the resolution. Upon abatement in full by the owner, then proceedings shall terminate.

ii.     If the council should determine that the abatement of the nuisance is likely to cause a significant depreciation in the value of the property upon which the nuisance is located, the council may order that all mortgages and/or beneficiaries under any deeds of trust of record on the property be served a copy of the resolution in the manner prescribed in this section.

g.     Abatement by City Officer.

i.      If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner as directed within the designated abatement period, then the city manager, or such other city official as may be designated, may, after consultation with the city attorney, cause the same to be abated by the city either through the use of its own employees or pursuant to private contract, and the city manager, or designee, is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purpose.

h.     Responsibility for Cost of Abatement.

i.      The identification, declaration, and abatement of any public nuisance by the city as prescribed in this chapter or elsewhere in this code shall be at the sole expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining such nuisance. The cost of identifying, declaring, and abating any public nuisance shall include, without limitation, inspection costs; investigation costs; attorney’s fees and costs, if elected by the city as set forth in subsection (h)(ii) of this section, below; costs to repair and eliminate all conditions constituting a public nuisance; and costs of levying a special assessment on the property, if such assessment is necessary.

ii.     In any action or administrative proceeding to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees, but only if the city elects in writing, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney’s fees. In no event shall an award of attorney’s fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

iii.    Should the proceeds of the sale of any salvage material exceed the cost of such abatement, the balance if any, shall be paid to the owner of the premises from which the nuisance was abated, when his property claim is established.

i.      Confirmation of Abatement Costs.

i.      The city official responsible for enforcing abatement of a public nuisance shall keep and verify an itemized written report showing the full actual cost of abatement, including attorney’s fees if elected by the city under Section 8.17.040(E)(4)(h)(i) and (ii), and including any salvage value of material from the abatement.

ii.     When the nuisance is abated, the official shall forward this report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall set the report of abatement costs for hearing by the city council to determine the correctness and reasonableness of such costs. The city clerk shall cause a copy of this report, with notice of the city council hearing, to be posted upon the property and served at least ten days before the date set for the hearing, as set forth in Section 8.17.040.

iii.    At the time and place fixed for the hearing on the report, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. The city council may revise, correct, or modify the report, and shall at the conclusion of the hearing adopt a resolution identifying the person or persons responsible for creating, committing, causing, or maintaining the nuisance and setting forth the sum for which this person or persons is or are individually or jointly liable. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections shall be final and conclusive.

iv.    The city may collect these costs from the responsible person or persons, as set forth in the city council’s resolution confirming costs, by: (A) obtaining a court order stating that this reimbursement requirement is a personal obligation of any person upon whom the city council resolution imposes a reimbursement obligation, recoverable in the same manner as any civil judgment; (B) recording a nuisance abatement lien against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is or was maintained; or (C) imposing a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is or was maintained.

j.      Nuisance Abatement Lien.

i.      Before recording any nuisance abatement lien against a parcel of land on which a nuisance is or was maintained, the city shall give notice to the owner of record. The notice of lien shall be served on the owner of record of the parcel of land, based on the last equalized assessment roll, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as summons in a civil action, in accordance with Section 415.10 et seq., of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record after diligent search cannot be found, notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days, and by publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in San Joaquin County, pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

ii.     A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the San Joaquin County recorder’s office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.

(A)   A nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien; the imposition of the lien on behalf of the city; the date of the abatement order; the street address, legal description, and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

(B)   In the event the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall record notice of the discharge, containing the information specified in subsection (4)(J)(ii)(A) of this section.

(C)   A nuisance abatement lien and the release of lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

(D)   The city may foreclose a nuisance abatement lien as a money judgment. As part of its foreclosure action, or as a condition of removing the lien upon payment, the city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred for processing and recording the lien and providing notice to the property owner.

k.     Special Assessment.

i.      As an alternative to recording a nuisance abatement lien, the city may make the cost of abatement a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the nuisance is or was maintained.

ii.     Notice shall be given by certified mail, to the property owner, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the county assessor’s or county recorder’s records. Notice pursuant to this section shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice pursuant to this section.

iii.    The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. If, however, any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

iv.    The city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent, subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

v.     Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment shall be entitled to recordation.

vi.    Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated as a nuisance pursuant to this section, the court may order such person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. The recovery of treble the costs of abatement of such nuisances as provided in this section shall not apply to city efforts to abate Violations of the Building Code pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. O2018-2 § 1;  Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.050 Non-stormwater related discharges.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to permit on any premises or property any of the following to occur:

A.    The discharge of any matter or substance from a private vault, cesspool, septic tank, water closet, privy vault, urinal, pipe, sewer line or any sewage, effluent, slop water, polluted water or any other filthy water, matter or substance to flow or discharge upon the ground or upon any public sidewalk, street or other public place.

B.     Discharges through the municipal stormwater system of any material other than stormwater are prohibited, including all discharges that are not incidental as defined in the small municipal separate storm sewer system (small MS4) NPDES permit, except where conditionally exempt under an NPDES permit and Chapter 13.28 of this code.

C.     No persons shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city any litter, yard clippings, leaves (except during any annual leaf collection period), etc. from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such materials at all times.

Activities or discharges that may cause or lead to a violation of regulations, policies or standards established by the city to comply with an NPDES permit are prohibited. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.060 Non-permitted land uses in violation of the zoning code.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to use that property other than in compliance with the adopted zoning code including, but not limited to:

A.    Residential property uses such as repair shops, non-permitted home businesses, unlicensed home businesses, unlicensed residential care facilities, unlicensed day care facilities that care for nine or more people or failure to maintain compliance with all conditions or provisions of an approved entitlement such as a planned unit development, development agreement, use permit, site plan, variance, home occupation permit, etc., or occupying any recreational vehicle in violation of Section 17.52.120(G) or 12.20.030 of this code.

B.     Nonresidential property uses such as unlawful signs, non-permitted uses, unlicensed businesses, failure to maintain compliance with all conditions or provisions of an entitlement such as a planned unit development, development agreement, use permit, site plan, variance, etc., or occupying any recreational vehicle in violation of Section 12.20.030 of this code. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.070 Parking lot striping and disabled accessible space markings.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to fail to maintain in good condition any parking lot striping as well as disabled accessible space markings and required signage on such premises or property. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.080 Portable recreational and sporting equipment.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to erect a portable basketball hoop, skateboard ramp, tetherball pole, or other portable recreational or sporting equipment on a public right-of-way, street, easement, sidewalk or roadway. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.090 Property maintenance standards.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to maintain, allow to be maintained, permit or cause real property, including adjacent parkways, sidewalks or streets, to be maintained with any of the following conditions, which are visible from the street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other public property:

A.    The accumulation of dirt, rock or gravel, litter, debris, paper, trash, garbage, rubbish, junk, salvage materials (including, but not limited to, auto parts, scrap metals, tires, concrete, bricks, cardboard, cans, bottles, plastic materials, or other similar materials), boxes, bins, containers, drums, barrels, crates, pallets, etc.

B.     Neglected or inadequately maintained landscaping, trees, bushes, hedges, lawns, shrubs, plants or other vegetation, which:

1.     Is dead, decayed, diseased, debris laden, weed infested, overgrown, or dying as a result of neglect, physical damage, disease, pest infestation or lack of water;

2.     Is overgrown as to be likely to harbor rats or vermin. For purposes of this subsection, a lawn area shall be deemed overgrown if any part exceeds six inches in height;

3.     Could create a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare;

4.     Interferes with or impedes the flow of traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, or obstructs visibility on streets, intersections, sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way;

5.     Otherwise creates a blighted appearance.

Provided, however, that the provision as to dead or dying vegetation due to lack of water shall not be enforced during a drought, as determined by the city.

C.     Attractive nuisances including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators and freezers, improperly fenced pools, ponds and excavations, structurally unsound fences or structures, etc.

D.    The presence of any refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, water heater, or any other household appliance, equipment, machinery or furniture, other than that designed and intended for normal residential outdoor activities, or any part of any listed item, nor any other personal property such as clothing, electronics (TVs, computers, monitors, etc.), household items, etc., for a period in excess of seventy-two consecutive hours. Any appliance or equipment present during this seventy-two-hour period is to be secured or rendered safe so that it is not a danger to children at any time.

 

E.     Storage of firewood or lumber, except for a construction project on the property in conjunction with a valid building permit and not to exceed one hundred eighty days.

F.     Inoperative vehicles, vehicle parts, components, etc. Any of the following conditions, but not limited to, may also render a vehicle to be considered inoperative:

1.     Having an accumulation of dirt, cobwebs, or debris on the vehicle to the extent that visibility may be limited, or indicating long-term non-use.

2.     Having any accumulation of items stored on, around, or in the vehicle.

3.     Having an accumulated growth of vegetation adjacent to the vehicle indicating non-use.

4.     Having broken or missing windows, missing parts such as lights or body parts, parts hanging or improperly secured, flat tires, or other unsightly conditions.

G.    Vehicles raised off the ground on blocks, jack stands, ramps, etc. when the resident is not in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle and actually performing repair work to the vehicle at that time.

H.    Recreational vehicles such as motorhomes or travel trailers, campers or shells (either mounted or not), boats, personal watercraft, trailers, cars, trucks, or other vehicles parked or stored in violation of Chapter 17.52 of this code.

I.      Parking of vehicles, trailers, etc. on lawns, vegetation, dirt, or any other area that is not surfaced with an approved impervious surface such as concrete, asphalt, brick, etc., as determined by the city, in order to reduce ground contamination, dust, and tracking of mud and is properly drained to dispose of all surface water per the city’s standard specifications on file, SWPPP (stormwater pollution prevention plan), NPDES (National Pollution Discharge Elimination System) permit, and any other state or federal requirements.

J.      Construction equipment, farm machinery, forklifts, or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on a residential property when it is visible from a public street, except during excavation, construction, or demolition operations covered by an active building permit which are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property.

K.    Conditions which have a potential to cause the discharge of any known pollutants onto or into the ground.

L.     Any unsightly, abandoned, or deteriorated building or structure, or any building or structure constructed with inappropriate materials, improperly fastened together, or improperly anchored against the forces of nature.

M.    Any structure that has suffered damage due to fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural event that has rendered it uninhabitable or unsafe for its intended use and which a permit for either the repair or demolition has not been obtained within sixty days and repairs or demolition have not begun within one hundred eighty days, unless the condition is such that a shorter time frame is necessary for public safety reasons.

N.    Any building or structure where construction was commenced and the building or structure was left unfinished or any building or structure that has been constructed or modified without permits. This shall include any unauthorized work or non-compliant work taking place on private property or in the public right-of-way, with or without a permit, or which is otherwise in violation of city ordinance.

O.    Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial construction or repair for more than one hundred eighty days and such buildings which are unpainted or where fifty percent or more of the paint on the building exterior is worn off.

P.     The presence of any improvement (including, but not limited to, buildings, garages, carports, fences, stucco or block walls, roofs, or gutters) in which the condition of the stucco, siding, paint, or other exterior coating has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling or warping so as to render the improvement or property unsightly and in a state of disrepair.

Q.    The presence of any structure or improvement with cracked or broken windows, roofs in disrepair, damaged porches, broken steps, etc.

R.     Property otherwise maintained in such a blighted condition, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair, that the same causes appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to adjacent properties and improvements.

S.     It is found and expressly declared that the existence of airborne sand, soil or dust traveling from one property to a neighboring property to such a degree as to result in visible deposits on neighboring property is dangerous and injurious to neighboring property and to health and welfare of residents of the vicinity. Therefore, all property within the city shall be kept and maintained in such a condition so as to prevent the airborne transportation of sand, soil or dust from their property being deposited in visible quantities on neighboring properties.

T.     Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity jurisprudence. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.100 Swimming pools, ponds, or other bodies of water.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain upon any such premises or property any swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained resulting in the bottom not being visible, water becoming polluted, and/or providing for mosquito breeding. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.110 Trees and shrubs.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property in such a manner that has resulted in:

A.    Trees and shrubs with dead or fallen limbs or branches that present a safety hazard or restrict, impede or obstruct the use of a public right-of-way, easement, sidewalk or roadway.

B.     Branches from any tree or shrub not trimmed to the height of eight feet over the public sidewalk and to the height of thirteen feet over the public street, easement, or roadway where such growth restricts, impedes or obstructs pedestrian or vehicular use of said public right-of-way, easement, sidewalk or roadway.

C.     Trees, tree limbs and branches that present a safety hazard or restrict, impede or obstruct street signs, traffic signal lights or street lamps from illuminating the public right-of-way, easement, sidewalk or roadway. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

 

8.17.120 Violation.
In addition to any other remedies provided by law, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or any other entity to violate any provision of this chapter and violations may be prosecuted either criminally or administratively. In addition, all violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may also be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.10 of this code. (Ord. 1584 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 8.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
8.20.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle which is not currently registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles and appears by sight to have been left to the elements.

B.     “Dismantled vehicle” means a vehicle from which any part has been removed which removal prevents its lawful operation upon any highway.

C.     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

D.    “Inoperative vehicle” means a vehicle which cannot be lawfully operated upon any highway.

E.     “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located. The owner is the person to whom such property is assessed in the county assessor’s office.

F.     “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

G.    Police or Fire Chief. Whenever “police” or “fire chief” are used, they mean to include any personnel designated to enforce such ordinance.

H.    “Public property” does not include “highway.”

I.      “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

J.      “Wrecked vehicle” means a vehicle which, due to physical impairment or damage, cannot be lawfully operated upon any highway. (Ord. 786 § 1, 1988; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-14)

 

8.20.020 Findings—Nuisance declared.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harboring for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. (Ord. 830 § 2, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-13)

 

8.20.030 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.

B.     A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

C.     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-15)

 

8.20.040 Provisions to be supplemental.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-16)

 

8.20.050 Enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city police chief or fire chief. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof) declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-17)

 

8.20.060 Right of entry for removal.
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-18)

 

8.20.070 Administrative costs.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 830 § 3, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-19)

 

8.20.080 Abatement—Removal—Authority.
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city the city police chief or fire chief shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-20)

 

8.20.090 Abatement—Notice.
At least a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be substantially the following forms:

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 8.20.050 of the Manteca Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an, or parts of an, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to_____, license number_____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.20.020 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, is located.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Police Chief or Fire Chief within such 10-day period, the City Police Chief or Fire Chief shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, as a public nuisance and assess the cost as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of vehicle) on said land, with reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

Notice Mailed _________________________________

Inspector _____________________________________

Police Chief or Fire Chief ________________________

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle notice to be given to both if different)

As last registered and/or legal owner of record of (description of vehicle make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 8.20.050 of the Manteca Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.20.020 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As registered and/or legal owner of record of said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Police Chief or Fire Chief within such 10-day period, the City Police Chief or Fire Chief shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, without a hearing.

Notice Mailed ___________________________________

Inspector _______________________________________

Police Chief or Fire Chief __________________________

 

(Ord. 830 §4, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-21)

 

8.20.100 Abatement—Hearing.
A.    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land, received by the city police chief or fire chief within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city police chief or fire chief on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

B.     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within the ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 830 §5, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-22)

 

8.20.110 Hearing—Procedure.
A.    All hearings under this article shall be held before the city police chief or fire chief which shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city police chief or fire chief shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial.

B.     The city police chief or fire chief may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He or she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city police chief or fire chief may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

C.     If the owner of the land submits sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city police chief or fire chief but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 830 §6, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-23)

 

8.20.120 Appeal.
A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the city police chief or fire chief by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within five days after its decision.

B.     Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.

C.     The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.20.090.

D.    In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 830 §7, 1989; Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-24)

 

8.20.130 Disposition.
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 8.20.090 or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-25)

 

8.20.140 Notice to department of motor vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-26)

 

8.20.150 Assessment for unpaid costs.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.16.060 are not paid within ninety days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 765 § 1, 1987; prior code § 12A-27)

Chapter 8.22 SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS
8.22.010 Declaration of purpose.
A.    Abandoned shopping carts constitute a nuisance, create potential hazards to the health and safety of the public and interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic as well as emergency services within the city. Wrecked, dismantled and/or abandoned shopping carts on public or private property create conditions that reduce property values, promote blight and deterioration within the city’s neighborhoods.

B.     The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations pertaining to abandoned shopping carts and unmarked shopping carts, to provide a requirement for a mandatory shopping cart retrieval service, and to prohibit the damage or removal of mandatory signage from the shopping cart or possession of a shopping cart with the signage removed or defaced. This chapter is not intended to duplicate state law or regulate any matters pertaining to shopping carts which are the subject of state law. To the extent any provision of this chapter is determined to be preempted by state law, it shall be deemed severed from all other provisions of this chapter and such other provisions shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings stated in this section:

“Abandoned, lost or stolen shopping cart” means any cart either removed from a business establishment’s premises without written permission of the owner and located on either public or private property or left unattended, discarded or abandoned upon any private or public property other than the premises of the business establishment from which such shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether the shopping cart was removed with permission or consent of the owner.

 

“Business establishment” means any business location within the city that offers or provides shopping carts for its customers. This includes any business advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, a business with multiple outlets regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, or in a private club or business, or is a membership store.

“Shopping cart retrieval business” means a business that searches for, gathers, collects, retrieves and restores possession to the owner, or an agent thereof, for compensation or in expectation of compensation of shopping carts located anywhere outside the premises or parking area of a business establishment.

“Owner” means any person or entity, including manager or designated agent, who in connection with the conduct of a business, makes shopping carts available to customers.

“Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.

“Premises” means the entire area owned, occupied, rented, leased, or utilized by an owner, including any parking lot, areas or other property areas provided by or on behalf of an owner for customer parking or use.

Shopping cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a business establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. This includes, but is not limited to, laundry, grocery or shopping carts.

“Unmarked cart” means any cart as defined by this chapter that is not identified and marked pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1 and this chapter. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.030 Enforcement authority.
The city manager and directors and their designees, including designated code enforcement officers shall have the authority and powers necessary to determine whether a violation of this chapter exists and to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state codes. These powers include the authority to impound the shopping carts, issue administrative citations, inspect public and private property, impose civil penalties for any violation of this chapter or pursue criminal actions. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.040 Rules and regulations—Enforcement.
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager and directors, and their designees. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and implement rules, regulations and procedures necessary or appropriate for enforcement of this chapter, which rules are to be approved by resolution of the city council. The city manager shall designate, maintain and advertise a public “hotline” for the intake of information concerning abandoned shopping carts.

B.     At the end of each business day, the city shall fax a list of reported abandoned carts to the appropriate cart retrieval service, as registered with the city, as well as to the businesses from which the carts originated, if requested.

C.     Whenever possible, all city field employees are to report the location of abandoned shopping carts as they find them.

D.    In addition to the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the city council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish additional rules and regulations concerning programs, practices and regulations pertaining to shopping cart storage and retrieval.

E.     The director or designee is hereby authorized to enter into, on or upon any public property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of the owner of any shopping cart, or to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with the provisions of this part. As used herein, “public property” includes the outdoor common area of any building, business premises, apartment building or complex, or other premises or portion thereof which is adjacent to public property, open to the public, and which contains a shopping cart or shopping carts visible at street or ground level from the adjacent public property. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.050 Shopping cart sign requirements.
Every shopping cart owned or provided by a business establishment in the city must have a sign permanently affixed to the cart that contains all of the following information:

A.    The name of the business establishment that owns the cart;

B.     The procedure to be used for authorized removal of a shopping cart from the establishment’s premises, including, but not limited to, cart rental and obtaining owner consent for removal;

C.     A statement that the unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from the premises is a misdemeanor and a violation of state law;

D.    Lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the shopping cart removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer, and the city “hotline” telephone number.

There shall be posted by the owner, prominently and conspicuously, at all public entrances and exits to the business, a notice in substantially the following form:

REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CHARTS IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SHALL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A MINIMUM FINE OF $100.00.

It is unlawful and a public nuisance to provide or offer to customers any shopping cart that does not have such information permanently affixed to it. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.060 Administrative penalties.
A.    In addition to any other remedies set forth in this chapter, civil penalties may be imposed against any person, as defined in Section 1.11.020 of this code, for violating any of the requirements set forth in this chapter.

B.     Civil penalties for the violations of this section shall be assessed as follows:

1.     One hundred dollars for the first violation;

2.     Two hundred fifty dollars for a second violation within a twelve-month period; and

3.     Five hundred dollars for any subsequent violation within a twelve-month period.

(Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.070 Prohibition.
A.    It is unlawful for any person, either temporarily or permanently, to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart has been properly marked in conformity with this chapter:

1.     Remove a cart from the premises of the owner of such cart, or to be in possession of a cart that has been removed from the premises of the owner of such shopping cart, without the written consent of the owner.

This section shall not apply to carts removed from the premises, with the consent of the owner, for the purposes of repair, maintenance or disposal.

2.     To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers or the signage mandated by this chapter removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

3.     To alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers or the signage mandated by this chapter on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

B.     It is unlawful and an infraction for any person, either temporarily or permanently to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart has been properly marked in conformity with this chapter.

1.     To cause or permit any cart to be abandoned on or upon any sidewalk, street or other public area, or upon any private property, other than the premises of the owner of such cart.

2.     To be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a business establishment, without the written consent of the owner.

(Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.090 Authority to impound.
A.    The city may impound a shopping cart when the following conditions exist:

1.     The shopping cart is located on a public right-of-way;

2.     In instances where the location of a shopping cart will impede emergency services, the city is authorized to immediately retrieve the shopping cart from public or private property; and

3.     Except as provided in Section 8.22.070, the shopping cart is not retrieved within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city of the shopping cart’s discovery and location on private property; and

a.     The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area of a business establishment. The parking area of a business establishment located in a multi-store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center; and

b.     The shopping cart has a sign affixed to it as required by Section 8.22.050 of this code.

B.     Any shopping cart that is impounded by the city pursuant to Section 8.22.070 shall be held at a location that is both:

1.     Reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart; and

2.     Open for business at least six hours of each business day.

C.     Any shopping cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days of receipt of a notice of violation by the owner of the shopping cart may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city.

D.    In addition to any other remedy available by law, the city may impose an administrative penalty on the owner of a shopping cart in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars for each occurrence in excess of three during a specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this section in a one-day period.

E.     The city is authorized to recover actual costs incurred for impounding a shopping cart under the authority provided in subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.100 Requirements—Impound fee after three days.
Notwithstanding Section 8.22.070(A)(3), the city may impound a shopping cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in Sections 8.22.070(A)(1) and/or 8.22.070(A)(2) without complying with the three-day advance notice requirement provided that:

A.    The owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, is provided actual notice within twenty-four hours following the impound and that the notice informs the owner, or his or her agent, as to the location where the shopping cart may be claimed.

B.     Any shopping cart so impounded shall be held at a location in compliance with Section 8.22.090.

C.     Any shopping cart reclaimed by the owner, or his or her agent, within three business days following the date of actual notice shall be released and surrendered to the owner or agent without charge. Thereafter, if a cart is not retrieved within three business days of notification by the city then an impound fee as established by the city council, shall be imposed. Any cart reclaimed within the three-business-day period shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of Sections 8.22.090 and 8.22.070(B).

D.    Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner, or his or her agent, within three business days following the date of actual notice shall be, in addition to payment of an impound fee, required to pay a storage fee commencing on the fourth business day following the date of the notice, as established by the city council.

E.     Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner, or his or her agent, within thirty days of receipt following the date of actual notice may be sold or disposed of as provided for in Section 8.22.090(C). The proceeds shall be applied against the impound and storage fees due. In the event there are excess proceeds, the city shall refund the amount to the owner. If the proceeds are not sufficient to cover the costs, the city shall bill the owner for the remainder. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.110 Repeat offenders—Imposition of additional measures to prevent cart removal.
Specific physical measures may be required by the city to prevent cart removal from the business premises if the business has had more than three carts impounded in any six-month period. These measures may include, but are not limited to: ordering the business to immediately install disabling devices on all of their shopping carts, requiring the posting of a security guard to deter and stop customers who attempt to remove carts from the premises, installation of bollards, chains or similar devices around the premises to prevent cart removal, requiring a security deposit of customers for the use of all carts, or requiring that the business provide for the rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or permanently used by customers for transport of purchases to a location outside the premises. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.120 Shopping cart retrieval services required—Filing of notification with city.
A.    Every business in the city that uses shopping carts must contract with a cart retrieval service and notify the city as to with whom they are contracted. The cart retrieval services must pick up the carts that have been reported to them within three business days of receipt of notice from the city.

B.     All retrieval service companies that have contracts with businesses located in the city of Manteca must register with the city in accordance with Section 5.04.020.

C.     Within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every business establishment must file a notification form with the city, on a form established by the city, setting forth the name of the cart retrieval service to be used by that establishment. In the event that there is a change in the listed cart retrieval service used, a business establishment shall file a new notification form with the city within ten days of the effective date of the change.

D.    As set forth in this chapter, there will be no charge to the business owner if a cart impounded by the city is picked up within three business days after being notified by the city. If the shopping carts are not retrieved, then all applicable impound fees shall apply. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.130 Registration required—Records required.
A.    Any person who engages in the business of shopping cart retrieval must be registered with the city so as to provide contact names and phone numbers to enforcement staff. The city manager shall issue a registry number, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rules and regulations.

B.     Each shopping cart retrieval business shall retain records showing written authorization from the shopping cart owner, or any agent thereof, to retrieve the cart or carts and to be in possession of the cart or carts retrieved. A copy of the record showing written authorization shall be maintained in each vehicle used for shopping cart retrieval and presented to enforcement personnel upon request. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.140 Sign required.
Each vehicle employed for the retrieval of shopping carts shall display a sign that clearly identifies the retrieval service, and prominently displays the registry number issued by the city. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

 

8.22.150 Violations as misdemeanors—Penalty.
A.    Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, with the exception of the items specified under Section 8.22.070(B), which are an infraction. In addition to any other remedies available to it the city may use the administrative enforcement remedies set forth in Chapter 1.11 of this code.

B.     In the event administrative penalties are used, they shall be assessed as follows:

1.     One hundred dollars for the first violation;

2.     Two hundred fifty dollars for a second violation; and

3.     Five hundred dollars for any third and subsequent violation.

(Ord. 1420 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.24 RIGHT TO FARM
8.24.010 Policy statement.
It is the policy of this city to preserve, protect and encourage the use of viable agricultural lands for the production of food and other agricultural products. When nonagricultural land-uses extend into or approach agricultural areas, conflicts often arise between such land-uses and agricultural operations. Such conflicts often result in the involuntary curtailment or cessation of agricultural operations, and discourage investment in such operations. This chapter is intended to reduce the occurrence of conflicts between nonagricultural and agricultural land uses within the city. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings stated in this section:

A.    An “agent” is one authorized by law to act in that capacity for that type of property, and is licensed as a real estate broker under Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 10130) of Part 1 of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code or is a licensee, as defined in Section 18006 of the Health and Safety Code.

B.     “Buyer” includes any transferee.

C.     A “listing agent” is one who has obtained a listing of property of the kind in respect of which he or she is authorized by law to act as an agent for compensation.

D.    “Property” means real property.

E.     “Sell” and “sale” means any transfer of fee title.

F.     A “selling agent” is an agent who acts in cooperation with a listing agent and who sells, or finds and obtains a buyer for, the property.

G.    “Sold” includes an exchange. A property is sold when a legally binding commitment to sell the property comes into existence. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.030 Delivery of disclosure statement by transferor.
The transferor of any property located in the city shall deliver the disclosure statement required by this chapter to the prospective transferee as follows:

A.    In the case of a sale, as soon as practicable before transfer of title.

B.     In the case of transfer by a real property sales contract, as defined in Section 2985 of the Civil Code, as soon as practicable before execution of the contract. For the purpose of this subsection “execution” means the making or acceptance of an offer. With respect to any transfer subject to subsection A or B, the transferor shall indicate compliance with this chapter either on the receipt for deposit, the real property sales contract, or any addendum attached thereto or on a separate document. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.040 Disclosure statement.
The disclosure required by this chapter is set forth herein, and shall be made on a copy of the following disclosure form:

 

REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONCERNS THE REAL PROPERTY SITUATED IN THE CITY OF MANTECA, COUNTY OF SAN JOAQUIN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA, DESCRIBED AS_____. THIS STATEMENT IS A DISCLOSURE OF THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY IN COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCE NO._____ OF THE MANTECA CITY CODE AS OF _____, 1990. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER(S) OR ANY AGENT(S) REPRESENTING ANY PRINCIPAL(S) IN THIS TRANSACTION, AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY INSPECTIONS OR WARRANTIES THE PRINCIPAL(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN.

I

SELLERS INFORMATION

The Seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that even though this is not a warranty, prospective Buyers may rely on this information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement to any person or entity in connection with any actual or anticipated sale of the property. THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE SELLER(S) AS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF MANTECA, AND ARE NOT THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE AGENT(S), IF ANY. THIS INFORMATION IS A DISCLOSURE AND IS NOT INTENDED TO BE PART OF ANY CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BUYER AND SELLER.

        1.     The City of Manteca permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations with the city limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT THE PROPERTY YOU ARE PURCHASING MAY BE LOCATED CLOSE TO AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND OPERATIONS. YOU MAY BE SUBJECT TO INCONVENIENCE OR DISCOMFORT ARISING FROM THE LAWFUL AND PROPER USE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL AND PESTICIDES AND FROM OTHER AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, CULTIVATION, PLOWING, SPRAYING, IRRIGATION, PRUNING, HARVESTING, BURNING OF AGRICULTURAL WASTE PRODUCTS, PROTECTION OF CROPS AND ANIMALS FROM DEPREDATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES WHICH OCCASIONALLY GENERATE DUST, SMOKE, NOISE AND ODOR. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in an agriculturally active region.

        2._________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the best of Seller’s knowledge as of the date signed by the Seller.

Seller ___________________________________________    Date __________________________

Seller ___________________________________________    Date __________________________

 

II

BUYER(S) AND SELLER(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN PROFESSIONAL ADVICE AND/OR INSPECTIONS OF THE PROPERTY AND TO PROVIDE FOR APPROPRIATE PROVISIONS IN AN ADVICE/INSPECTIONS/DEFECTS.

I/WE ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS STATEMENT.

Seller _______________________ Date __________ Buyer ___________________ Date __________

Seller _______________________ Date __________ Buyer ___________________ Date __________

Agent (Broker Representing Seller) _____________________________________________________

By (Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature) ______________________________ Date ___________

Agent (Broker Obtaining the Offer) _____________________________________________________

By (Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature) ______________________________ Date ___________

 

A REAL ESTATE BROKER IS QUALIFIED TO ADVISE ON REAL ESTATE. IF YOU DESIRE LEGAL ADVICE, CONSULT YOUR ATTORNEY.

 

(Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.050 Disclosure statement—Building permits.
Prior to issuance of a city building permit for construction of a residential building the owner of the property upon which the building is to be constructed shall sign, date and file with the city building department the disclosure statement set forth below:

 

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT—BUILDING PERMIT

The City of Manteca permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the city limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT THE PROPERTY YOU ARE PURCHASING MAY BE LOCATED CLOSE TO AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND OPERATIONS. YOU MAY BE SUBJECT TO INCONVENIENCE OR DISCOMFORT ARISING FROM THE LAWFUL AND PROPER USE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS AND PESTICIDES AND FROM OTHER AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING LIMITATION, CULTIVATION, PLOWING, SPRAYING, IRRIGATION, PRUNING, HARVESTING, BURNING OF AGRICULTURAL WASTE PRODUCTS, PROTECTION OF CROPS AND ANIMALS FROM DEPREDATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES WHICH OCCASIONALLY GENERATE DUST, SMOKE, NOISE, AND ODOR. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in an agriculturally active region.

 

I declare that I have read and understand the foregoing disclosure.

Date: ________________ (sign) __________________________________________________

Print Name: __________________________________________________________________

 

(Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.060 Refusal to sign disclosure statement.
If a buyer refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Section 8.24.040, the transferor may comply with the requirements of this chapter by delivering that statement to the buyer as provided in Section 8.24.030 and affixing and signing the following declaration to the statement:

 

I (insert name) have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to (insert Buyer’s name) who has refused to sign.

I declare the foregoing to be true under penalty of perjury.

Date: _____________ (sign) _____________________________________________

Print Name: __________________________________________________________

 

(Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.070 No limitation on other disclosure obligations.
The specification of items of disclosure in this chapter does not limit or abridge any obligation for disclosure created by any other provision of law or which may exist in order to avoid fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in the sale. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.080 Delivery of disclosure statement.
Delivery of the disclosure statement required by Section 8.24.030 shall be by personal delivery or certified mail return receipt requested to the buyer. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.090 Penalty for violation.
Noncompliance with any provision of this chapter shall not affect title to real property, nor prevent the recording of any document. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

 

8.24.100 Does not abridge state law.
Nothing contained in this chapter is to be construed as modifying state law as set out in the California State Civil Code, Health and Safety Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Division 7 of the Water Code, or any other applicable provision of state law relating to nuisances; rather, it is only to be utilized in the interpretation and enforcement of this code and city regulations. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 8.30 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
8.30.010 Statutory authorization.
The legislature of the state has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.020 Findings of fact.
A.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.    Protect human life and health;

B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high-velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition and channel migration.

“Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation that occurs during the discharge of the base flood.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level-on all sides.

Building. See “Structure.”

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood, flooding, or floodwater” means:

1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

“Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)” means the official map of which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain administrator” means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain or floodprone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.)

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” means the area of the floodplain on either side of the “Regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization” as related to Section 8.30.230, Variance procedure and nature of variances, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council of the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” means the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Section 8.30.230, Variance procedure and nature of variances, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

1.     An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a.     The wet floodproofing standard in Section 8.30.170(C)(3).

b.     The anchoring standards in Section 8.30.170(A).

c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 8.30.170(B).

d.     The standards for utilities in Section 8.30.180.

2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacements costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

“Obstruction” means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

“One-Hundred-Year Flood” or “100-Year Flood.” See “Base flood.”

“Public safety and nuisance” as related to Section 8.30.230, Variance procedure and nature of variances, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.     Built on a single chassis;

2.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of shallow flooding.”

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.

“Start of construction” means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) dated December 5, 1989 and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated December 5, 1989, panels 595, 605, 615 and 620, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall, 1001 W. Center St., Manteca, CA 95337. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.120 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.130 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 8.30.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A.    Site plan, including but not limited to:

1.     For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and

2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; and

3.     If available, the base flood elevation from the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate map; and

4.     If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and

B.     Foundation design detail, including but not limited to:

1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

2.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 8.30.170(C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and

3.     For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and

C.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 8.30.170(C)(2) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and

D.    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 8.30.150(D) of this chapter; and

E.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.140 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The director of public works of the city, or designee, is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.150 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

B.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data.

1.     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 8.30.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 8.30.170 through 8.30.220. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption; or

2.     If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 5:

a.     Simplified Method.

i.      One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U. S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and

ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

b.     Detailed Method.

i.      One-hundred-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-HMS computer program; and

ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-RAS computer program.

C.     Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

2.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

3.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

D.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1.     Certification required by Section 8.30.170(C)(1) and 8.30.200 (lowest floor elevations);

2.     Certification required by Section 8.30.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.     Certification required by Section 8.30.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 8.30.190(B) (subdivision standards); and

5.     Certification required by Section 8.30.220(A) (floodway encroachments).

E.     Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 8.30.230.

F.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 8.30.080. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.160 Appeals.
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.170 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.    Anchoring.

1.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 8.30.200.

B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

1.     With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

C.     Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 8.30.050 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement”).

1.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

b.     In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 8.30.150(B) of this chapter.

c.     In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 8.30.170(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a.     Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 8.30.170(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection (C)(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

b.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

4.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 8.30.200.

(Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.180 Standards for utilities.
A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1.     Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and

2.     Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

B.     Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.190 Standards for subdivisions.
A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.200 Standards for manufactured homes.
A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, on sites located:

1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood; shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 8.30.200A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.210 Standards for recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map will either:

A.    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

B.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 8.30.130 through 8.30.160 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 8.30.200(A). (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.220 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 8.30.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.     If Section 8.30.220 is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 8.30.170 through 8.30.220. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.230 Variance procedure and nature of variances.
A.    The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

B.     It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.240 Appeal board.
A.    In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

B.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the San Joaquin County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

C.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

 

8.30.250 Conditions for variances.
A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 8.30.130 through 8.30.220 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 8.30.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 8.30.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 8.30.050, see “Public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 8.30.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters.

F.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 8.30.250(A) through (E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

G.    Upon the consideration of the factors of Section 8.30.240(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 8.35 ADULT MARIJUANA USE AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1461 and 1575.

 

8.35.010 Purpose.
A.    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation of marijuana in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community consistent with Proposition 64, also known as the Control, Regulate, and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (“AUMA”).

B.     It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to ban the delivery of marijuana in all areas within the city of Manteca.

C.     It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate all vehicular transportation and vehicular storage of marijuana in all areas in the city of Manteca, except adult persons and or qualified patients and caregivers shall be allowed to transport marijuana by motor vehicle provided it is locked in the vehicle’s trunk or in a locked container.

D.    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to ban adult marijuana and medical marijuana dispensaries in all areas within the city of Manteca.

E.     This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patient’s right to medical marijuana as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, nor does it criminalize medical marijuana possession or cultivation by specifically defined classifications of persons, pursuant to state law. This chapter is not intended to give any person unfettered legal authority to grow marijuana; it is intended to impose zoning restrictions on the personal indoor cultivation of marijuana permitted under AUMA when it is authorized by California state law for medical or other lawful purposes.

F.     No part of this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Sections 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.020 Definitions as used in this section.
“Adult” means a person twenty-one years or older.

“Authorized grower” means a person twenty-one years or older who is authorized by, and in compliance with, federal or state law to cultivate marijuana indoors for personal or medical use.

“Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d) as the same may be amended from time to time.

“City” means the city of Manteca.

“Cultivation” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(e) as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Delivery” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(h). Delivery does not include the lawful transportation of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products on public roads by a state licensee transporting medical marijuana or medical marijuana products from the permitted business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another licensee.

“Dispensary” or “medical marijuana dispensary” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(e) as the same may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this chapter, “dispensary” shall also include a cooperative. “Dispensary” shall not include the following uses: (1) a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (2) a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (3) a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (4) a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; (5) a residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a fully enclosed space within a building at the residence of an authorized grower and complies with the California Building Code (“CBSC”), as adopted in the city of Manteca, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBSC, that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, is accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and is not visible from a public right-of-way. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two inch by four inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If indoor grow lights or air filtration systems are used, they must comply with the California building, electrical, and fire codes as adopted in the city of Manteca.

“Immature marijuana plant” means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has not yet flowered and which does not yet have buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination.

“Indoors” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as that structure is defined above in the definition of “fully enclosed and secure structure.”

“Marijuana” has the same meaning as in Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Marijuana cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or otherwise processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof.

“Mature marijuana plant” means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has flowered and which has buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination.

“Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act” or “MMRSA” shall mean the following bills signed into law on October 9, 2015 as the same may be amended from time to time: AB 243, AB 246, and SB 643.

“Outdoor” means any location within the city of Manteca that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

“Parcel” means property assigned a separate parcel number by the San Joaquin County Assessor.

“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular number.

“Private residence” means a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling unit.

“Qualifying patient” or “qualified patient” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Transport” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(am) as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.030 Outdoor cultivation.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city to cause or allow such premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.040 Cultivation of marijuana for personal or medical use—Regulations for residential zones.
A.    When authorized by state law, an authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate marijuana only at a private residence in a residential zone, only indoors, and only for personal use, subject to the following regulations:

1.     The marijuana cultivation area shall be located indoors within a fully enclosed and secure structure and shall not exceed fifty square feet and not exceed ten feet in height, nor shall it come within twelve inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting. Cultivation in a greenhouse on the property of the residence but not physically part of the home is permitted, as long as it is fully enclosed, secure, and not visible from a public right-of-way and meeting all requirements in this chapter.

2.     The use of gas products such as, but not limited to, CO2, butane, methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas for marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited.

3.     There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence from the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, or any light emanating from cultivation lighting.

4.     The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs.

5.     The authorized grower shall not participate in marijuana cultivation in any other location within the city.

6.     The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation.

7.     The marijuana cultivation area shall be in compliance with the current adopted edition of the California Building Code including Section 1203.4 Natural Ventilation or Section 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation (or equivalent), as amended from time to time.

8.     The building official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including, but not limited to, installation of fire suppression sprinklers.

9.     The marijuana cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

10.   No more than six marijuana plants, mature or immature, are permitted for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter.

11.   Marijuana in excess of twenty-eight and one-half (28.5) grams produced by plants kept for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence not visible from the public right-of-way.

12.   Outdoor cultivation of marijuana and cultivation of marijuana for non-personal uses are expressly prohibited in all zones and districts of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.050 Indoor cultivation of marijuana restricted to authorized growers.
A.    It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city to cause or allow such parcel to be used for the cultivation of marijuana, unless the person is authorized by state law to grow marijuana for a specifically authorized purpose within a private residence or fully enclosed and secure structure in a residential zone, and such authorized grower is complying with all requirements of this chapter.

B.     No person shall grow marijuana upon any parcel until and unless they first secure a permit from community development and pay such fee as may be   required and set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.060 Deliveries prohibited.
All deliveries of adult marijuana are expressly prohibited within the city. No person shall conduct any deliveries that either originate or terminate within the city.

This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a state license is required. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any activity for which a state license is required under the MMRSA. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.070 Transportation and storage regulated.
No person, including, but not limited to, a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall store marijuana or marijuana products in a vehicle unless the vehicle is secured inside a locked building.

No person, including, but not limited to, a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall transport marijuana products in a vehicle except when transporting it directly from a licensed dispensary directly to their place of residence, or their patient’s or caregiver’s place of residence, or when transporting between the places of residence of the patient and caregiver.

No person shall leave marijuana or marijuana products outside of their immediate control, for any length of time, in any place open to the public, including in any vehicle parked in a place open to the public. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.080 Dispensary ban.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in any zone or district in the city of Manteca, the operation of an adult marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana dispensary. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.090 Public nuisance.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the city to create a public nuisance in the course of cultivating marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location, indoor or outdoor. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist, if such activity produces:

A.    Odors which are disturbing to people of reasonable sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.

B.     Responses to the parcel by law enforcement personnel.

C.     A disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood, excessive noise which is disturbing to people of normal sensitivity on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.

D.    Any other impacts on the neighborhood which is disruptive of normal activity in the area including, but not limited to, grow lighting visible outside the dwelling, excessive vehicular traffic or parking occurring at or near the dwelling, and excessive noise emanating from the dwelling.

E.     Outdoor growing or cultivation of marijuana.

F.     Smoking or ingesting marijuana or marijuana products in any public place. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.100 Criminal penalties.
Any person who violates, causes or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.110 Safety violation enforcement and fines.
A.    Any violation of this chapter may result in any or all of the following actions and/or fines:

1.     A misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail and/or a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars;

2.     Institution of a civil action by the city attorney, or designee, as set forth in Chapter 1.10;

3.     Issuance of administrative citation(s) and/or an order to abate the safety violation(s) with a fine up to five hundred dollars, plus any administrative expenses incurred in the enforcement of this chapter.

B.     Each day a safety violation(s) occurs shall be deemed a new violation subject to additional citations, penalties, and fines.

C.     Violations of any section of this chapter may be filed as an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.120 Civil penalties.
A.    In addition to the enforcement and fines described herein, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code against any owner who violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, the court may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party.

B.     The city may pursue any other legal remedy to enforce or collect any fines or amounts owed as set forth herein. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

 

8.35.130 Right to a hearing.
A.    The cited person may appeal administrative citations issued pursuant to this chapter, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code.

B.     The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code. (Ord. O2017-15 § 1)

Chapter 8.37 INCLEMENT WEATHER CENTERS
8.37.010 Legislative findings and purposes.
A.    Centers for the protection of homeless individuals and families during inclement weather is vital, whether due to extreme cold, extreme heat, poor air quality conditions, severe storms, or other types of civil emergencies.

B.     The city council has, from time to time in the past, passed resolutions stating the guidelines and triggering conditions for the activation of emergency warming centers in the city of Manteca, noting that extreme weather conditions can create an extreme danger for homeless people in Manteca and puts a great strain on service providers.

C.     An inclement weather center can be located or constructed on any land owned or leased by the city of Manteca or the successor agency to the Manteca Redevelopment Agency, including land acquired with low- and moderate-income housing funds. (Ord. O2020-02 § 1; Ord. O2019-16 § 1)

 

8.37.020 Activation criteria.
A.    The activation criteria for inclement weather centers in the city of Manteca is as follows:

1.     A private nonprofit organization filing a 501(c)3 with the state may apply with the city of Manteca to activate an inclement weather center on city or successor agency owned property and the city may approve the use as temporary use via a temporary use permit.

2.     Warming centers can be established with an approved temporary use permit between the dates of December 1 and March 31; and any other day during which the temperature is predicted by the National Weather Service to be forty degrees Fahrenheit or lower as a daily low and designated shelter space within the City was at ninety percent capacity or greater during the previous night. The city may, upon request by a center provider, raise the activation temperature for warming centers, but in no event will the activation temperature be higher than fifty-two degrees Fahrenheit.

3.     Cooling centers can be established with an approved temporary use permit and activated when the temperature is predicted by the National Weather Service to be one hundred degrees Fahrenheit or higher for three consecutive days or more.

4.     Safe air centers can be established with an approved temporary use permit and activated for any day on which the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air Pollution Control District forecasts the current air quality index to reach two hundred fifty or higher.

5.     Wind shelter centers can be established with an approved temporary use permit and activated when Manteca is subject to sustained winds of over twenty mph.

6.     A temporary use permit may be approved for an inclement weather center and be activated by the city manager or city manager’s designee on city or successor agency owned property any day in which a civil emergency or extreme storm or weather condition exists or is predicted to occur and which, in the determination of the city manager or city manager’s designee, poses a severe threat to the health or safety of homeless individuals and families in the city of Manteca.

7.     The operation of an inclement weather station shall comply with all life and safety codes to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee.

B.     The city manager shall implement the appropriate policies and procedures, including, without limitation, partnering with inclement weather center providers for grant funding requests; the designation of specific locations to be used as warming, cooling, safe air and wind shelter centers; and the arrangement of other appropriate measures and conditions to the city council in order to carry out the specific provisions and intent of this section. (Ord. O2020-02 § 1; Ord. O2019-16 § 1)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 FALSE REPORTS
Chapter 9.08 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Chapter 9.12 PUBLIC DRINKING
Chapter 9.13 OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY AND MORALITY
Chapter 9.16 HANDBILLS AND NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION
Chapter 9.20 CURFEW
Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS
Chapter 9.24 WEAPONS
Chapter 9.28 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSEURS
Chapter 9.32 STREET GANGS
Chapter 9.34 RESPONSIBLE PROPERTY OWNER
Chapter 9.36 GRAFFITI CONTROL
Chapter 9.40 CRUISING AND LOITERING
Chapter 9.44 PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Chapter 9.48 NUDITY ON PUBLIC LANDS
Chapter 9.52 RESIDENTIAL NOISE

Chapter 9.04 FALSE REPORTS
9.04.010 False reports prohibited.
No person shall make any report to the police chief or any of his or her staff or to any peace officer, based on information which such person knows to be false in whole or in part with the intention of deceiving the person receiving the report. (Prior code § 15-2)

Chapter 9.08 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
9.08.010 Public exposure.
Every person who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, or entertainer, or participates in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in an establishment which serves or supplies alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment employs or pays any compensation to such person to perform such activity, exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, pubic region, buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, pubic region, or buttocks is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 11-50)

 

9.08.020 Counseling or assisting.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels, or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in Section 9.08.010. (Prior code § 11-51)

 

9.08.030 Exemption of theatrical establishments.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performance. (Prior code § 11-52)

Chapter 9.12 PUBLIC DRINKING
9.12.010 Drinking on streets and public places—Prohibited.
No person shall drink any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage:

A.    On any street, sidewalk, public walkway, alley, municipal parking lot, or private parking lot;

B.     Within fifty feet of those areas delineated in subsection A of this section while on private or public property open to the public view without the express permission of the owner, his or her agent or person in lawful possession thereof. (Prior code § 13-12)

9.12.020 Possession of open container on streets and public places—Prohibited.
No person shall have in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed:

A.    On any street, sidewalk, public walkway, alley or public or private parking lot; or

B.     Within fifty feet of those areas delineated in subsection A of this section while on private or public property open to the public view without the express permission of the owner, his or her agent or person in lawful possession thereof. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1989)

 

9.12.030 Drinking and possession of open containers on streets and public places—Permitted.
A.    The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the sponsors, vendors, participants or attendees at any event which meets the following criteria:

1.     The drinking of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages occurs at a fund raising event or activity sponsored by one or more not-for-profit organizations which have tax-exempt status pursuant to Sections 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code;

2.     The sponsoring organization has secured a permit issued by the police chief allowing the drinking of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages on public streets or other public places. The permit must be applied for and received not less than sixty days and no more than three hundred sixty-six days prior to the event;

3.     The alcoholic beverages are sold or provided by the sponsoring organization or their vendors to participants/attendees at and as a part of the fund raising event.

B.     The permit required by subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be applied for using an application form, the form and substance of which shall be designated from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. Such form shall be available at the city clerk’s office.

C.     The city clerk shall publish notice of any decision granting the permit in the Manteca Bulletin no later than five days after it was granted. Any decision granting or denying the permit required by subsection (A)(2) of this section may be appealed to the city council by any person. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of permit approval, and must be accompanied by the filing fee established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. The appeal shall be heard at a public hearing after notice published in the Manteca Bulletin at least ten days before the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1106 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.13 OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY AND MORALITY
9.13.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Public place” means an area generally visible to public view, and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not) and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to those buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 2014)

 

9.13.020 Urinating or defecating in public.
It is unlawful for a person to intentionally urinate or defecate in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 2014)

 

9.13.030 Violation—Penalty.
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370, the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 1550 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 9.16 HANDBILLS AND NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION
9.16.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this chapter:

“Deliver” and “delivery” mean throwing, casting, distributing, scattering, depositing, passing-out, giving away or circulating.

“Disseminator” means the owner, publisher or deliverer of the printed matter.

“In defiance of the previously expressed will of the occupant” means:

1.     The building or property has been conspicuously posted with a sign approved and distributed by the police chief or his or her designated representative prohibiting the delivery of printed matter; or

2.     The occupant of the building or possessor of the property has previously instructed the disseminator to discontinue or refrain from delivering printed matter.

“Printed matter” means handbill, dodger, circular, newspaper, paper, booklet, book or poster.

“Property” means building, vacant lot or other private property. (Ord. 1018 § 1, 1995; prior code § 13-1(a))

 

9.16.020 Prohibited delivery.
A.    No person shall deliver any printed matter to or on any property in defiance of the previously expressed will of the occupant or possessor of the property.

B.     No person shall deliver any printed matter to or on any property where it is apparent to a reasonable person that the property is vacant.

C.     No person shall deliver or cause to be delivered any printed matter to any property in the city except as follows:

1.     By placing the same in a receptacle, clip or other device designed or intended to receive it when such receptacle, clip or other device is erected in a conspicuous place near the front door or front entrance or near the mailbox of any property;

2.     If no receptacle, clip or other device exists, then by placing the printed matter on the porch or vestibule of a building on the property; provided, that it is wrapped, tied or lock-folded, or is placed within the outer door or in the door jamb or door handle; or

3.     By handing the same from person to person.

D.    No person shall place or cause to be placed any printed matter upon any motor vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to the issuance of any traffic citation, tow away notice, or other notice permitted or required by law.

 

E.     Nothing in this section shall apply to U.S. Postal Service mail carriers delivering the mail. (Ord. 1018 § 1, 1995; prior code § 13-1(b)—(h))

Chapter 9.20 CURFEW
9.20.010 Definitions for curfew provisions.
As used in this chapter:

“Curfew hours” means the period from eleven p.m. any evening of the week until five a.m. the following day.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

“Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1078 (part), 1998)

 

9.20.020 Curfew restrictions.
A.    It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment with the city during curfew hours.

B.     It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

C.     It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (A) and (B) of this section that the minor was:

1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;

2.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;

3.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

4.     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

5.     Involved in an emergency;

6.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

7.     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

8.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

9.     Emancipation pursuant to law.

D.    Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection (C) of this section is present or applicable.

E.     Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1078 (part), 1998)

 

9.20.030 Violation—Penalty.
A violation of Section 9.20.020 is punishable as provided in Section 1.16.010. (Ord. 1078 (part), 1998)

Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS
9.22.010 Definitions.
As used in this section:

A.    “Display” means to place in plain view.

B.     “Harmful matter” means matter taken as a whole, the predominant appeal of which, to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, is to prurient interest, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

1.     When it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.

2.     In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that matter is being commercially exploited by the defendant for the sake of its prurient appeal, that evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

C.     “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines, or materials.

D.    “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age.

E.     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity. (Ord. 797 § 1(a), 1988)

 

9.22.020 Display restrictions.
No person shall display harmful matter in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, without placing a device commonly known as a “blinder rack” in front of such matter, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 797 § 1(b), 1988)

Chapter 9.24 WEAPONS
9.24.010 Weapons—Discharge prohibited—Exception.
It is unlawful for any person in the city to use or discharge any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, air rifle, B-B gun, or other instrument from or by means of which any bullet, shot or other missile of any kind may be projected; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of firearms in bona fide shooting galleries, gun clubs, or organizations or educational institutions authorized to give military instruction, while such firearms are being used as a part of such instruction, and that the city council may issue by resolution its permit or permits to any person or persons to use, shoot, fire or discharge guns, pistols or firearms of any description upon such terms and under such conditions and for such time as it deems advisable, and which terms, conditions and time shall be set forth in such permit. The person shall have upon his or her person such permit when exercising the privilege granted therein. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to or prevent the use and firing of firearms by duly appointed peace officers while acting within the scope of their employment or in the performance of their duties as such peace officers. (Prior code § 13-11)

 

9.24.020 Violation—Penalty.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 899 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 9.28 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSEURS
Article 1. General Provisions
9.28.005 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage businesses and to comply with state regulations as it relates to massage services. The city council recognizes that providing massage services is a viable professional field offering the public valuable health and therapeutic services. While there are significant health benefits that can result from massage therapy, there are also significant risks of injury by persons improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage therapy services. There are also opportunities for illegal acts of prostitution, lewdness and human trafficking that can occur in massage establishments.

This chapter establishes minimum standards for massage businesses and massage therapists so as to protect and safeguard the public health, safety and welfare and to enhance the reputation of the profession and integrity of the services provided. The establishment of reasonable standards for the issuance of business licenses and restrictions on massage operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health.

It is the purpose and intent of the city council that massage businesses and massage therapists offering such services be regulated so as to ensure that persons offering massage services possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such a business and are able perform the services offered to ensure that those offering these services conduct their work in a lawful and professional manner and comply with required building, sanitation and health standards. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.010 Definitions.
A.    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

1.     “California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” shall mean the non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 4600).

2.     “CAMTC certificate” shall mean a current and valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council to a massage practitioner pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4601(b) or (c) or any later enacted amendment.

3.     “Certified massage therapist” or “massage therapist” shall mean any individual, certified by the CAMTC and possessing a valid CAMTC certificate and is licensed to practice or administer massage, in exchange for any form of compensation within the city of Manteca. All persons certified by CAMTC shall have the right to perform or engage in the practice of massage consistent with the Massage Therapy Act, the qualifications established by his or her certification, and the provisions of this chapter stated herein.

4.     “Chief of police” means and includes the chief of the Manteca police department, or designated representative.

5.     “City” shall mean the city of Manteca.

6.     “Client” shall mean the customer or patron who pays for or receives massage services.

7.     “Compensation” means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.

8.     “Employee” shall mean any person employed by a massage business who may render any massage services, or who may engage in activities that further massage services, of any nature in connection with the operation of a massage business and who receives any form of compensation from the massage business. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “employee” shall include independent contractors, agents and volunteers.

9.     “Licensee” shall mean any person who receives from the city of Manteca a business license.

10.   “Manager” means a person who supervises, manages, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the conduct of the activities within a massage business. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules, or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner.

11.   “Massage” or “massage therapy” shall mean any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes for any form of compensation by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating, of the external parts of the body with hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice; or by baths, including but not limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, mud, fermentation or any other type of bath.

12.   “Massage business” means any business that offers massage in exchange for compensation, whether at a fixed place of business or at a location designated by the customer or client through out-call or on-site massage services. The term “massage business” includes a certified massage therapist who is the sole owner, operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “massage business” shall include those businesses that provide separate massage services, such as spas and day spas, but shall not apply to massages performed to limited areas of the neck, face and/or scalp, hands or feet of the clients when that massage is accessory to and within the scope of a barber’s, cosmetologist’s, and esthetician’s state license.

13.   “Massage establishment” shall mean a fixed location where massage for compensation is regularly conducted. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “massage establishment” shall include those businesses that provide separate massage services, such as spas and day spas, but shall not apply to massages performed to limited areas of the neck, face and/or scalp, hands or feet of the clients when that massage is accessory to and within the scope of a barber’s, cosmetologist’s, and esthetician’s state license.

14.   “On-site massage” shall mean a massage given to an individual who remains fully clothed during the massage and at a location other than a massage business, and is limited to massages that take place at malls, business offices, sports complexes, convention centers and public events.

15.   “Operator” or “massage business operator” shall mean any and all owners of a massage business.

16.   “Out-call massage” shall mean the engaging in or carrying on of massage for compensation in a location other than a duly licensed massage establishment.

17.   “Owner” shall mean any of the following:

a.     The sole proprietor of a massage business or establishment; or

b.     Any person who is a general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage business; or

c.     Any person who has a five percent or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage business; or

d.     Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage business; or

e.     Any person who has a five percent or greater ownership interest in any other type of business association that owns a massage business.

18.   “Person” shall mean any individual.

19.   “Reception area” shall mean the area immediately inside the front door of the massage establishment, dedicated to the reception and waiting of clients and visitors of the massage establishment, which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services.

20.   “Sole proprietorship” shall mean a massage business where the owner owns one hundred percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors that perform massage for the business.

21.   “Spa” or “day spa” shall mean a business that offers a variety of services intended to meet personal needs of individuals such as skin treatment, manicures and pedicures and massage.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties:

1.     Physicians, surgeons, nurses, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, podiatrists, physical therapists, who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions, in the state of California under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code.

2.     Persons operating or employed at hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or any other health facility duly licensed by the state of California.

3.     Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team, so long as such persons’ practice of massage is limited to such athletes and athletic teams.

4.     Persons operating or employed at athletic clubs or fitness facilities, where such facility is designed and equipped for indoor sports, exercise, or physical education, and where massage services are provided to members of such facilities.

5.     Barbers, cosmetologists, or estheticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses, so long as the barber, cosmetologist or esthetician limits any massages he or she performs in the course of his or her professional duties to the neck, face and/or scalp, hands or feet of the clients when that massage is accessory to and within the scope of the barber’s, cosmetologist’s, and esthetician’s state license.

6.     Enrolled students of a school of massage when they are performing massage within the city as part of a formal supervised internship or training wherein the student receives school credit, operated by the school, without receiving any form of compensation, including tips, on the premises of a massage establishment duly authorized to operate in the city.

7.     Persons performing a therapeutic modality for which the state does not offer licenses or certification under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code and the modality is performed with minimal touching and the client remains fully clothed at all times, such as Reiki, Reflexology, Rolfing or the Bowen Technique. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.020 Out-call massage and on-site massage restrictions.
A.    No person or massage business shall perform either on-site massage or out-call massage for compensation without possessing a CAMTC certificate in conjunction with a valid city business license.

B.     Out-call massage shall not be performed unless authorized in writing by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the state of California.

C.     Out-call massage and on-site massage shall only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m.

D.    Out-call massage or on-site massage shall not be conducted in the following locations:

1.     A hotel/motel room or any other similar location used primarily for transitory habitation purposes.

2.     The residence of the out-call or on-site massage therapist. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.030 Health and safety requirements for all massages.
All massage establishment owners, operators, employees, sole proprietors, independent contractors and any person performing massage within the city shall comply with all of the following health and safety requirements.

A.    Massage establishments and massage therapists shall at all times have an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings, and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels, non-disposable coverings, and linens shall not be used on more than one client, unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and disposable coverings shall not be used on more than one client. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in separate receptacles.

B.     In the massage establishment, wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, showers and bathrooms, whirlpool baths, and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day when the premises are open, with a hospital-grade disinfectant. Bath tubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a hospital-grade disinfectant after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities for the establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

C.     All equipment used in the massage establishment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Instruments utilized in performing massage techniques shall not be used on more than one client unless they have been sterilized, using standard sterilization methods.

D.    No massage establishment shall have any alcohol for consumption or illegal controlled substance on the premises at any time except for those massage establishments that obtain authorization from the chief of police and any licenses from the state of California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control that may be necessary to provide alcohol to a client as a part of the establishment’s services.

E.     No massage shall be given by any massage therapist who is consuming, or is under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or illegal controlled substance.

F.     No massage shall be given unless the client’s genitalia and female breasts are, at all times, fully covered. Genitalia shall include the genitals, anus, and perineum of any person. No massage shall be provided to a client for sexual gratification by intentional contact, or occasional and repetitive contact with the client’s genitalia or female breasts either covered or uncovered.

G.    No massage therapist or massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers that services prohibited by this chapter are available nor shall any massage therapist or massage establishment employ language in any advertising text or business name that would reasonably suggest to a prospective client that any service is available that is prohibited under this chapter.

H.    A massage therapist shall not engage in lewd or dissolute conduct in any massage establishment in violation of Penal Code Section 647(a), shall not solicit or engage in any act of prostitution with the intent to receive compensation, money, or anything of value from another person in violation of Penal Code Section 647(b), and shall not commit any acts that would constitute a violation of a crime of moral turpitude. Such conduct shall not be allowed or permitted by the massage business. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.040 Operating requirements for massage.
All massage establishment owners, operators, employees, sole proprietors, independent contractors and any person performing massage within the city shall comply with all of the following operating requirements.

A.    CAMTC certification shall be worn by and on the massage therapist’s person during working hours and at all times when the massage therapist is inside a massage establishment or providing out-call massage. No owner, operator or manager of a massage establishment shall allow or permit a person to administer massage for such establishment unless the massage therapist possesses and wears a valid CAMTC certificate.

B.     Massage shall only be performed between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. No massage business shall be open and no massage shall be provided between ten p.m. and six a.m. A massage commenced prior to ten p.m. shall terminate prior to ten pm. and all clients shall exit the massage establishment prior to ten pm.

C.     A list of services available and the cost of each service shall be posted in the reception area within the massage establishment, and shall be described in English if another language is also used to list the available services. Out-call service providers shall provide such a list to clients in advance of performing any service. No owner, manager, or operator shall permit, and no massage therapist shall offer to perform any service other than those posted or listed, as required herein, nor shall an owner, manager, or operator nor a massage therapist request or charge a fee for any service other than those on the list of available services posted in the reception area or provided to the client in advance of any out-call services.

D.    The massage establishment premises and facilities shall meet and be maintained in a condition to comply with all applicable code requirements of the city, including, but not limited to, those related to the safety of structures, adequacy of the plumbing, lighting, heating, ventilation, waterproofing of rooms in which showers, water or steam baths are used, and the health and cleanliness of the facility.

E.     Clients of the massage establishment shall be furnished with a private dressing room. Dressing rooms need not be separate from the room in which the massage is being performed.

F.     Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations within the massage establishment and shall consist of at least one unisex toilet with lavatories or wash basins provided with soap and both hot and cold running water either in the toilet room or vestibule.

G.    A minimum of one wash basin for employees shall be provided at all times. The basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Soap and sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin.

H.    The CAMTC certificate of each and every massage therapist performing massage shall be displayed in the reception area or in the area where massage is to be performed. CAMTC certificates of former employees, independent contractors, or volunteers shall be removed as soon as those massage therapists are no longer performing massage at the location. All records of employees, independent contractors, or volunteers who have performed massage for a massage business shall be retained by the owner of the massage business for a period of two years.

I.      The owner and/or manager of the massage establishment shall maintain a roster of all employees, including operators, managers and massage therapists, showing each individual’s name, nick-name or alias, home address, date of birth, gender, phone number, Social Security Number, CAMTC certificate number, date of employment, and the individual’s job duties for the massage establishment. This roster and all of the information contained therein shall be maintained on the massage establishment’s premises for a period of two years following the last date of employment of each employee listed on the roster. Upon consent or upon obtaining an applicable warrant, the operator or manager on duty shall make the roster immediately available for inspection by city or police department representatives during all hours the massage establishment is open for business.

J.      Massage therapists shall be fully clothed at all times. Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non-transparent material and said garments shall not expose their genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or breasts. Swim attire may not be worn unless the massage therapist is providing a water-based massage modality approved by the CAMTC. A massage therapist shall not wear any clothing that is deemed by the CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire. All employees of the massage business, including owners and managers, shall also adhere to these clothing requirements.

K.    Every massage business shall keep a written or electronic record of the date and hour of each treatment administered, the name and address of each client, the name of the massage therapist administering treatment, and the type of treatment administered. Such written or electronic record shall be available for inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Such records shall be kept on the premises of a massage establishment for a period of two years and shall be open to inspection by the city during the massage business’ normal business hours.

L.     Where the massage establishment has staff available to ensure security, the entry to the reception area of the massage business shall remain unlocked during business hours when the establishment is open for business or when clients are present.

M.    No massage establishment shall simultaneously operate as a school of massage or share facilities with a school of massage.

N.    Minimum lighting consisting of at least one artificial light of not less than forty watts shall be provided and shall be operating in each room or enclosure where massage services are being performed on clients and in all areas where clients are present.

O.    No massage establishment shall allow any person to reside within the massage establishment or in any attached structures owned, leased or controlled by the massage establishment owners.

P.     All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to disabled clients.

Q.    All massage establishments must comply with the city’s sign ordinance pursuant to Title 17, Article 3, Chapter 17.54 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

R.     All front, reception, hallway or front exterior doors (except back or exterior doors used solely for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall be unlocked during business hours, except as may be permitted by applicable law, which allow for safety doors that may be opened from the inside when locked. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth or any other area within a massage establishment that is fitted with a lock of any kind (such as a locking door knob, padlock, dead bolt, sliding bar or similar device) unless the door is an exterior door. No entry doors to any room shall be obstructed by any means. The requirement that an exterior door must remain unlocked at all times does not apply to any massage establishment owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

Article 2. Licensing and State Certification
9.28.050 CAMTC certification required.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in the practice of massage for compensation within the city unless that person possesses a current, valid, unsuspended and unrevoked CAMTC certificate.

B.     It is unlawful for any massage business or massage establishment to provide massage for compensation within the city unless all persons employed by the massage business or massage establishment to perform massage, whether as an employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or sole proprietorship, possess a current, valid, unsuspended and unrevoked CAMTC certificate. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.060 Time for Compliance with CAMTC certification.
A.    Any individual holding a valid business license issued by the city to perform or engage in massage for compensation within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may continue to provide such massage services under that license until that license expires, but shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter. Upon expiration of said license issued by the city, any person who desires to continue to provide massage for compensation within the city shall first obtain a current, valid, unsuspended and unrevoked CAMTC certificate.

B.     Any massage business holding a valid business license issued by the city to provide massage for compensation within the city may continue to operate as a massage business until the license expires provided that all of the massage business’ employees providing massage services possess a CAMTC certificate or the equivalent state certificate for massage. Upon expiration of the massage business’ city business license, any massage business that desires to continue to provide massage for compensation within the city shall first ensure that all of the massage business’ employees providing massage possess a current, valid, unsuspended and unrevoked CAMTC certificate.

C.     All persons, massage businesses or massage establishments, including its owners, operators, managers, and employees engaged in the practice of massage for compensation within the city shall comply with all health and safety and operating requirements set forth in Sections 9.28.030 and 9.28.040, upon its effective date. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.070 City business license.
It is unlawful for any person or massage business to conduct massage for compensation within the city without first obtaining a valid city business license.

 

A.    Application for License.

1.     An applicant wishing to obtain a business license from the city shall complete a business license application form completely and accurately and shall provide a copy of a current and valid CAMTC certificate possessed by every person who will be performing or engaging in the practice of massage for the massage business.

2.     Every massage business owner(s) or manager(s) who does not qualify as a massage therapist and is not CAMTC certified must obtain a massage business permit and be subject to a background check and fingerprinting pursuant to Section 9.28.090 prior to the issuance of a city business license. If any massage business owner(s) or manager(s) is denied a massage business permit then a city business license cannot be issued to the massage business until such time as the denied business owner(s) or manager(s) is removed from the application for the city business license.

3.     Prior to the issuance of a city business license, the city shall make a reasonable investigation into the information provided in the application to confirm the facts stated therein.

B.     Issuance of License. All business licenses shall be issued in accordance with the Manteca Municipal Code Chapter 5.04, Business Licenses Generally.

C.     Renewal of License. A city business license shall be valid for one year from the renewal date, which is determined at the time the initial application is received and the business license is issued. The city business license must be renewed within thirty days after the expiration of said city business license. If an application for renewal of a city business license and all required information is not timely received and the license expires, no right or privilege to provide massage shall exist.

D.    Fees. The fee for a city business license shall be assessed pursuant to Manteca Municipal Code Sections 5.12.030 and 5.04.120.

E.     It is unlawful for a massage business to conduct massage for compensation within the city if the CAMTC certification of a massage business owner or manager is revoked or suspended and if that massage business owner or manager has not obtained a massage business permit pursuant to Section 9.28.090. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.080 Exchange of information.
The city may, from time to time, request information from CAMTC pertaining to any person who possesses a CAMTC certificate and who is engaging in the practice of massage in the city. The requested information may include, but need not be limited to, the current status of a person’s CAMTC certificate, any history of disciplinary action(s) taken against the person, the home and work addresses of the CAMTC certificate holder, and any other information that may be necessary to verify a fact relevant to administering the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.090 Massage business permit for owners and managers who do not qualify as massage therapists and who are not CAMTC certified.
Every massage business owner(s) and manager(s) who does not possess a current and valid CAMTC certificate, must obtain a massage business permit from the chief of police, or designee, prior to obtaining a business license, according to the following procedures:

A.    The massage business owner(s) and manager(s) shall complete an application that requests information regarding topics, including, but not limited to, the applicant’s current business name and location, occupation, employment history for the five years preceding the date of the application, and the name and address of any massage business or like establishment previously owned or managed by the applicant.

B.     Every massage business owner(s) and manager(s) subject to this section shall personally appear at the city police department to be fingerprinted. The chief of police, or designee, shall conduct or cause to be conducted on his or her behalf a background investigation of the applicant.

C.     At the time of the fingerprinting, the applicant shall pay the police department a fingerprinting fee and the cost of obtaining criminal history information and conducting a background investigation. Fees are set forth in the city’s fee schedule in amounts established by resolution of city council and may be amended by council from time to time.

D.    The chief of police, or designee, shall determine, based on the background investigation and the information submitted with the application, whether a massage business permit shall be issued. If the chief of police, or designee, determines that the applicant is not qualified, the chief of police, or designee, shall inform the applicant in writing and specify the reasons for the denial. The chief of police shall serve the applicant with notice of the denial either personally or by certified mail addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant. The notice of denial shall contain an advisement of the applicant’s right to request an appeal. The city may deny a massage business permit for the following reasons:

1.     The applicant has provided materially false information in applying for a massage business permit.

2.     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application the applicant has been convicted of, or has pled guilty to, any of the following offenses: violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, inclusive, 267, 288, 314 to 316 inclusive, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 647(i), 647(j) or any offense requiring registration under Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code Section 11590; any felony offense involving the possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 to 11058, inclusive, as amended; any offense in another state which if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned here; any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft, embezzlement, or moral turpitude;

3.     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application the applicant has had a massage license suspended or revoked; unless the applicant can show that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension.

E.     The applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police, or designee, to the city manager, or designee, by filing a notice of appeal within ten calendar days of being served with the decision. The applicant is deemed served either on the date that the decision was personally served on the applicant or on the date that the decision was mailed to the applicant through certified mail. The chief of police’s decision shall be final if no notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk within the time permitted.

F.     A notice of appeal must be in writing, shall explain the reason(s) for the appeal and shall be mailed to, or personally delivered to, the city manager’s office, or designee, with a filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars. The city manager, or designee, shall schedule a hearing within thirty calendar days of receiving the notice of appeal, and shall provide written notice of the time, date and location of the hearing to the appellant at least seven calendar days before the scheduled hearing.

G.    The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. The city manager, or designee, shall render a decision within thirty calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the parties agree otherwise. The city manager, or designee, shall notify the appellant in writing of the decision. The decision of the city manager, or designee, may be appealed pursuant to Manteca Municipal Code Section 1.10.500, Judicial review.

H.    If a massage business permit is granted by the chief of police, or designee, it shall be valid until such time as the permittee terminates the permit or the permit is suspended or revoked pursuant to Manteca Municipal Code Section 9.28.100. The permit shall be non-transferrable and cannot be sold.

I.      A massage business permittee shall notify the chief of police, or designee, in writing at least thirty days after the sale of the massage business or establishment for which he or she obtained the massage business permit is completed.

J.      A massage business permit shall be non-transferable and every new owner of a massage business or establishment who does not qualify as a massage therapist and is not CAMTC certified must obtain a massage business permit before operating a massage business or establishment. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.100 Massage business permit—Grounds for suspension and revocation.
The chief of police, or designee, may suspend and/or revoke a massage business permit issued under this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:

A.    A massage business permittee made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process;

B.     A massage business permittee violated a provision or provisions of this chapter or the Massage Therapy Act or some other state or federal law. Including a violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, inclusive, 267, 288, 314 to 316 inclusive, 318, 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), 647(i), 647(j) or any offense requiring registration under Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code Section 11590; any felony offense involving the possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 to 11058, inclusive, as amended; any offense in another state which if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned here; any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft, embezzlement, or moral turpitude;

C.     The massage establishment is not being maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Massage Therapy Act (Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4621), any other provision of the Manteca Municipal Code or any other local, state or federal law, and the massage business permittee has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency for which they have received notice;

D.    The massage business has knowingly employed, allowed, or permitted a person who was not certified by CAMTC to perform massage services at the massage establishment. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.110 Massage business permit—Process for suspension and revocation.
A.    The chief of police, or designee, shall send written notice of the suspension or revocation to the permittee and the notice shall be served on the permittee either personally or by certified mail addressed to the business or residence address of the permittee. The notice shall contain a description of the grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit along with supporting facts, and the notice shall contain an advisement of the permittee’s right to request an appeal.

B.     Suspension or revocation issued pursuant to subsection A shall be effective five calendar days from the date appearing on the notice, unless a timely appeal is filed in accordance with subsection C.

C.     The decision of the chief of police, or designee, may be appealed to the city manager’s office, or designee. An appeal must be in writing, shall explain the reason(s) for the appeal, and shall be mailed to, or personally delivered to, the city manager’s office, or designee, with a filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars within five calendar days of the date of the written notice of suspension or revocation. The city manager, or designee, shall schedule a hearing within thirty calendar days of receiving the written appeal, and shall provide written notice of the time, date and location of the hearing to the appellant at least seven calendar days before the scheduled hearing.

D.    The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. The city manager, or designee, shall render a decision within thirty calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the parties agree otherwise. The city manager, or designee, shall notify the appellant in writing of the decision. The decision of the city manager, or designee, may be appealed pursuant to Manteca Municipal Code Section 1.10.500. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.120 Inspection of massage establishment by officials.
The investigating and enforcing officials of the city, including, but not limited to, the chief of police, or designees, chief building official or designees, the chief of the fire department or designee, shall have the right to enter the massage establishment premises, from time to time, during regular business hours, for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable laws, statutes and regulations, and with the provisions of this chapter. The chief building official and/or the chief of the fire department may charge a fee for any safety inspections, which shall be established by council. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.130 Applicability of other ordinances.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person from complying with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance, rule, or regulation, or to exempt a massage establishment or massage therapist from the provisions of any zoning, licensing or other building ordinance, rule or regulation. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.140 Notifications.
A.    Any person or massage business licensee shall notify the city finance department of any amendments or changes necessary to the information provided to the city pursuant to Section 9.28.070.

B.     Any person or massage business licensee who holds a city business license pursuant to Section 9.28.070 shall inform the police department within five days if any of following events occur:

1.     Arrest of any employee, owner, manager, operator of the massage establishment of any crime listed in Section 9.28.090(D)(2).

2.     Any event involving an employee, owner, manager, operator or independent contractor, volunteer that may constitute a violation of this chapter or any state or federal law.

C.     This provision shall be complied even if the licensee believes that the city has or will receive the information from another source. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.150 Nuisance.
Any massage business or establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in any manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court(s) as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such businesses and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a massage establishment or business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. All remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.160 Unlawful business practices may be enjoined.
Any massage establishment or business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17200 et seq., and the city attorney and/or district attorney may, in the exercise of its discretion, in addition to or in lieu of taking any other action permitted by this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings in an appropriate court of jurisdiction, seeking an injunction prohibiting the unlawful business practice and/or any other remedy available at law, including, but not limited to, fines, attorney’s fees and costs. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.170 Criminal prosecution.
A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and at the discretion of the city attorney, a violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted in a criminal court. Any violation of this chapter prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, per violation or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. All remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.180 Administrative fines.
A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, may result in the issuance of an administrative citation and the city may, at its discretion, seek an administrative fine of up to one thousand dollars.

A.    Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person.

B.     Notice of the assessed fine shall be served by certified mail with the legal violation and supporting facts. The notice shall contain an advisement of the right to file an appeal and the process for contesting the imposition of the fine with the city. The appeal process and timeline shall follow those procedures and timelines set forth in Manteca Municipal Code Chapter 1.10 et seq.

C.     If an appeal is not filed and the fine is not paid within thirty days from either the date of the notice of fine or a notice of determination from the hearing officer, the fine may be referred to a collection agency within or external of the city.

D.    Any outstanding amounts owed to the city may be recovered through a lien against any real property owned by the offending party or a personal obligation lien against the offending party. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.190 Prosecutorial discretion.
Pursuant to the city attorney’s prosecutorial discretion, the city may enforce violations of this chapter as criminal, civil, and/or administrative violations utilizing administrative remedies. All remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

 

9.28.191 Application to existing businesses.
All requirements set forth in this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable to and govern all existing and proposed massage businesses and establishments immediately upon the date the ordinance is codified in this chapter, and shall become effective. (Ord. O2019-06 § 2)

Chapter 9.32 STREET GANGS
9.32.010 Legislative findings and declaration.
A.    The city council finds and declares that it is the right of every person to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation, and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is not the intent of this chapter to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected right of freedom of expression and association. The city council recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process.

B.     The city council, however, further finds that a state of crisis has been caused by violent street gangs whose members threaten, terrorize and commit a multitude of crimes against the peaceful citizens of their neighborhoods. These activities, both individually and collectively, present a clear and present danger to public order and safety and are not constitutionally protected. It is the intent of the city council in enacting this chapter to seek the eradication and prevention of criminal activity by street gangs by focusing upon patterns of criminal gang activity and upon the organized nature of street gangs, which together, are the chief source of terror created by street gangs. The city council further finds that an effective means of punishing and deterring the criminal activities of street gangs is through forfeiture of the profits, proceeds and instrumentalities acquired, accumulated or used by street gangs. (Ord. 864 § 1, 1990)

 

9.32.020 Participation in criminal street gang prohibited—Elements—Punishment.
A.    Any person who actively participates in any criminal street gang with knowledge that its members engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity, and who wilfully promotes, furthers, or assists in any felonious criminal conduct by members of that gang, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by both.

B.     As used in this chapter, “pattern of criminal gang activity” means the commission, attempted commission, or solicitation of two or more of the following offenses, provided at least one of those offenses occurred after the effective date of this chapter and the last of those offenses occurred within three years after a prior offense, and the offenses are committed on separate occasions, or by two or more persons:

1.     Assault with a deadly weapon or by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury, as defined in Section 245 of the California Penal Code;

2.     Robbery, as defined in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 211) of Title 8 of Part 1 of the California Penal Code;

3.     Unlawful homicide or manslaughter, as defined in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 187) of Title 8 of Part 1 of the California Penal Code;

4.     The sale, possession for sale, transportation, manufacture, offer for sale, or offer to manufacture controlled substances as defined in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code;

5.     Shooting at an inhabited dwelling or occupied motor vehicle, as defined in Section 246 of the California Penal Code;

6.     Arson, as defined in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 450) of Title 13 of the California Penal Code;

7.     The intimidation of witnesses and victims, as defined in Section 136.1 of the California Penal Code.

C.     As used in this chapter, “criminal street gang” means any ongoing organization, association or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in subdivisions 1 through 7, inclusive, of subsection B of this section, which has a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity. (Ord. 864 § 1, 1990)

 

9.32.030 Buildings or places used by criminal street gang nuisance.
Every building or place, used by members of a criminal street gang for the purpose of the commission of the offenses listed in subsection B of Section 9.32.020 or any offense involving dangerous or deadly weapons, burglary, or rape, and every building or place, wherein or upon which that criminal conduct by gang members takes place, is a nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented. (Ord. 864 § 1, 1990)

 

9.32.040 Mutual aid activities—Labor organizations.
This chapter does not apply to employees engaged in concerted activities for their mutual aid protection, or the activities of labor organizations or their members or agents. (Ord. 864 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 9.34 RESPONSIBLE PROPERTY OWNER
9.34.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide administrative and civil remedies against property owners who permit, allow, or fail to prevent ongoing behaviors and activities to occur on their properties that compromise public health and safety. It is not the purpose of this chapter to subject property owners to any legal liability resulting from a tenant’s actions occurring away from the owner’s property. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:

A.    “Administrative expenses” shall include, but not be limited to:

1.     The costs associated with any hearings before a hearing officer;

2.     The city’s personnel costs, direct and indirect, incurred in enforcing this chapter and in preparing for, participating in, or conducting any hearings subject to this chapter, including but not limited to attorneys’ fees;

3.     The cost incurred by the city in documenting the safety violations, including, but not limited to, the actual expense and costs of the city responding to the safety violation(s); investigating and enforcing statutory crimes related to the safety violation, including, but not limited to, court appearances; conducting inspections; attending hearings; and preparing notices, administrative citations, and orders.

B.     “Chief of police” shall mean the chief of police or designee.

C.     “City” means the city of Manteca.

D.    “Drug related nuisance” means any activity related to the possession, sale, use, or manufacturing of an illegal drug or narcotic that creates an unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, or the safety and welfare of the residents of the property, the neighborhood, or the public. These activities include, but are not limited to, any activity commonly associated with illegal drug use and dealing, such as noise, steady foot and vehicle traffic day and night to a particular property, possession of weapons, drug loitering (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11532), possession of stolen property, identity theft, possession of property with serial numbers removed, evidence of forgery or fraud, or other drug related activities.

E.     “Enforcement officer” means any person authorized by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter to enforce violations of this chapter.

F.     “Gang related crime” means any crime motivated by gang membership in which the perpetrator, victim, or intended victim is a known member of a gang.

G.    “Hearing officer” shall mean any person appointed pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code to preside over hearings, including those hearings required by to this chapter.

H.    “Notice of violation” shall mean the notice provided to a property owner indicating that a safety violation has occurred on the property.

I.      “Owner” and “property owner” have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably and shall mean the owner or owners of record of the subject real property as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll of San Joaquin County or as otherwise actually known to the chief of police.

J.      “Person” means individual(s), corporations, associations, partnerships, limited liability companies, trustees, lessees, agents and assignees.

K.    “Real property” or “property” have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably and shall mean the lot or parcel of land for which the owner has legal ownership or exercises custody or control thereof.

L.     “Safety violation” shall mean any of the following activities or behaviors:

1.     Evidence of the illegal manufacture, cultivation, sale, use, or possession of controlled substances or other illegal drugs and substances, including paraphernalia, evidence by the arrest of one or more persons.

2.     Any drug related nuisance occurring within one year of an arrest on the premises for a safety violation defined in subsection (L)(1).

3.     Any act of prostitution evidenced by the arrest of one or more persons.

4.     Any gang related crime.

5.     The unlawful possession, discharging, or brandishing of a firearm or weapon by any person.

6.     Violent criminal acts, whether or not a criminal case is filed, including, but not limited to, rape, attempted rape, robbery, battery, homicide, shootings, kidnapping, or arson.

7.     Disturbances occurring at parties or gatherings at which alcohol or drugs are consumed and/or crimes have occurred.

8.     Allowing the occupancy load to exceed the permitted number within a public assembly building, as established by the California Building Code, when alcohol and/or drugs are being consumed or accessible to the gathering.

9.     The occurrence of any other criminal activity not specified above which threatens the life, health, safety, or welfare of residents of the property, the neighborhood, or the public.

M.    “Tenant” or “occupant” have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably and shall mean that person(s), visitor(s), or transient(s) utilizing, leasing, residing at, or occupying the real property in question regardless of whether a lease or contract exists between the parties; such occupancy may last for any limited period of time. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.030 Scope of application.
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all real property whether owner occupied or a rental property, whether residential, commercial, industrial, improved, or unimproved, throughout the city wherein any of the safety violations are found to exist.

B.     A criminal conviction is not required for establishing the occurrence of a safety violation pursuant to this chapter.

C.     The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and additional to any and all other legal remedies available whether set forth elsewhere in the Manteca Municipal Code, or any applicable state or federal laws, rules or regulations. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.040 Dual responsibility.
A.    Every person owning, possessing, or having charge or control of real property within the city is required to manage that property and control the environment thereon in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter. The owner of real property shall be liable for safety violations as set forth in detail herein, regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property.

B.     Every tenant, occupant, lessee, or holder of any possessory interest in real property shall:

1.     Comply with all federal, state, and local laws applicable to the property.

2.     Supervise or cause to be supervised anyone utilizing, residing at, or occupying the property, with or without consent of the owner, consistent with this chapter.

3.     Maintain the property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.050 Authority.
The chief of police shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police shall have the authority to designate employees as enforcement officers in conformance with this chapter to assist with enforcement responsibilities of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the issuance of administrative citations. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.060 Safety violations prohibited.
It is hereby declared a violation of this chapter for a property owner with actual or constructive knowledge, whether through the owner or owner’s agent, lessee, sublessor, sublessee, or occupant, to allow, permit or fail to prevent a safety violation to occur on the real property of the owner on a repeated basis or after receipt of a notice as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.070 Notice to property owners.
A.    To commence enforcement of this chapter, the chief of police shall notify the property owner of the occurrence of a safety violation on the owner’s property. The notice shall be served upon the property owner personally or by U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid, and if by such mail, it shall be sent to the last known address listed on the most recent tax assessor’s records. In the case of personal service, service shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. In the case of service by first class mail, service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit into the U.S. mail. Where service is by first class mail, a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted at the affected property when reasonably practicable for a period of not less than three calendar days prior to the first date that commencement of corrective action or abatement is to be undertaken. The failure to receive a notice sent via first class mail shall not affect the validity of any enforcement proceedings under this chapter.

B.     When the chief of police notifies an owner of rental property of a safety violation allegedly caused by a specific tenant or the tenants of a specific unit or property, the chief of police may concurrently give written notice thereof to the property manager, when one is known, and the specific tenant(s) of a unit or property.

C.     The notice of violation shall also contain the following information:

1.     The address where the safety violation is occurring or has occurred;

2.     A statement specifying the activities and behaviors which constitute the safety violation, including the names (when known) of the tenant, person or persons allegedly causing the safety violation, and may include reasonable actions which the chief of police directs the property owner to take to abate the violation;

3.     A statement informing the owner that if any safety violations reoccur after thirty calendar days of the date of notice, a letter will be sent to the property owner and one of the listed actions and/or fines listed in Section 9.34.080 will occur;

4.     A statement that the owner must, in responding to the notice and working with tenants, comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations relating to evictions and prohibitions against discrimination;

5.     The name and contact information for the chief of police or an enforcement officer that the owner may meet with in order to discuss the safety violation.

D.    After issuing a notice of violation to a property owner, the city shall not be responsible for providing additional notices pursuant to this section prior to the issuance of a citation for subsequent safety violations that occur on the same property that occur within the latter of: (1) three hundred sixty-five days of mailing or publication of the initial notice; or (2) that occur within three hundred sixty-five days following the hearing officer’s decision pursuant to Manteca Municipal Code Section 1.10.420. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.080 Safety violation enforcement and fines.
A.    Any violation of this chapter may result in any or all of the following actions and/or fines:

1.     A misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail and/or a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars;

2.     Institution of a civil action by the city attorney, or designee, as set forth in Chapter 1.10;

3.     Issuance of administrative citation(s) and/or an order to abate the safety violation(s) with a fine up to five hundred dollars, plus any administrative expenses incurred in the enforcement of this chapter.

B.     Each day a safety violation(s) occurs shall be deemed a new violation subject to additional citations, penalties, and fines.

C.     Violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the city attorney.

D.    All fines shall be the obligation of the owner, and unless an appeal is filed, such fines are due and payable within sixty days of issuance of the citation, pursuant to Section 1.10.240. Any fine or administrative expense not paid within the time limits set forth shall be collected pursuant to the procedures contained in Chapter 1.10. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.090 Civil penalties.
A.    In addition to the enforcement and fines described herein, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code against any owner who violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, the court may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party.

B.     The city may pursue any other legal remedy to enforce or collect any fines or amounts owed as set forth herein. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

 

9.34.100 Right to a hearing.
A.    The property owner may appeal citations issued pursuant to this chapter, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code.

B.     The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of the Manteca Municipal Code. (Ord. 1460 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 9.36 GRAFFITI CONTROL
9.36.010 Policy statement.
It is the policy of this city to prevent graffiti in the city and to provide a program for removal of graffiti and other inscribed material from walls, fences and structures located on public or private property. California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city to provide for the removal of graffiti. Section 38772 of the Government Code authorizes the city to make the expense of such removal a lien against the property of, and a personal obligation against, a minor creating or causing graffiti and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. California Penal Code Section 594.5 authorizes the city to regulate the sale of aerosol containers of paint. The city council finds that graffiti is often used as a method of communication by and between gangs engaged in criminal activities, and the presence of such gangs is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. The city council further finds that graffiti, as defined herein, is obnoxious and a public nuisance which serves as an invitation for repeated trespasses and vandalism and therefor must be abated as to avoid its detrimental impact on the city. (Ord. 1012 § 1, 1995; Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

A.    “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city, county, or city and county in identifying and apprehending the minor.

B.     “Graffiti or other inscribed material” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any real or personal property.

C.     “Minor” means a minor who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the California Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the Juvenile Court pursuant to Section 602 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 1012 § 2, 1995; Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.030 Graffiti prohibited.
It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to draw or place graffiti or other inscribed material on public or private property. (Ord. 1012 § 3, 1995; Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.040 Sale and possession of aerosol paint cans.
A.    No person under the age of eighteen years shall purchase or possess any aerosol container of paint or the liquid substance capable of defacing property unless that person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.

B.     No person shall possess any aerosol container of paint or other liquid substance capable of defacing property while in a public park, playground, swimming pool or recreational facility in the city except authorized employees or contractors of the city. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.050 Maintenance of graffiti prohibited.
It is unlawful and nuisance for an owner of land within the city to permit graffiti or other inscribed material to remain on land or any structure located thereon for more than ten days. (Ord. 1012 §4, 1995; Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.060 Removal of graffiti.
Whenever the police chief determines that graffiti is so located on public or private property, or any structures located thereon, so as to be capable of being viewed by a person using any public right-of-way, and the owner of the property consents to removal of the graffiti by the city, then the director of public works is authorized to order its abatement. Such removal shall not involve the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than where the graffiti is located. (Ord. 1012 §5, 1995; Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.070 Penalties.
Any person violating Sections 9.36.030 through 9.36.050 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1990)

 

9.36.080 Reward.
A.    The city council is authorized to offer a reward to any individual providing information to the city leading to the identification and/or apprehension of anyone placing or applying graffiti or other inscribed materials on or to any public or private property within the city. The city council may appropriate such moneys for this purpose by including such appropriations in its annual budget resolution or by adopting a resolution or resolutions from time to time as may be warranted in the discretion of the city council.

B.     Rewards may be offered to and paid to any person provided, however, that no peace officer, official, officer, employee, appointee or agent of the state of California or any county or city therein, or any political subdivision thereof, shall be eligible to receive any reward offered under this section.

C.     The maximum amount of any reward shall not exceed one thousand dollars per incident.

D.    The city manager and designee shall establish procedures for public notification of this reward program criteria for the offer and payment of rewards and procedures for making of offers to, submission of claims for, and the payment of rewards under this section. In the event of any dispute concerning the offer of, a claim for, or payment of any reward under this section, the determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

E.     The city shall not be obligated to offer or pay any reward under this section, but such offer and payment shall be at the sole discretion of the city.

F.     No offer of reward shall be made or payment made in the event that (1) the city council has not authorized by resolution the appropriation of funds as set forth in subsection A of this section; or (2) the funds appropriated by the city council in accordance with subsection A of this section have been expended.

G.    In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, the offender, whether or not convicted of any criminal violation, shall be liable to the city for any reward paid by the city which led to the offender’s identification or apprehension and if the offender is an unemancipated minor, the offender’s parent(s) or guardian shall be liable for the reward paid pursuant to this section. (Ord. 980 § 1, 1993)

 

9.36.090 Collection of expense of abatement.
A.    As soon as the amount of the expense of abatement is determined, the director of public works shall file a statement of said expense with the city clerk.

B.     Upon receipt of the statement of expense of abatement the city clerk shall cause to be served on the minor and on the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor a notice that unless said expenses are paid to the city clerk within ten days of the service of the notice the city will record a lien with the county recorder on identified parcels of land owned by the minor and identified parcels of land owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The notice shall be served in the manner required by Government Code Section 38773.2(b).

C.     The notice required in subsection B of this section shall be in substantially the following form:

 

NOTICE OF INTENT TO RECORD GRAFFITI NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN

 

TO: _____________________________

        (name of individual being served)

This Notice is being served pursuant to Section 9.36.090 B. of the Manteca Municipal Code and state law. Your failure to pay the sum indicated below to the city clerk of the City of Manteca within ten (10) days of the date of service of this Notice will result in the recordation of a Graffiti Nuisance Abatement Lien with the count recorder. This will place a lien upon the real property owned by you identified below.

The amount owed: __________________.

The real property to be liened is:

Street address:_____________ APN:_____

Street address:_____________ APN:_____

Dated:_______________

City Clerk: __________________________

 

(Ord. 1012 §6, 1995)

Chapter 9.40 CRUISING AND LOITERING
9.40.010 Cruising prohibited.
No person shall engage in the activity known as cruising, as defined in this chapter, on the public streets, alleys or highways of the city in any area which has been posted as a no-cruising zone. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:

“Congested traffic” means traffic on any public street, alley or highway which is delayed to the point that:

1.     Motor vehicles cannot move through one-hundred-yard approach corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light within two complete green-light cycles where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles; or

2.     Motor vehicles cannot move through a one-hundred-yard approach corridor to an intersection controlled by a traffic light, stop sign or yield sign within a five-minute period of time where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles; or

3.     Motor vehicles cannot readily move forward on portions of public streets, alleys or highways between intersections because traffic speed is slowed to less than five miles per hour, and the delay in movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles. The determination that a street, alley or highway is congested shall be made by the ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area.

“Cruising” means the repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a traffic-control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic-control point.

“Green-light cycle” means the period commencing upon the switching of a traffic light from a red light to a green light through to the return of a red light.

“Traffic-control point” means a location along a public street, alley or highway utilized by a peace officer on duty within the affected area as an observation point in order to monitor traffic conditions for potential violations of this chapter. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

 

9.40.030 Warning against cruising—Written notice.
A peace officer may issue a written notice to any person operating or occupying any motor vehicle passing a traffic-control point stating that any subsequent passage past that traffic-control point within the next succeeding four hours will be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

 

9.40.040 Loitering in a no-cruise zone prohibited when.
A.    It is unlawful to loiter on any property in the proximity of any posted no-cruising zone between the hours of six p.m. of one day and six a.m. the next day. As used in this section, the term “loiter” means to delay or linger without a lawful purpose for being on the property. “Property in the proximity of any posted no-cruising zone,” as used in this section, means any property which is both visible from and located within three hundred feet of any portion of a street, alley or highway which is posted as a no-cruising zone pursuant to this chapter.

B.     The refusal by any person to leave the premises after having been cited by any peace officer for a violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.

C.     Any minor who is cited for violation of this section shall be considered in violation of a traffic offense for purposes of California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 256. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

 

9.40.050 Violation of this chapter.
Any person who, after having received a written notice as described in Section 9.40.030, subsequently drives past or is a passenger in a vehicle passing the same traffic-control point within the next succeeding four hours shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

 

9.40.060 Posting of signs.
This chapter may be enforced in any area which has been posted as a no-cruising zone. No cruising signs shall be posted at the beginning and end of any public street, alley or highway or portion thereof which is a no-cruising zone. The signs shall reference California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) and this chapter. The city manager is authorized to designate no-cruising zones in which it is found that conditions of congested traffic exist. (Ord. 958 § 1, 1992; Ord. 957 § 2(part), 1992)

Chapter 9.44 PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
9.44.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:

“Public place” shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.

“Solicit, ask or beg” shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.020 Aggressive solicitation prohibited.
A.    No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place.

B.     “Aggressive manner” shall mean any of the following:

1.     Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (a) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or (b) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;

2.     Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person’s consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging;

3.     Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;

4.     Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging;

5.     Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words of conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or

6.     Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation.

(Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.030 All solicitation prohibited at specified locations.
A.    Banks and ATMs. No person shall solicit, ask or beg within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within fifteen feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers’ use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas.

1.     Definitions. For purposes of this section:

a.     “Automated teller machine” shall mean any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit deposit or convenience account.

b.     “Automated teller machine facility” shall mean the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

c.     “Bank” means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

d.     “Check-cashing business” means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000.

e.     “Credit union” means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.

f.      “Savings and loan association” means any federal savings and loan association and any “insured institution” as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act.

2.     Exemptions. The provisions of Section 9.44.030(A)(1) shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located.

B.     Motor Vehicles and Parking Lots.

1.     Motor Vehicles. No person shall solicit, ask or beg from an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located with one hundred feet of any intersection that is controlled by an official traffic signal of the type set forth in Vehicle Code Section 21450.

No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking or begging while such vehicle is in a public place.

2.     Parking Lots. No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any public parking lot or structure any time after dark. “After dark” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.

3.     Exemptions. Section 9.44.030(A)(2) shall not apply to any of the following:

a.     To solicitations related to business which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;

b.     To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or

c.     To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle.

C.     Public Transportation Vehicles and Stops.

1.     “Public transportation vehicle” shall mean any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.

2.     Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any public transportation vehicle, or within ten feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop, is guilty of a violation of this section if:

a.     He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the agent of the owner, driver or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; the agent of the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; a member of a security force employed by the public transportation facility; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code, Section 830); or

b.     Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in Section 9.44.030(C)(2)(a).

c.     Section 9.44.030(C)(2) is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in Section 9.44.030(C)(2)(a).

D.    Restaurants. Any person who solicits, asks, or begs in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this section if:

1.     He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Penal Code, Section 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this subsection; or

2.     Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in Section 9.44.030(D)(1).

3.     Section 9.44.030(D)(1) is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in Section 9.44.030(D)(1).

(Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.040 Exemption.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit an individual or organization representing a legitimate nonprofit organization from conducting solicitation in a public place in support of that organization or its causes after having first obtained a permit from the police department. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.050 Public nonprofit solicitation permits application.
A.    Every person desiring a public nonprofit solicitation permit shall file an application with the police chief or designee, containing the following:

1.     The name, address and phone number of the applicant;

2.     The name and tax identification number of the organization represented or supported by the solicitation;

3.     The date and times for which the permit is requested;

4.     The dates of any previous permits issued to the applicant within the previous six months;

5.     Additional information the police chief, or designee, may reasonably require; and

6.     The signature of the applicant under penalty of perjury.

B.     There shall be no fee charged for issuance of a public nonprofit solicitation permit.

C.     Individuals and organizations meeting the requirements of this section may apply for a public nonprofit solicitation permit once every six months.

D.    The police chief may impose conditions or restrictions on the exercise of the permit necessary to ensure the safety of the applicant and the public.

E.     The police chief shall issue a permit if:

1.     The application was completed in accordance with this chapter;

2.     He or she determines that the health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood will not be adversely affected thereby; and

3.     The application is signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.

(Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.060 Penalty.
A violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

 

9.44.070 Non-exclusivity.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 9.48 NUDITY ON PUBLIC LANDS
9.48.010 Purpose and intent.
The presence of persons who are nude and exposed to public view in or on public rights-of-way, public park or any other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public park or other public land, is offensive to members of the general public unwillingly exposed to such persons. The provisions of this section are enacted for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of all persons in the city of Manteca. (Ord. 1274 § 1, 2004)

 

9.48.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

“Nude” means devoid of an opaque covering which covers the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person.

“Public right-of-way” means any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, square and any other similar public way. (Ord. 1274 § 1, 2004)

 

9.48.030 Nudity prohibited.
No person over the age of ten years shall be nude and exposed to public view in or on any public right-of-way, public park or other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public park or other public land. (Ord. 1274 § 1, 2004)

 

9.48.040 Exemptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall or other similar establishment located on public land. As used in this section, theater, concert hall or similar establishment means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other enclosed place not open to public view from any public right-of-way but having a stage upon which movable scenery is located and theatrical, vaudeville or similar performances are given and seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage and whose primary function is to give such performances. (Ord. 1274 § 1, 2004)

 

9.48.050 Violation.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1274 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 9.52 RESIDENTIAL NOISE
9.52.010 Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of Manteca to prohibit and control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise and vibration in the city in order to preserve tranquility and protect the use and enjoyment of residential and commercial property. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.020 Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated as follows:

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Manteca or the city manager’s designee.

“Commercial purpose” means and includes the operation of a business for profit involving the sale or advertising of goods or services.

“Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action on public or private property.

“Emergency machinery, vehicle or alarm” means any machinery, vehicle or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in response to an emergency, including but not limited to work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

“Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, including but not limited to work by private or public utilities when restoring utility services.

“Motor vehicles” means and includes any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under this code, all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said code and mini-bikes, motorized scooters and go-carts.

“Noncommercial purpose” means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose.

“Noncommercial purpose” means and includes personal, philanthropic, political and charitable purposes.

“Person” means a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

“Police chief” means the police chief of the city of Manteca or designee.

“Sound amplifying equipment” means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound amplifying equipment as used in this chapter shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.

“Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.

“Weekday” means any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.030 Prohibited noises—General standard.
No person shall make, or cause to suffer, or permit to be made upon any public property, public right-of-way or private property, any unnecessary and unreasonable noises, sounds or vibrations which are physically annoying to reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time or place as to cause or contribute to the unnecessary and unreasonable discomfort of any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate or which interfere with the peace and comfort of residents or their guests, or the operators or customers in places of business in the vicinity, or which may detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.040 Specific prohibited noises.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following acts and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared and deemed to be in violation of this chapter:

A.    Radios, Stereos, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. of any radio, musical instrument, stereo, television set, or instrument or device similar to those heretofore specifically mentioned for the production or reproduction of sound in volume sufficiently loud as to be plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the sound is emanating.

B.     Placement of Stereo Speakers. The amplification of music or any other sound on private property, through speakers located either (1) outdoors, or (2) in one or more windows or doorways, when such speakers are directed towards and such music is plainly audible on an immediately adjacent public right-of-way.

C.     Band or Orchestral Rehearsals. The conducting of or carrying on, or allowing the conducting or carrying on of band or orchestral concerts or rehearsals or practices between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. sufficiently loud as to be plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the sound is emanating.

D.    Engines, Motors and Mechanical Devices Near Residential District. The sustained, continuous or repeated operation or use between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. of any motor or engine or the repair, modification, reconstruction, testing or operation of any automobile, motorcycle, machine, contrivance, or mechanical device or other contrivance or facility unless such motor, engine, automobile, motorcycle, machine or mechanical device is enclosed within a sound insulated structure so as to prevent noise and sound from being plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the sound is emanating.

E.     Motor Vehicles. Racing the engine of any motor vehicle or needlessly bringing a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop.

F.     Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. in such a manner as to cause noise disturbance, except for solid waste collection.

G.    Nonemergency Signaling Devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m., and in no event for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period outside those hours.

H.    Emergency Signaling Devices.

1.     The intentional sounding, or permitting the sounding, outdoors, of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar emergency signaling device, provided, however that testing of an emergency signaling device is permitted between the hours of ten a.m. and eight p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty seconds. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in each calendar month.

2.     Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm unless such alarm is terminated within fifteen minutes of activation.

3.     Sounding or permitting the sounding of any motor vehicle alarm unless such alarm is terminated within five minutes of activation.

4.     Sounding or permitting the sounding of any motor vehicle alarm more than three times of any duration in any twenty-four hour period.

I.      Leaf Blowers. The use or operation or allowing the use or operation of any portable machine powered with a combustion, gasoline or electric powered engine used to blow leaves, dirt and other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns and other surfaces between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. and is sufficiently loud as to be plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the sound is emanating.

J.      Commercial Establishments Adjacent to Residential Property. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, continuous, repeated or sustained noise from the premises of any commercial establishment which is adjacent to one or more residential dwelling units, including any outdoor area part of or under the control of the establishment, between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. that is plainly audible from the residential dwelling unit’s property line.

K.    Construction Equipment. The use or operation of any construction equipment between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. and is sufficiently loud as to be plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the sound is emanating. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.050 Use of sound amplification equipment on public property.
A.    Application Required. It is unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement and government agencies, to install, use or operate within the city a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purpose of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property without first filing an application and obtaining a permit therefore as set forth in the following paragraphs.

B.     Filing Application. Every user of sound amplifying equipment shall file an application with the police chief at least ten days prior to each date or each consecutive number of days on which the sound amplifying equipment is intended to be used. The application shall contain the following information:

1.     The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and responsible party for the property where the sound amplifying equipment shall be used;

2.     The address where the sound amplifying equipment will be used;

3.     The date(s) and day(s) on which the sound amplifying equipment will be used;

4.     The times when the sound amplifying equipment will be used;

5.     The type of activity and the estimated number of persons who will attend;

6.     A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used;

7.     Whether the sound amplifying equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes;

8.     Other information deemed necessary by the police chief or designee to determine the levels, location and duration of the use of sound amplifying equipment.

C.     Approval of Permit. The police chief shall approve the application unless he or she finds that:

1.     The conditions of motor vehicle or pedestrian movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or

2.     The issuance of the permit would be otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; or

3.     The issuance of the permit will substantially interfere with the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the community; or

4.     The applicant would violate the provisions of this code or of any other law.

D.    Conditions of Approval. The police chief may impose such conditions on the operation to be conducted under the permit as he or she may deem necessary or proper to ensure that the city’s noise regulations are followed and that the operation of the sound equipment will not invade the privacy of others. There shall be no conditions placed on any permittee as to the type of message or the content of the communication proposed to be amplified.

E.     Appeals. Any person aggrieved by disapproval of an application may appeal to the city council within ten calendar days from the date of notification of decision.

F.     Permit Fee. Prior to the issuance of the permit, a permit fee in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council per day, or any portion thereof, shall be paid to the city. No fee shall be paid by any nonprofit organization. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.060 Loud parties or gatherings.
The following provisions apply to party or gathering of two or more people on private property generating any noise that is plainly audible at the property line of the property from which the noise is emanating, or is determined by a law enforcement officer at the scene to constitute a violation of the California Penal Code or the Manteca Municipal Code, or is otherwise a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, the disturbance, unruly behavior or destruction of property generated by the party or gathering, or excessive traffic caused by the party or gathering.

A.    The law enforcement officer at the scene shall take such actions and give such direction as is necessary to abate the violation or condition, and shall advise the responsible person orally and in writing that if additional law enforcement personnel or emergency service providers are called upon to respond on behalf of the city to abate the condition, the responsible person and the owner or occupant of the property shall be held liable for the cost to the city of providing such services. Such direction and advice shall be given to the person responsible for the party or gathering or to the owner or occupant of the property involved. If the condition is not voluntarily abated and if additional law enforcement personnel or emergency service providers are called upon to respond on behalf of the city in order to disperse the party or gathering, quell any disturbance, direct traffic, cite illegally parked vehicles or otherwise respond, then the cost to the city of such additional services shall be reimbursed to the city as provided in subsection B of this section.

B.     The person or persons responsible for a party or gathering described in subsection A of this section, or the owner or occupant of the property on which the party or gathering is held, or, if any such person is a minor, the parents or legal guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the following costs incurred by the city:

1.     The actual cost to the city of law enforcement services and emergency services, excluding the initial response provided by a law enforcement officer, in order to abate any of the conditions described in subsection A of this section;

2.     Damage to public property resulting from such law enforcement or emergency response; and

3.     Injuries to any law enforcement or emergency service personnel involved in such law enforcement or emergency response.

C.     The city manager or his or her designee shall calculate all such costs. The person or persons specified above in subsection B of this section shall be billed by the city manager or designee for the total cost, and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen days of the billing date. If the amount due is not paid, the city may collect the debt, as well as any fees and costs incurred in its collection, pursuant to all applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.070 Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Emergency Exemption. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. For the purposes of this section, “emergency” means a condition that constitutes an immediate threat to public safety, health or welfare or to property.

B.     Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, such as police, fire and ambulance sirens and train horns.

C.     Outdoor Activities. Activities conducted on public playgrounds, fully licensed and approved child day care facilities within residential areas as permitted by law, and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events.

D.    Outdoor Gatherings, Public Dances, Shows and Sporting Events. Provided the events are conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the city manager.

E.     Operation of city vehicles, controls, and alarms.

F.     Public health and safety activities, including, but not limited to: all transportation, flood control, and utility company maintenance and construction operation at any time on public rights-of-way, public property and those situations that may occur on private property deemed necessary to serve the best interest of the public and to protect the public’s health and well-being, including debris and limb removal, removal of damaged poles and vehicles, removal of downed wires, repair of traffic signals, repair of water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines, and sewers, restoration of electrical service, street sweeping, unplugging sewers, vacuuming catch basins, municipal well borehole drilling, municipal well casing installation, etc. The regular testing of motorized equipment and pumps shall not be exempt.

G.    Emergency generators when operated during power outages to restore electrical service due to a situation beyond the control of the owner/operator of the facility or residential home/development. (Ord. O2019-09 § 1; Ord. 1596 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.080 Violation—Penalty.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.090 Enforcement.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city manager from seeking to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice or informational materials. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

 

9.52.100 Additional remedies.
A.    Motor Vehicle Alarms—Deactivation. In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, the police department may undertake such procedures as are reasonably necessary to deactivate a motor vehicle alarm generating noise in violation of this chapter. If the police department is unable to deactivate the alarm, the law enforcement officer may cause the motor vehicle to be removed according to the procedure set forth in Section 22651.5 of the California Vehicle Code.

B.     Motor Vehicle—Removal. Any costs associated with the removal or storage of a motor vehicle pursuant to subsection A of this section and any costs incurred by the city in connection therewith shall be paid by the registered owner of the motor vehicle.

C.     Operation or Maintenance of Other Machinery. The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, equipment, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this chapter, and persistent animal noise in violation of this chapter shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1374 § 1, 2007)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.24 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.28 STOPS
Chapter 10.32 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 10.36 TRAINS
Chapter 10.40 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Chapter 10.44 PARKING
Chapter 10.46 PARKING OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES
Chapter 10.48 LOADING ZONES
Chapter 10.52 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 10.56 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINALS—ROUTE DESIGNATION
Chapter 10.60 OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLES
Chapter 10.64 ADVERTISING VEHICLES
Chapter 10.68 BICYCLES

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Definitions generally—Motor Vehicle Code definitions.
A.    The words and phrases in this chapter, when used in this title, shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.

B.     Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

10.04.020 Bicycle.
“Bicycle” means a light vehicle without a motor having two wheels, handlebars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. (Prior code § 12-22 (part))

 

10.04.030 Central traffic district.
“Central traffic district” means all streets and portions of streets listed as follows:

A.    The east one-half of Manteca Avenue;

B.     Both sides of Sycamore Avenue from Center Street to Yosemite Avenue;

C.     Both sides of Maple Avenue from Center Street to Tidewater Railroad Tracks;

D.    Both sides of Main Street from Alameda Street to Tidewater Railroad Tracks;

E.     Both sides of Grant Avenue from Center Street to Yosemite Avenue;

F.     Both sides of Moffat Boulevard from Main Street to Lincoln Avenue;

G.    Both sides of Center Street from Sycamore Avenue to Grant Avenue;

H.    Both sides of Yosemite Avenue from Rose Lane to Fremont Avenue. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.040 Coach.
“Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.050 Council.
“Council” means the council of the city of Manteca. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.060 Curb.
“Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked. “Curb” as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.070 Divisional island.
“Divisional island” means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.080 Holidays.
A.    Within the meaning of this title, “holidays” are:

1.     The first day of January;

2.     The twelfth day of February;

3.     The twenty-second day of February;

4.     The thirtieth day of May;

5.     The fourth day of July;

6.     The first Monday in September;

7.     The ninth day of September;

8.     The twelfth day of October;

9.     The eleventh day of November;

10.   The twenty-fifth day of December; and

11.   Thanksgiving Day.

B.     If the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of September, the twelfth day of October, the eleventh day of November or the twenty-fifth day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.090 Loading zone.
“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.100 Official time standards.
Whenever certain hours are named in this title they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.110 Park.
“Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.120 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.130 Passenger loading zone.
“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.140 Pedestrian.
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.150 Police officer.
“Police officer” means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.160 Stop.
“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.170 Stop or stand.
“Stop or stand,” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (Prior code § 12-22(part))

 

10.04.180 Vehicle Code.
“Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 12-22 (part))

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 City traffic engineer.
The office of city traffic engineer is established. The superintendent of public works shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his or her other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. (Prior code § 12-23)

 

10.08.020 Traffic direction—Police and fire department officials.
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the police chief are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 12-24)

 

10.08.030 Traffic direction—Unauthorized persons.
No person other than a officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the police chief or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this chapter any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Prior code § 12-25)

 

10.08.040 Traffic direction—Obedience.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the police chief or by law. (Prior code § 12-26)

 

10.08.050 Obedience—Generally.
Unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, it shall be an infraction punishable as prescribed by Vehicle Code Section 42001 for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this title. (Ord. 775 § 8, 1987; prior code § 12-27)

 

10.08.060 Obedience—Persons on bicycles or animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code § 12-28)

 

10.08.070 Obedience—Public officials.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 12-30)

 

10.08.080 Obstructing or interfering with authorized officials—Prohibited.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Prior code § 12-29)

 

10.08.090 Official vehicles exempted.
A.    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others.

C.     The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States Mail. (Prior code § 12-31)

 

10.08.100 Right-of-way for fire department vehicles.
All motorized equipment of the fire department shall have the right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. (Prior code §9-41)

 

10.08.110 Damage to public utility or facility—Report required.
A.    The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.

B.     Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

C.     The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Prior code § 12-32)

 

10.08.120 Removal of vehicles authorized when.
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:

A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;

B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

C.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 836 § 1, 1989; prior code § 12-33)

 

10.08.130 Crowd control authority—Parking—Pedestrians.
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer’s order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this title. (Prior code § 12-34)

 

10.08.140 State Highways Department of Public Works—Approval.
Any provision of this title which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of a state agency is required by statute shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval by the state agency. (Ord. 775 § 10, 1987; prior code § 12-111)

 

10.08.150 State Highways Department of Public Works—Authorization for action.
Whenever this title delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which pursuant to state law prior approval of a state agency is required, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to the state highway without the prior approval in writing of the responsible state agency. (Ord. 775 § 11, 1987; prior code § 12-112)

 

10.08.160 Violation—Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, any violation of this title shall constitute an infraction punishable as prescribed in Vehicle Code Section 42001. (Ord. 775 § 9, 1987; prior code § 12-109)

Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS
10.12.010 Establishment pursuant to Vehicle Code.
The city council of the city, pursuant to Sections 22357 and 22358 of the Vehicle Code hereby establishes upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys, the prima facie speed limits on portions of certain streets within the city as in Section 10.12.020. (Ord. O2017-6 § 1; Ord. 1521 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1048 § 1, 1996; Ord. 937 § 1, 1992; Ord. 894 § 1, 1990; Ord. 823 § 1, 1989; prior code § 12-1)

 

10.12.020 Designated.
It shall be prima facie unlawful to operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of that established as follows:

 

Location

Recommended Speed

Airport Way, Roth to Daisywood

55

Airport Way, Daisywood to Union Pacific Railroad

45

Airport Way, Union Pacific Railroad to Crom

45

Airport Way, Crom to Wawona

40

Airport Way, Wawona to south city limit

40

Alameda Street, Powers to Union

25

Atherton Drive, Woodward to Van Ryn

45

Atherton Drive, Van Ryn to Main

45

Atherton Drive, Main to Union

45

Atherton Drive, Sparrowhawk to Heartsong

45

Austin Road, 1,500 ft. north of Yosemite to 1,350 ft. south of Louise

45

Austin Road, Yosemite to 2,000 ft. north of Graves

40

Austin Road, Union Pacific Railroad to south city limit

55

Button Avenue, Yosemite to Cottage

40

Center Street, Fremont to Main

30

Center Street, Main to Walnut

30

Center Street, Walnut to Union

30

Center Street, Union to Trevino

25

Commerce Avenue, Yosemite to Phoenix

30

Cottage Avenue, Louise to State Route 99

40

Cottage Avenue, State Route 99 to Yosemite

30

Crestwood Avenue, Lathrop to Northgate

30

Crom Street, Union to Airport

35

Daisywood Drive, Riverberry to Airport

30

Daniels Street, Union to Airport

30

Daniels Street, Airport to West End

35

Edison Street, Powers to Main

25

Elm Avenue, Louise to Center

25

Fishback Road, Yosemite to Wawona

35

Fishback Road, Wawona to Daniels

30

Fremont Avenue, Alameda to Yosemite

25

Garden Gate Drive, Louise to Edison

25

Hoyt Lane, King Richard to Northgate

25

Industrial Park Drive, Moffat to Main

35

Lancaster Drive, Springtime to Main

25

Lathrop Road, State Route 99 to Union

45

Lathrop Road, Union Road to west city limit

45

Locust Avenue, Yosemite to Mission Ridge

25

London Avenue, Lathrop to Northgate

25

Louise Avenue, east city limit to Cottage

40

Louise Avenue, Cottage to Garden Gate

40

Louise Avenue, Garden Gate to Main

40

Louise Avenue, Main to Union

40

Louise Avenue, Union to west city limit

40

Main Street, Lathrop to Alameda

40

Main Street, Alameda to Wetmore

30

Main Street, Wetmore to Woodward

35

Main Street, Woodward to south city limit

45

McKinley Avenue, State Route 120 to Woodward

50

Mission Ridge Drive, Main to Union

30

Moffat Blvd., east city limit to Powers

45

Moffat Blvd., Powers to Main

40

Nehemiah Drive, Vasconcellos to Button

25

North Street, Lovell to Cottage

25

North Street, Cottage to Main

30

North Street, Main to Elm

30

Northgate Drive, Main to Union

35

Northgate Drive, Union to Airport

25

Northwoods Avenue, Lovell to Yosemite

25

Pestana Avenue, North End to Louise

25

Pestana Avenue, Louise to Yosemite

30

Phoenix Avenue, Commerce to Spreckels

30

Powers Avenue, North to Moffat

25

Southland Road, Mitchell to west city limit

45

South Woodward Avenue, Woodward to Williamson

35

Spreckels Avenue, Yosemite to Moffat

40

Thomas Street, Winters to Fishback

30

Trailwood Avenue, Northgate to Louise

25

Union Road, north city limit to Lathrop

45

Union Road, Lathrop to Louise

40

Union Road, Louise to Center

40

Union Road, Center to Wawona

35

Union Road, Wawona to south city limit

40

Van Ryn Avenue, Industrial Park to Woodward

35

Walnut/Hacienda Avenue, Louise to Yosemite

25

Wawona Street, Main to Union

25

Wawona Street, Union to Airport

25

Wetmore Avenue, Main to Mellon

30

Winters Drive, Yosemite to Wawona

35

Winters Drive, Wawona to Daniels

25

Woodward Avenue, Moffat to Main

45

Woodward Avenue, Main to Union

45

Woodward Avenue, Union to Airport

30

Woodward Avenue, Airport to McKinley

45

Woodward Avenue, McKinley to South Woodward

50

Yosemite Avenue, State Route 99 to Powers

35

Yosemite Avenue, Powers to Main

25

Yosemite Avenue, Main to 1,000 ft. west of Walnut

25

Yosemite Avenue, 1,000 ft. west of Walnut to Winters

35

Yosemite Avenue, Winters to west city limit

45

(Ord. O2017-6 § 1; Ord. 1521 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1345 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1130 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1108 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1048 § 2, 1996; Ord. 937 § 2, 1992; Ord. 894 § 2, 1990; Ord. 855 § 2, 1990; Ord. 829 § 2, 1989; Ord. 823 § 2, 1989; Ord. 795 § 2, 1988; Ord. 781 §§ 2, 3, 1987; Ord. 772 § 2, 1987; Ord. 756 § 2, 1987; prior code § 12-2)

 

10.12.030 Sign erection authorized.
The director of public works shall erect signs giving notice of the prima facie speed limits as set forth in Section 10.12.020 of this chapter, upon said city streets. (Ord. 1345 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1048 § 3, 1996; Ord. 937 § 3, 1992; Ord. 894 § 3, 1990; Ord. 855 § 3, 1990; Ord. 823 § 3, 1989; prior code § 12-3)

 

10.12.040 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable in the manner prescribed by Section 42001 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1345 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1048 § 4, 1996; Ord. 937 § 4, 1992; Ord. 894 § 4, 1990; Ord. 855 § 4, 1990; Ord. 823 § 4, 1989; prior code § 12-4)

Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.16.010 Turning marker placement—Intersections—Multiple lanes.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.

B.     When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (Prior code § 12-44)

 

10.16.020 Restricted turn signs.
The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Prior code § 12-45)

 

10.16.030 No-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Prior code § 12-46)

 

10.16.040 Signal control intersections—Right turns.
A.    No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section.

B.     The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Prior code § 12-47)

Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.20.010 Authority to install.
A.    The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

C.     The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Prior code § 12-35)

 

10.20.020 Traffic control signs required.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Prior code § 12-36)

 

10.20.030 Obedience to traffic control devices.
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Prior code § 12-37)

 

10.20.040 Traffic signal installation.
A.    The city traffic engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersection and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

B.     The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Departments of Public Works.

C.     Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any intersections. (Prior code § 12-38)

 

10.20.050 Lane marking.
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Prior code § 12-39)

 

10.20.060 Roadway markings.
The traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 12-40)

 

10.20.070 Traffic control device—Removal and relocation.
The city traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. (Prior code § 12-41)

 

10.20.080 Traffic control device—Hours of operation.
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Prior code § 12-42)

 

10.20.090 Curb painting—Unauthorized.
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Prior code § 12-43)

 

10.20.100 One-way streets and alleys.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Prior code § 12-48)

Chapter 10.24 PEDESTRIANS
10.24.010 Crosswalks—Marking.
A.    The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside the district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

C.     The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Prior code § 12-61)

 

10.24.020 Crosswalks—Use required.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Prior code § 12-62)

 

10.24.030 Obedience to traffic signs.
Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place. (Prior code § 12-63)

 

10.24.040 Crossing at right angles required.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. (Prior code § 12-64)

 

10.24.050 Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
No person shall attach himself with his or her hands or catch on, or hold on to with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Prior code § 12-53)

Chapter 10.28 STOPS
10.28.010 Stop sign erection authority.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and to those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 12-49)

 

10.28.020 Stops at through street or stop sign.
A.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.

B.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the council.

C.     The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 12-50)

 

10.28.030 Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicles immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Prior code § 12-51)

Chapter 10.32 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
10.32.010 Coasters, roller skates and similar devices.
It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device or go upon any roadway or upon the sidewalk in the business district. (Prior code § 12-106)

 

10.32.015 Skateboards and roller skates on public ways.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and punishable as an infraction for any person upon roller skates or riding on or by means of a skateboard, coaster or similar device to go upon any public parking lot or public roadway within the city, or upon any public side-walks located along any of the following streets in the city:

 

 

Alameda Street

Maple Avenue to the alley 240 feet east

 

 

Main Street

 

Center Street

Union Road to Walnut Avenue

 

 

Poplar Avenue to Lincoln Avenue

 

Cherry Lane

Center Street to Camphor Street

 

Cottage Avenue

Alameda Street to Louise Avenue

 

Edison Street

340 feet west of Main Street to Grant Avenue

 

El Portal Avenue

The alley 400 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to Yosemite Avenue

 

Fremont Avenue

The alley 180 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 180 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

 

Garfield Avenue

130 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 170 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

 

Grant Avenue

Moffat Boulevard to 200 feet north of Center Street

 

Jason Street

Main Street to Grant Avenue

 

Jessie Avenue

The alley 170 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to Yosemite Avenue

 

Lincoln Avenue

The alley 180 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 170 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

Louise Avenue

Union Road to Agate Avenue Poplar Avenue to Garden Gate Drive Souza Boulevard to Cottage Avenue

Main Street

South Street to Lancaster Drive

Manteca Avenue

Yosemite Avenue to Center Street

Maple Avenue

South Terminus at the railroad tracks to the alley 200 feet north of Center Street

Moffat Boulevard

Main Street to Grant Avenue

North Street

The alley 170 feet west of Main Street to the alley 210 feet east of Main Street

Northwoods Avenue

Yosemite Avenue to McNary Circle

Pierce Avenue

Yosemite Avenue to Poplar Avenue

Poplar Avenue

Pierce Avenue to Center Street

Powers Avenue

230 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to Elmo Court

Sherman Avenue

The alley 180 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 170 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

Sutter Street

Main Street to the alley 230 feet east of Main Street

Sycamore Avenue

Yosemite Avenue to the alley 200 feet north of Center Street

Union Road

The alley 380 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to Center Street

 

Crom Street/Cherry Lane to 530 feet north of Kelly Drive

Walnut Avenue

The alley 170 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 170 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

Washington Avenue

The alley 180 feet south of Yosemite Avenue to the alley 180 feet north of Yosemite Avenue

Wetmore Street

Stockton Street to 250 feet east of Main Street

Willow Avenue

Oak Street to Yosemite Avenue

Yosemite Avenue

2,640 feet west of Union Road to 320 feet west of Austin Road

 

B.     It shall also be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding on or by means of a skateboard or similar device to go upon any private parking lot, or shopping center parking lot or shopping center sidewalk provided signs are erected at each entrance to such area prohibiting such acts. Said signs shall be in plain view and be not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height.

C.     The council may, by resolution, grant approval for the use of roadways and sidewalks for organized skating events of community-wide interest and may impose such condition and restrictions as it deems necessary to protect the public interest and promote the general welfare. (Ord. 803 § 1, 1988)

 

10.32.020 Horse-drawn vehicles.
No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central traffic district between the hours of four-thirty p.m. and six p.m. of any day. (Prior code § 12-101)

 

10.32.030 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Prior code § 12-55)

 

10.32.040 New pavement and markings.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone-marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Prior code § 12-56)

 

10.32.050 Limited access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Prior code § 12-57)

 

10.32.060 Restrictions on use of freeways.
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Prior code § 12-58)

 

10.32.070 Obedience to barriers and signs.
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. (Prior code § 12-59)

 

10.32.080 Obstructing intersection prohibited.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk or accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Prior code § 12-60)

Chapter 10.36 TRAINS
10.36.010 Railway gates.
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (Prior code § 12-104)

 

10.36.020 Trains not be block crossings.
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to rail-way trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Prior code § 12-105)

Chapter 10.40 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
10.40.010 Driving through funeral procession prohibited.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Prior code § 12-52)

Chapter 10.44 PARKING
10.44.010 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

C.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all streets, roads, alleys and alley vehicle parking lots owned, leased or maintained by the city. (Ord. 929 § 1, 1991; prior code § 12-65)

 

10.44.020 Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Prior code § 12-66)

 

10.44.030 No stopping zones and no parking areas.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.

B.     When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 12-67)

 

10.44.040 No parking areas.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer or traffic sign or signal:

A.    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

B.     On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

C.     In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

D.    In any area established by resolution of the council as a no-parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

E.     Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;

F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

H.    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

I.      At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

J.      Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. (Prior code § 12-68)

 

10.44.050 Storage of vehicles on street prohibited.
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. (Prior code § 12-69)

 

10.44.060 Vehicle parked for advertising prohibited.
A.    No person, including a commercial dealership, shall park or place upon Yosemite Avenue or Main Street, or upon any sidewalk or public property adjacent thereto, any vehicle, trailer, or vessel displayed any sign, picture, transparency, advertisement or mechanical device for the purpose of advertising or bringing notice to any person the fact that such vehicle, trailer, vessel, or any other good, is to be sold, rented, or leased, or calling the attention of the general public to any business or to commodities being sold, rented, raffled, or given away by other than a charitable or nonprofit organization.

B.     Any person violating subsection A of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 798 § 2, 1988; prior code § 12-70)

 

10.44.070 Vehicle repair in street prohibited.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Prior code § 12-71)

 

10.44.080 Car washing for profit prohibited on street.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. (Prior code § 12-72)

 

10.44.090 Restrictions—Near schools.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 12-73)

 

10.44.100 Restrictions—Narrow streets.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this chapter, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Prior code § 12-74)

 

10.44.110 Parking on grades.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residence district) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Prior code § 12-75)

 

10.44.120 Peddlers and vendors—Prohibited.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which foods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

B.     No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

C.     No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

D.    Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Prior code § 12-76)

 

10.44.130 Emergency parking signs.
A.    Whenever the city traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 12-77)

 

10.44.140 Disabled commercial vehicles—Warning signs.
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of, and one hundred feet to the rear of such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A Type 1 turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. (Prior code § 12-78)

 

10.44.150 Twenty-four minute parking.
A.    Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays.

B.     When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. (Prior code § 12-79)

 

10.44.160 Forty-minute parking.
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Prior code § 12-80)

 

10.44.170 One-hour parking.
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and ix p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Prior code § 12-81)

 

10.44.180 Two-hour parking.
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice therefor, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. (Prior code § 12-82)

 

10.44.185 Restricted parking in excess of two hours.
When authorized signs or parking meters have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Ord. 929 § 1, 1991)

 

10.44.190 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadways unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C.     The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

D.    The requirements of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Prior code § 12-83)

 

10.44.200 Diagonal parking.
A.    On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except:

1.     At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space;

2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb.

B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.44.190 shall be complied with. (Prior code § 12-84)

 

10.44.210 Parking space markings.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

B.     When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Prior code § 12-85)

 

10.44.220 No stopping zones.
A.    The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited.

B.     During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. (Prior code § 12-86)

 

10.44.230 Prohibited hours.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of four a.m. and five a.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or material subject to the limitations provided by Section 10.48.020. (Prior code § 12-87)

 

10.44.240 Parking on city property.
A.    Whenever the city administrator determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted the city administrator shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 12-88)

 

10.44.250 Vehicle on private property.
No person shall operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without express or implied permission of the owner thereof, or the person entitled to the possession thereof, for the time being, or the authorized agent of either except that this section shall not apply to public or private parking lots. (Prior code § 12-89)

 

10.44.260 Parking prohibited in front of fire stations.
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer within fifteen feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station. This section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or operated by a fire department and clearly marked as a fire department vehicle. (Prior code §9-45)

 

10.44.265 On-street parking by fire hydrants in a R-1 zone.
In a R-1 zone no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle on any city street within five feet of either side of a fire hydrant. The measurement shall be from the midpoint of the fire hydrant and along the curb or edge of the street. (Ord. 1094 § 1, 1998)

 

10.44.270 Curb markings.
The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter to place, and when required in this chapter shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:

A.    Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

B.     Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes.

C.     White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

1.     When such zone is in front of a hotel, church, hospital, or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.

2.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.

D.    When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 12-91)

 

10.44.280 Physically handicapped—Street parking.
The director of public works may recommend to the city council and the city council shall indicate by resolution which street parking spaces shall be designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 9105 or 22511.5. Whenever the city council so designates a parking space, it shall be marked by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition to the blue paint, the space may also be marked by signs or other suitable means. (Prior code § 12-10)

 

10.44.290 Physically handicapped—Off-street parking.
A.    Designation of Spaces. Any person owning or operating an off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in such facility for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 or 22511.5. Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. Designation of such spaces in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the city shall take place after authorization by city council resolution.

B.     “Handicapped” includes those persons who are temporarily incapacitated, and who display in a vehicle window the approved placard as issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

C.     Removal of Vehicles. The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility, after notifying the Manteca police department, and the city with regard to any off-street parking facility it owns or operates may cause the removal from a stall or space designated for physically handicapped persons in such facility to the nearest public garage, of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing license plates or placards specified in this section if there is posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, such stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following:

 

UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES NOT DISPLAYING DISTINGUISHING LICENSE PLATES OR PLACARDS ISSUED TO PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS, WILL BE TOWED AWAY AT OWNER’S EXPENSE. TOWED VEHICLES MAY BE RECLAIMED AT __________________________, OR BY TELEPHONING __________________________________.

(Telephone number of Manteca Police Department)

 

(Prior code § 12-11)

 

10.44.300 Violation—Penalty.
It is unlawful and punishable as an infraction for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard issued to disabled (and temporarily disabled) persons pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 to stop, stand, park or leave standing any such vehicle in any parking space properly designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 12-12)

Chapter 10.46 PARKING OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES
10.46.010 Findings.
The city council finds as follows:

A.    Parking recreational vehicles and trailers on city streets interferes with the normal flow of vehicle traffic, parking affects the safety of drivers using such streets, and creates visual obstacles for motorists and pedestrians.

B.     Current parking regulations are inadequate to address the problem of parking oversized vehicles and trailers on residential streets.

C.     Persons owning oversized vehicles and trailers should have the opportunity to have limited use of residential streets for short periods of time.

D.    It is in the public interest to adopt parking regulations that will help alleviate safety and parking concerns regarding oversized vehicles or trailers while also allowing oversized vehicle or trailer owners to use city streets for a limited time and basis. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.020 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers and California Vehicle Code Sections 22507, 22507.5, and any successor statute or regulation, in order to regulate parking of oversized vehicles or trailers within the city’s jurisdiction. The regulations enacted by this chapter are intended to protect public health and safety by, among other things, ensuring that vehicles parked or stopped in and along city streets, or other public rights-of-way, do not hinder, obstruct, or otherwise endanger drivers engaged in the ordinary flow of traffic. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.030 Definitions.
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:

“Out-of-town visitor” means any person who does not reside in the city and who is temporarily visiting a resident of the city.

“Oversized vehicle” means any vehicle, including marine vessels, which exceeds at least the following criteria:

1.     Twenty feet in length; or

2.     Seven feet in height; or

3.     Seven feet in width.

The listed criteria is exclusive of such projecting lights or devices as are expressly allowed pursuant to the California Vehicle Code as it now exists or hereafter may be amended. Oversized vehicle does not include pickup trucks, which are less than twenty-five feet in length and eighty-two inches in height.

“Residential areas” means those residential areas of the city as defined by local zoning ordinance.

“Trailer” means a trailer, semi-trailer, camp trailer, unmounted camper, or trailer coach as defined in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.040 Application of regulations.
A.    The prohibitions in this chapter will apply at all times, or at those times specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B.     The time limitations on standing or parking in this chapter will not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.050 Appeals.
Every person who is issued a notice of parking violation pursuant to this chapter may request review of that notice under California Vehicle Code Section 40215 et seq. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.060 Oversized vehicles—Parking prohibited—Exceptions.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any oversized vehicle or trailer on any public street or alley, Monday through Fridays, exclusive, federally excepted holidays excepted.

B.     Exceptions. This section does not apply:

1.     To any person loading, unloading, or cleaning an oversized vehicle or trailer as long as said oversized vehicle or trailer is parked on the public street for no more than twenty-four hours;

2.     To any person making temporary or emergency repairs to an oversized vehicle or trailer not to exceed twenty-four consecutive hours;

3.     To any person picking up or delivering goods, wares, and merchandise, including, without limitation, building materials to be used in “the actual repair,” alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure located in the residential zones for which a building permit has previously been obtained;

4.     To any person holding a valid oversized vehicle parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

5.     To any person holding a valid oversized vehicle handicap permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

6.     To any public emergency vehicle; or

7.     To any person parking their vehicle or trailer on a street within a space already designated for timed parking. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.070 Trailers parking prohibited—Exceptions.
A.    Daytime Parking Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any trailer that is attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer in a lawful manner on any street in a residential area Monday through Friday, inclusive, holidays excepted.

B.     Unhitched Trailers Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no trailer shall be left unattached to any vehicle on any city street or alley for any period of time exceeding four hours.

C.     The provisions of this section do not apply to:

1.     Trailers owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while actually in use during the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility.

2.     Trailers actually in use for the pick-up or delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise or for delivery of materials for repairing, altering, remodeling, or constructing any building.

3.     Persons loading or unloading a trailer when making temporary or emergency repairs to a trailer. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1467 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.080 Oversized vehicle parking permits.
A.    Purpose. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle parking permits is to give owners of oversized vehicles an opportunity, for a limited time, to park the oversized vehicles on a street/highway adjacent to their residence for the purpose of loading or unloading such oversized vehicles, and to allow an out-of-town visitor to park on a street/highway adjacent to the residence which the out-of-town visitor is visiting for a limited time period, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle handicap permits is to allow a handicapped person, whether or not such person has a handicapped license plate, to park a designated oversized vehicle on a street/highway in a residential area.

B.     Persons holding a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter may park an oversized vehicle on a street in a residential area.

C.     The police chief or designee, is authorized to issue oversized vehicle parking permits and oversized vehicle handicap permits pursuant to this chapter.

D.    There will be no fee charged for issuance of an oversized vehicle parking permit. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.090 Oversized vehicle parking permits application.
Every person desiring an oversized vehicle parking or handicap permit will file an application with the police chief or designee, containing the following:

A.    The name, address and phone number of the registered owner and applicant of designated oversized vehicle;

B.     The license number, make and model of designated oversized vehicle;

C.     The dates for which the permit is requested;

D.    The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle permits issued to the applicant within the immediately preceding ninety-day period;

E.     Additional information the police chief, or designee, may reasonably require; and

F.     The signature of the applicant under penalty of perjury. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.100 Issuance.
A.    The police chief will issue a permit if:

1.     The application was completed in accordance with this chapter;

2.     He or she determines that the health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood will not be adversely affected thereby; and

3.     The application is signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.

B.     Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter will conform to the general permit conditions of this chapter. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.110 Duration.
A.    Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit. An oversized vehicle parking permit will be valid for a period not to exceed five consecutive calendar days. Upon expiration of an oversized vehicle parking permit issued under this section, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits; if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth herein. In no event will oversized vehicle parking permits be issued to an applicant for a total period in excess of ten days within any consecutive ninety-day period.

B.     Oversized Vehicle Handicap Permits. Oversized vehicle handicap permits will be valid for a period of two years, and may be renewed, if the applicant continues to meet the qualifications therefor. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.120 Permit denial.
A permit must be denied if the police chief finds that:

A.    The applicant is not a bona fide city resident;

B.     The proposed location is not on a street adjacent to the applicant’s residence;

C.     The out-of-town visitor is not the applicant’s guest;

D.    Information submitted by the applicant is materially false; or

E.     If the application is for an oversized vehicle handicap permit and:

1.     The applicant is not entitled to receive a handicap placard or license plate under the California Vehicle Code, or

2.     The oversized vehicle is not the applicant’s primary mode of transportation;

F.     Any violation of the above may result in the revocation of the existing and/or future permits. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

 

10.46.130 Form.
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter will be in a form prescribed by the police chief and will include the license plate number of the oversized vehicle to which it relates, and the date of issuance and the day of expiration. (Ord. O2019-04 § 1; Ord. 1231 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 10.48 LOADING ZONES
10.48.010 Authority.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1.     At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;

2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C.     Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in the zones. (Prior code § 12-90)

 

10.48.020 Permission to load or unload—Granting.
A.    Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of material shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C.     Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

D.    Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this chapter. (Prior code § 12-92)

 

10.48.030 Yellow loading zone—Use.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.48.020. (Prior code § 12-93)

 

10.48.040 Passenger loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.48.020. (Prior code § 12-94)

 

10.48.050 Alley use.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Prior code § 12-95)

 

10.48.060 Coach zones.
A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and loading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.

B.     Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Prior code § 12-96)

 

10.48.070 Special passenger loading zones.
A.    No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in any special passenger loading zone when approved permanent or portable signs are in place, as provided in this chapter, for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes.

B.     Special passenger loading zones, as used in this chapter, shall be those areas adjacent to the curb, not more than sixty feet in length, located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of any church, theater, club, or place of business or public gathering. The signs shall be provided and paid for by the church, theater, club, or place of business or public gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the city traffic engineer. (Prior code § 12-97)

 

10.48.080 Funeral zones.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place at any time during or within forty minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or funeral service, unless the operator of the vehicle is directed by or has received permission from the director or other person in charge of such funeral or funeral service to park such vehicle in such place, provided, that such director or person in charge shall have placed and maintained prior to and during the time limit specified in this section two approved portable signs, one at each extremity of such place, upon the sidewalk or pavement area and within two feet of the curb. (Prior code § 12-98)

 

10.48.090 Taxicab stands.
A.    The city council shall establish taxicab stands and determine the locations thereof.

B.     The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be painted white and marked “taxicab stand” in red lettering, or shall be designated by signs of a type and size approved by the city traffic engineer.

C.     No operator of any vehicle other than a taxicab or automobile for hire shall park the vehicle in such taxicab stand. (Prior code § 12-99)

Chapter 10.52 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
10.52.010 Vehicle weight limitation.
A.    Except as set forth in Section 10.52.050 of this chapter “vehicle” or “commercial vehicle” as used in this chapter shall mean a commercial motor vehicle as that term is defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code.

B.     No vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of eight thousand pounds shall drive on or use any street in the city of Manteca except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

C.     The maximum gross weight limits shall not apply to the entire length of Moffat Boulevard and Lathrop Road, South Main Street between Moffat Boulevard and the southerly city limit. Grant Street between Moffat Boulevard and the public scales, nor to any vehicle exempted by Section 35701, 35703 and 35704 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 2002; prior code § 12-13)

 

10.52.020 Excess load—Permit required.
A.    No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the city traffic engineer.

B.     The city traffic engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his or her judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the city that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the city traffic engineer in his or her discretion may require. (Prior code § 12-107)

 

10.52.030 Vehicles over three tons—Truck route use.
A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and described any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is unlawful and not permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to erect appropriate “Not a Truck Route” signs prohibiting the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons.

B.     When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of four tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

1.     Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or

2.     Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of four tons. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 2002; prior code § 12-102)

 

10.52.040 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.
A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and described any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicles, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.

B.     Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 2002; prior code § 12-103)

 

10.52.050 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
A.    No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

B.     For the purpose of this section a “commercial vehicle” means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Prior code § 12-54)

Chapter 10.56 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINALS—ROUTE DESIGNATION
10.56.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and welfare by establishing procedures to coordinate, review, and designate terminal access routes for interstate trucks operating on the federally designated highway system. (Prior code § 12-14)

 

10.56.020 Definitions.
A.    The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth:

1.     “Caltrans” means the state of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency.

2.     “City” means the city of Manteca.

3.     “Director” means the public works director for the city of Manteca or authorized representative.

4.     “Interstate truck” means a truck tractor and semi-trailer; or truck tractor, semi-trailer, and trailer with unlimited length as regulated by the California Vehicle Code.

5.     “Terminal” means any facility where:

a.     Freight is consolidated to be shipped;

b.     Full load consignments may be loaded or unloaded; or

c.     Interstate trucks are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.

B.     Any word or phrase used in this chapter not otherwise defined shall have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code, or if not defined therein, the meanings attributed to it in ordinary usage. (Prior code § 12-15)

 

10.56.030 Application for designation.
A.    Any interested person desiring terminal and route designation for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application on a form provided by the city public works department. The application shall contain such information as may be required by the director; and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee.

B.     Upon receipt of the application and application fee, the director shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether the proposed terminal facility meets the definition set forth in Section 10.56.020. Upon making a determination approving the terminal designation, the director shall then determine whether the requested route(s) designation and alternate route(s) are capable of such designation. Such capability determination shall be based on considerations of traffic safety, adequacy of street surfaces and geometrics (including turning radius and lane widths), approval or disapproval of Caltrans, an estimate of the cost of establishing the route, and other considerations the director may from time to time deem to be appropriate.

C.     If the application is for a route designation passing through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with the application process of both the city and other jurisdiction.

D.    If the director determines that the proposed designations are acceptable, he or she shall recommend approval to the city council. The city council shall then approve or deny the application.

E.     If the director determines that the proposed designations are unacceptable, he or she shall notify the applicant that the application is denied, noting the reason therefor. The applicant may appeal the denial to the city council in accordance with Section 10.56.060. (Prior code § 12-16)

 

10.56.040 Application—Fees and costs.
A.    The nonrefundable application fee to be paid by the applicant in accordance with subsection A of Section 10.56.030 shall be established by the city council by resolution, and shall be in an amount sufficient to pay the cost of the review of the terminal designation and the review of the route(s) and al-ternate route(s).

B.     Upon the approval of the terminal designation and route by the director, the applicant shall deposit with the city sufficient funds as estimated by the director to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point in the city on route to the terminal. Upon completion of the installation of the signs, the actual cost shall be computed and any difference between the actual and the estimated cost shall be billed or refunded to the applicant, whichever the case may be. No terminal or route may be used until such signs as may be required are in place. (Prior code § 12-17)

 

10.56.050 Terminal and route revocation.
The director may revoke any approved terminal and/or route designation if, in his or her judgment, such terminal and/or route becomes a safety hazard. A safety hazard includes, without limitation, the inability of interstate trucks to safely negotiate the route or the interstate trucks creating unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. Such revocation may be appealed by the applicant/terminal owner in accordance with Section 10.56.060. (Prior code § 12-18)

 

10.56.060 Appeal.
A.    If the director denies terminal designation, route feasibility or revokes a previously approved terminal or route, the applicant/terminal owner, within ten days following the date of receipt of the decision of the director, may appeal the decision to the city council in writing. An appeal shall be made on a form pre-scribed by the city public works department and shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director or wherein this decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Within ten days of the filing of an appeal, the director shall transmit to the city clerk the terminal application, the sketches of the revoked route and all other data filed therewith, the report of the director with his or her findings and his or her decision on the application.

B.     The city clerk shall make copies of the data provided by the director available to the appellant for inspection and may give notice to any other interested party who requested notice in writing of the time when the appeal will be considered by the city council.

C.     If Caltrans denies or revokes terminal access from federally designated highways, no appeal may be made to the city council, but must be made to Caltrans as may be permitted by Caltrans. (Prior code § 12-19)

Chapter 10.60 OFF-ROAD MOTOR VEHICLES
10.60.010 Purpose.
It is necessary to regulate the operation and use of motorcycles, motor bikes, motorscooters and similar vehicles on public and private property within the city limits in order to prevent property damage, fire hazards and noise pollution. Such regulations are necessary to protect the public welfare, public peace and safety. (Prior code § 12-5)

 

10.60.020 Licensing.
All such vehicles shall be licensed in accordance with current state regulations. (Prior code § 12-6)

 

10.60.030 Restriction to public roads.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor bike, motorscooter or similar vehicle on any property or any area within the city limits other than on public roads and other areas specifically designated by federal, state or governmental agencies for the use of off-road vehicles. (Prior code § 12-7)

 

10.60.040 Exceptions.
The provisions of Section 10.60-.030 shall not apply to:

A.    Owners, tenants or lawful occupants of real property and members of their immediate family while operating such vehicles upon their own property;

B.     Invitees of any of the persons designated in subsection A of this section, provided they:

1.     Have in their possession written permission to operate such vehicles upon the property,

2.     Are in the immediate company of a person entitled to use such property;

C.     Use of such vehicles in the course of a bona fide lawful occupation. (Prior code § 12-8)

 

10.60.050 Required equipment.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor bike, motorscooter, snowmobile or similar vehicle on any real property within the city limits, other than public roads, unless such vehicle is at all times equipped with a spark arrester of a type approved by the United States Forest Service and/or city fire department and an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise, and no muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass, or similar device, nor shall any person modify the exhaust system of such motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle; nor shall any such motor vehicle be operated in a manner resulting in the escape of excessive smoke, flame, gas, oil or fuel residue; nor shall such motor vehicle be so operated unless the exhaust system, including the manifold, muffler and exhaust pipe, shall be so constructed as to be capable of being maintained and shall be maintained in a reasonably gastight condition; nor shall such motor vehicle be driven or moved if the filling spout for any tank is closed or partly closed with a plug of wood, rags or other combustible material. (Prior code § 12-9)

Chapter 10.64 ADVERTISING VEHICLES
10.64.010 Permit required.
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the police chief. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Prior code § 12-100)

Chapter 10.68 BICYCLES
10.68.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Bicycle” means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches.

B.     “Police chief” means the police chief of the city.

C.     “Police department” means the police department of the city. (Prior code §§4-1, 11-58)

 

10.68.020 License—Required.
No resident shall operate any bicycle, first sold as a new bicycle in California on or after September 20, 1974, on any street, road, high-way, or other public property within the jurisdiction of the city, unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with this chapter. (Prior code § 11-59)

 

10.68.030 License—Application—Issuance.
The city police department is authorized to issue bicycle licenses and/or designate bona fide bicycle repair shops to do the same, as provided in this chapter, upon written application, which licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensees to operate such bicycles for which the licenses have been issued upon all streets, roads, alleys, highways, or other public property within the jurisdiction of the city. (Prior code § 11-60)

 

10.68.040 License—Inspection prior to issuance.
The police department or bicycle repair shop shall inspect each bicycle prior to the issuance of a license as provided in this chapter, and shall require adequate brakes and tires as prerequisites for the issuance of the license. (Prior code § 11-61)

 

10.68.050 License—Fee—Transfer.
The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be two dollars and shall be paid at the time of issuance of the license plate, pursuant to the provisions in this chapter; such license shall be transferred when the ownership of the bicycle repair shop is transferred, and a fee of seventy-five cents shall be paid for the registration of such transfer. If the purchaser or transferee of a bicycle which has been previously licensed under this chapter fails to register such transfer within ten days of the date of the purchase or transfer, he or she shall then be required to take out a new license and pay a license fee of two dollars therefor. (Prior code § 11-62)

 

10.68.060 License—Revenue from fees.
All revenues from license fees shall be presented monthly to the police department by the bicycle shops, along with a listing of license numbers issued, serial number, make and model of bicycle licensed, name and address of licensee. All license revenues shall be used for the support of the bicycle licensing resolution codified in this chapter. In addition, revenue fees collected shall be used to improve bicycle safety programs and establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes, within the city limits. (Prior code § 11-63)

 

10.68.070 License—Indicia.
The police department shall provide bicycle license indicia. The bicycle license indicia shall be the same as issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles to the city and shall be adhesive, durable, flexible, and of a size to permit it to be affixed to the bicycle frame. Each indicia shall near a unique license number and shall be permanently assigned to a bicycle. (Prior code § 11-64)

 

10.68.080 License—Renewal.
Each bicycle license shall be renewed every three years. Renewal of a bicycle license shall be indicated by a supplementary adhesive device affixed parallel to and above the bicycle license indicia with expiration date shown. (Ord. 775 §6, 1987; prior code § 11-65)

 

10.68.090 Records of registration.
The police department shall maintain the records of each bicycle registered. Such records shall include but not be limited to the license number, the serial number of the bicycle, the make, the type and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Such records shall be maintained by the police department during the period of validity of the license or upon notification that the bicycle no longer is to be operated. (Prior code § 11-66)

 

10.68.100 Sale—Information required by retailer.
Each bicycle retailer shall supply to each purchaser a record of the following information:

A.    Name of retailer;

B.     Address of retailer;

C.     Year and make of bicycle; and

D.    Serial number of bicycle. (Prior code § 11-67)

 

10.68.110 Sale—Requirements.
A.    Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he or she shall within ten days notify the police department of such disposition.

B.     Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires pos-session of a bicycle shall, within ten days of taking possession, apply for transfer of license to his or her name.

C.     Whenever the owner of a bicycle license pursuant to this chapter changes his or her address, he or she shall within ten days notify the police department of the old and new address.

D.    The police department shall have the power to revoke any license issued under this chapter for violation of any provision of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-68)

 

10.68.120 Sale—Secondhand bicycle dealers.
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles within the city are required to make a daily report to the police department, giving name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the license plate found thereon, if any. (Prior code §4-12)

 

10.68.130 Sale—Dealer’s report.
Every person engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a monthly report to the police department of all sales by such person of new or secondhand bicycles during the preceding month, giving a list of all sales made by such dealer, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom a bicycle is sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and the frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate attached there-to, if any. (Prior code §4-13)

 

10.68.140 Nonbusiness vendor—Report to police.
It shall be the duty of every person, except persons in the business of buying or selling bicycles, who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycles, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department the registration card or receipt issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within ten days following the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration within ten days following the date of the transfer or sale. (Prior code §4-14)

 

10.68.150 Serial or model number removal prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer’s name-plate on any bicycle, or the serial or model number of any bicycle frame. It is also unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal, or registration card or receipt, during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration card or receipt is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial numbers can be found or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Prior code §4-10)

 

10.68.160 Prohibited on sidewalks.
A.    No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.

B.     The police chief is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same.

C.     No person twelve or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district.

D.    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Prior code §4-22)

 

10.68.170 Parking restrictions.
No person shall park any bicycle against any windows or parking signs or in the main traveled portion of the sidewalk, nor in such manner to constitute a hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property. If there are no bicycle racks or other facilities used to park bicycles in the vicinity, bicycles may be parked on the sidewalk in an upright position parallel to the curb in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Prior code §4-24)

 

10.68.180 Violation—Penalty.
A.    Except as provided in subsection B of this section, every person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of Sections 10.68.120 through 10.68.170 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable as prescribed by Vehicle Code Section 42001.

B.     Every person, firm or corporation violating Sections 1 through 12 of the resolution of the city council of the city of Manteca, No. R 5895, passed and adopted by the city council concurrently with the ordinance codified in this section, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five dollars.

C.     Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Sections 10.68.020 through 10.68.110 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed ten dollars. (Ord. 775 §§ 2,7,1987; prior code §§4-25, 11-69)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 STREET ENCROACHMENT AND EXCAVATION
Chapter 12.08 TREES AND SHRUBS
Chapter 12.12 PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITY USE
Chapter 12.16 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Chapter 12.20 CAMPING

Chapter 12.04 STREET ENCROACHMENT AND EXCAVATION
12.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

A.    “Applicant” means any person applying for a permit to perform work or construct facilities in a city street right-of-way.

B.     “Application” means a written application for permit pursuant to the terms and provisions of the city code.

C.     “Director” means the director of public works of the city acting directly or through properly authorized agents acting within the scope of the particular duties delegated to them.

D.    “Encroachment” means and includes any facility, pole, pole line fence, driveway, sign or any structure or object of any kind which is placed in, under or over any portion of a city street, alley or parking lot. Additionally, encroachment means the entering upon a street for maintenance or repair work or existing facilities.

E.     “Improvement” means the construction and installation of any work within a city street right-of-way.

F.     “Permit” means a written encroachment permit issued by the director, pursuant to the provisions of this code.

G.    “Street” means and includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way or property whether or not such entire area is used for street purposes. Street, as used in this chapter, also refers to city-owned alleys and parking lots.

H.    “Traveled way” means the paved section of the road extending from four feet outside the outer traffic lane to four feet outside the opposite traffic lane. (Prior code § 17-1)

 

12.04.020 Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or cause to construct or install any improvement or encroachment in a city street without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works. (Prior code § 17-2)

 

12.04.030 Permit—Application.
In order to secure a permit for the construction and installation of any improvement or encroachment an application must first be filed accompanied by a plan for such work with the director. (Prior code § 17-3)

 

12.04.040 Permit—Issuance.
The director may issue written permits authorizing the permittee to do any of the following:

A.    Make an opening or excavation in a street for any purpose;

B.     Place, change, renew or maintain an encroachment;

C.     Place or display in or over a street any kind of advertising sign or device. Any such sign placed or displayed contrary to the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and it may immediately be removed. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the posting of any notice in a manner required by law or any court;

D.    Plant, remove, cut down, injure or destroy any tree. (Prior code § 17-4)

 

12.04.050 Permit—Requirements.
Any permit issued shall provide that the permittee will pay the entire expense of replacing the street in as good a condition as before and shall provide such other conditions as to the location and manner in which the work is done as the director finds necessary for the protection of the street and public. (Prior code § 17-6)

 

12.04.060 Encroachment—Relocation—Removal.
In the event future improvement of the streets necessitates relocation of such encroachment the permittee will relocate same at their sole expense. All permits other than those issued to a public agency or public utility having lawful authority to occupy the streets are revocable on five days’ notice and the encroachment shall be removed or relocated as specified by the director at the expense of the permittee. (Prior code § 17-7)

 

12.04.070 Encroachment—Unauthorized—Removal.
A.    The director may immediately remove or by notice may require the removal of any of the following encroachments:

1.     An encroachment which prevents the use of a city street;

2.     An encroachment which consists of refuse;

3.     Stockpiled construction materials;

4.     An encroachment which is a traffic hazard;

5.     An encroachment which is an advertising sign.

B.     The party or parties responsible for any of the unauthorized encroachments in subsection A of this section shall be responsible for any costs incurred for the removal of the encroachment, cost of collection and any other damages incurred by the city. (Prior code § 17-8.5)

 

12.04.080 Emergency excavation.
Permittees may excavate openings in streets to make repairs in cases needing immediate action. In such cases the director shall be promptly notified of such action and permittees shall at their own expense immediately replace such street in as good a condition as before such excavation. All the work performed shall comply with the provisions of this code with the exception that a written permit will not be required prior to beginning work. (Prior code § 17-8)

 

12.04.090 Blanket permits.
The director may issue a blanket permit renewable annually for the installation of service connections and for ordinary maintenance. (Prior code § 17-8.1)

 

12.04.100 Persons authorized to do work.
Only licensed contractors or employees or public agencies or utilities will be allowed to perform work within city streets. Property owners performing the work themselves may be allowed to work fronting their property outside the traveled way. (Prior code § 17-8.2)

 

12.04.110 Traffic control—Requirements.
A.    Traffic control shall be provided by permittee and shall conform to the standards established in the current issue of “Manual of Traffic Controls Warning Signs, Lights and Devices for Use in Performance of Work Upon Highways” published by the State of California Business and Transportation agency and/or as required by the director. Work shall be performed in such manner that at least one lane of traffic will be open at all times unless a detour plan has been submitted and approved as part of the permit issuance. Adequate flagmen shall be required at all times.

B.     In the event that the traffic control is not provided in conformance with the provisions of this code or is endangering the public, the director or any officer of the Manteca police department shall have the authority to stop the work until appropriate traffic controls are provided. (Prior code § 17-8.3)

 

12.04.120 Traffic control—Failure to provide—Permit revocation.
Repeated failure to provide proper traffic controls as required or to comply with the provisions of the code shall be justification for the director to rescind an existing encroachment permit and to refuse to issue future permits. (Prior code § 17-8.4)

 

12.04.130 Damaging street.
It is unlawful for any person to cause damage to any city street in any form including water seepage and overflow and such person causing damage shall make repairs within a reasonable time or the director shall make repairs and recover the cost from such person. (Prior code § 17-8.6)

 

12.04.140 Conformance with city standards.
All work within city streets shall be in conformance with the city standard plans and specifications shall be to the lines and grades established or approved by the city. (Prior code § 17-8.7)

 

12.04.150 Inspection of work.
All work shall be subject to inspection by the director. (Prior code § 17-8.8)

 

12.04.160 Construction materials on street—Permit.
A.    It is unlawful to store building construction materials or debris within the street without a permit.

B.     It shall be the building contractor’s, as shown on the building permit, responsibility to comply with this section. It shall also be the building contractor’s responsibility to keep the street fronting and adjacent to the building site clear from debris and dirt. The city shall have the authority to remove building material from street and responsible party shall pay all costs. (Prior code § 17-8.9)

 

12.04.170 Open trenches—Prohibited.
Trenching and excavation shall not be open overnight. They shall either be backfilled to subgrade and surfaced to finish grade with either permanent or temporary paving materials or shall be covered with a steel plate capable of supporting traffic loads at the end of every day’s work unless otherwise permitted in writing by the director. Temporary paving shall be maintained by the permittee until permanent paving is placed. Permanent paving shall be placed within ten days of backfilling. (Prior code § 17-8.10)

 

12.04.180 New subdivision streets—Applicability.
All requirements of this code shall be applicable to new subdivision streets prior to acceptance by the city council, from the time that public traffic is allowed to utilize the streets. (Prior code § 17-8.11)

 

12.04.190 Bond required.
A.    The director may require of any applicant a satisfactory bond payable to the city in such amount as deemed sufficient by the director.

B.     The director shall require a bond in an amount not less than twenty thousand dollars from an applicant who has previously not complied with the provisions of this code or the conditions of the previous permit. (Prior code § 178.12)

 

12.04.200 Insurance required.
Before issuance of a permit, a certificate of insurance or an approved plan of self-insurance shall be submitted by the permittee or the contractor performing the work providing the following coverages: workers’ compensation, comprehensive automobile and general public liability insurance with an insurer acceptable to the city in an amount of at least one million dollars per occurrence combined single limit. The city shall be named as an additional insured and the insurance shall carry a cross liability clause and a provision that the insurance applies as primary, not excess, to any insurance carried by the city. (Prior code § 17-8.13)

 

12.04.210 Fees.
Permit and inspection fees shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council. Consideration of any resolution establishing or revising fees shall be at a duly advertised public hearing. (Prior code § 17-8.14)

 

12.04.220 Revocable encroachment permit—Grant—Conditions—Acceptance.
The council may by resolution grant permits revocable at its will for minor or temporary purposes or privileges on public property subject to such terms and conditions as it deems necessary for the public interest. The use of the property by the permittee shall constitute acceptance and agreement to be bound by the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

 

12.04.230 Community development director or designee—Authority to accept applications.
Applications for revocable permits shall be filed with the community development department and shall be accompanied by a map or plat indicating the area for which the permit is sought. If any work is to be undertaken in the area subject to the permit, the application shall also be accompanied by a detailed plan or plans of such work.

The community development director or designee shall refer such application to the city council together with a recommendation concerning the approval, conditional approval or denial of such permit. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

 

12.04.240 Community development director or designee—Authority to issue revocable permits.
The community development director may review applications for and approve or conditionally approve revocable permits for the following uses:

A.    Behind existing curbs and gutters:

1.     Paving,

2.     Landscaping,

3.     Construction of landscape planters,

4.     Other minor uses;

B.     Groundwater monitoring wells;

C.     Privately owned utilities within public streets and alleys;

D.    Sidewalk cafés. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

 

12.04.250 Revocable encroachment permits—Terms and conditions.
A.    All revocable encroachment permits shall be allowed only as expressed within a written application and approved by the community development director, designee or city council. The city may revoke or terminate permits issued under this chapter if: (1) the city determines to use the public property for a public purpose; (2) the city determines that the encroachment conflicts with the public’s current or prospective use of the public property; (3) the city determines that the encroachment constitutes a public nuisance; (4) the encroachment is declared unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction; or (5) the permittee is in default under the encroachment agreement.

B.     Upon the revocation or termination of a permit, it shall be the community development director or designee’s responsibility to require the permittee, at its sole expense and within thirty days after revocation or termination, to remove the revocable encroachment and restore the public property to its pre-encroachment condition, all to the community development director or designee’s satisfaction.

C.     The permittee shall agree to indemnify the city with an indemnification agreement satisfactory to the city attorney.

D.    The city’s risk manager shall establish and may modify the minimum public liability insurance requirements for revocable encroachment permits. The policy of insurance shall be maintained by the permittee at its sole expense at all times during the term of the permit.

E.     A revocable encroachment agreement shall be recorded on the permittee’s property and be binding on the permittee’s transferees and successor owners. The permittee shall notify successor owners of the encroachment’s existence and the encroachment agreement’s terms prior to the sale or transfer of its property. Successor owners shall submit written consent to the encroachment agreement’s terms prior to their acquisition of the property.

F.     Once a revocable encroachment permit is issued, no changes may be made to the permit without the community development director or designee’s written authorization; provided, however, that the city council must approve any changes that would result in a revocable encroachment becoming a permanent encroachment.

G.    The permittee shall exercise reasonable care to maintain properly any encroachment placed in the street, road, highway, or other areas, and to exercise reasonable care in inspecting for and immediately repairing and making good any injury to any portion of the street, road, highway, or other areas which occurs as a result of the encroachment in the street, road, highway, or other areas, or as a result of the work done under a revocable encroachment permit, including any and all injury to the street, road, highway, or other areas which would not have occurred had such work not been done or such encroachment not been placed there. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

 

12.04.260 Authority and approval criteria for revocable encroachments.
A.    The community development director or designee is authorized to approve, issue, revoke and terminate permits for revocable encroachments in accordance with this chapter.

B.     The community development director or designee may adopt administrative guidelines, rules and regulations addressing the location, construction, form, size, safety, maintenance, repair and other manner of conduct of revocable encroachments, and may include such provisions and additional conditions in a permit that are not inconsistent with this chapter.

C.     No revocable encroachment permit shall be approved unless:

1.     The granting of the permit will not unreasonably interfere with or disrupt use of the public property;

2.     The public property has the capacity to accommodate the proposed encroachment and any other existing or foreseeable public or private facilities;

3.     The granting of the permit will not be detrimental to the public interest, safety, health or welfare or have the potential to injure the property interests of others, whether public or private; and

4.     The applicant has demonstrated the permittee’s ability to install, maintain, repair and remove the encroachment. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

 

12.04.270 Sidewalk café revocable encroachment permits
A.    Sidewalk café is herein defined as any area located in any public sidewalk or public right-of-way that is associated with a restaurant or other eating and drinking establishment on a contiguous adjacent parcel. No portion of a sidewalk café shall be used for any other purpose other than dining and circulation therein.

B.     Sidewalk cafés are permitted on a city sidewalk, boardwalk, alley, or pedestrian mall located in the public right-of-way, subject to issuance of a sidewalk café revocable encroachment permit under this section and compliance with the application, development, and operational requirements of this section.

C.     Applications for a sidewalk café revocable encroachment permit shall be made to the community development director or designee. A completed sidewalk café revocable encroachment permit application must be accompanied by two sets of plans drawn to scale, consisting of site (plot) plan and elevation drawings of proposed outdoor dining facilities. The site plan must show the location of tables, chairs, accessory service facilities, perimeter barrier element, and any fixed elements on the sidewalk, boardwalk, alley, or mall within a twenty-five-foot radius around the sidewalk café area. Fixed elements include, but are not limited to, light and sign poles, trees and landscape strips, traffic signal poles, parking meters, raised planter curbs, tree-wells, flower pots, and waste containers. Plans must include the dimension of the clear zone, as defined in subsection E of this section, from outer perimeter of the sidewalk café fixture to nearest sidewalk fixtures. Elevation plans must show front and side view of sidewalk dining facilities, including all proposed above-grade improvements such as planter boxes, awnings, tables, and chairs.

D.    A sidewalk café may be established only in conjunction with an adjacent restaurant use.

E.     Sidewalk cafés shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic, accessibility to vehicles parked adjacent to the curb, or create public health or safety hazards.

F.     A minimum four-foot clear zone is required between the outside edge of any sidewalk café fixture and any fixed element within the sidewalk, boardwalk, alley, or pedestrian mall right-of-way. Fixed elements include, but are not limited to, light and sign poles, trees and landscape strips, traffic signal poles, parking meters, raised planter curbs, tree-wells, flower pots, and waste containers. “Clear zone” means a pedestrian area that is maintained free of all obstructions.

G.    The sidewalk café revocable encroachment permit holder is responsible for compliance with all federal and state laws relating to disabled access in the operation of a sidewalk café and in maintaining the clear zone required by subsection E.

H.    No additional parking shall be required for sidewalk cafés permitted under this section.

I.      Sidewalk cafés shall be used only as seating areas. Storage, kitchen, or restroom uses are not allowed. Tables and chairs must be movable unless otherwise approved by the community development director or designee.

J.      Placement of tables and chairs shall be limited to the public right-of-way frontage adjacent to the associated restaurant use as determined by the community development director or designee.

K.    Service and consumption of alcoholic beverages in a sidewalk café shall comply with Chapter 9.12.

L.     A decorative element separating the sidewalk café seating area from adjacent pedestrian traffic must be provided. The design and materials of this element must complement and be compatible to the architectural design of the restaurant building façade or of a design that adds visual interest to the streetscape.

M.    Sidewalk cafés may be uncovered, partially covered, or fully covered by means of umbrellas, awnings or canopies. Awning or canopy material covering a sidewalk café shall be temporary or retractable and may extend into the public right-of-way from the face of the building up to the maximum clear zone dimension of six feet. Width and height of awnings and canopies shall meet applicable building code requirements. Awnings, canopies and umbrellas must be made of fire-treated or nonflammable materials.

N.    Decorative or accent lighting may be incorporated into the sidewalk café awning or canopy and shall meet all city code requirements.

O.    Upon approval by the community development director or designee, the applicant shall obtain all required building and electrical permits prior to construction.

P.     The permit issued under this section approving the sidewalk café and designating the allowed number of tables and chairs shall be displayed in a prominent location easily accessible to the public. (Ord. O2018-27 § 1)

Chapter 12.08 TREES AND SHRUBS
12.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Director” means the parks and recreation director of the city or authorized representative(s).

“Street tree area” means that area between public street right-of-way lines.

“Street tree plan” means the street tree plan of the city as adopted and made a part of this chapter and as the same may hereafter be from time to time amended.

“Street trees” means trees approved by this chapter for planting in street tree area. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; Ord. 1149 § II, 2000; prior code § 21-1)

 

12.08.020 Street tree plan.
The city council shall cause to be prepared a street tree plan which, when adopted, shall be the street tree plan of the city. The street tree plan may be amended by resolution of the city council. The street tree plan shall include such matters and shall contain such rules and regulations relating to the planting and care of trees in street tree areas as the city council shall determine. The street tree plan shall be strictly adhered to in regard to all future planting and care of trees in street tree areas. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-2)

 

12.08.030 Enforcement.
The director of parks and recreation shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-3)

 

12.08.040 Street tree planting—Permit required.
No trees or shrubs shall be planted in any street tree area without permission of the director, and the director shall require that all new plantings of street trees shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the street tree plan. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-4)

 

12.08.050 Street tree list.
The director shall be responsible for the city’s approved street tree list, comprised of types and species of trees that are suitable and desirable for planting. All street trees shall be in compliance with the approved street tree list. The approved street tree list shall be revised from time to time by the director as needed. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-5)

 

12.08.060 Tree planting in subdivisions.
Before any street improvements in any new subdivision are accepted by the city, the subdivider shall comply with this chapter and the street tree plan. A minimum containerized tree size of fifteen gallons per tree in new subdivisions shall be required. The city will determine the species of tree which will be planted. Watering and care of the trees shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-6)

 

12.08.070 Tree trimming or removal.
No person shall cut, prune, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub, or plant upon or in any street tree area or other public place in the city without prior permission and approval therefor from the director. The director is authorized to grant such permission at his or her discretion and where necessary. Excepting and with reference to utility companies, as provided in Section 12.08.080, no such permission granted shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its issuance. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-7)

 

12.08.080 Tree pruning by utility companies.
Utility companies shall be required to secure encroachment permits to trim or prune trees which create a hazard to their facilities. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-8)

 

12.08.090 Commercial tree trimming—Permit—Insurance.
Any person engaged in the business of pruning, trimming or removing trees within the city’s rights-of-way shall, in addition to having a business license, secure a permit to operate in the city from the director. As a condition of obtaining such permit, the person shall carry, and shall furnish satisfactory proof to the director that he or she has commercial general liability insurance listing the city as additionally insured, with minimum limits of one million dollars aggregate and two million dollars per occurrence, one hundred thousand dollars for personal injury per occurrence, two hundred thousand dollars aggregate, and property damage insurance in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars. The policy or policies or certificates thereof shall be filed with the director prior to granting such permit, and such person shall keep such insurance in full force and effect during the term of the permit. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; Ord. 1149 § IV, 2000; prior code § 21-9)

 

12.08.100 Tree removal by city.
The director may cause to be trimmed, pruned, or removed, any tree, shrub, plant or vegetation in any street tree area or other public place. If existing street trees are removed, they shall be replaced with trees which conform to the street tree plan and approved street tree list. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-10)

 

12.08.110 Dangerous trees—Nuisance—Removal.
When any tree or shrub growing in a street tree area or public place which is endangering or which in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, sidewalk, or other public place or the full and safe operation of public utility wires, is declared to be a nuisance, the director may cause the same to be trimmed or removed. In the case of any such trees or shrubs in the private property portion of the street tree area, the director shall notify the owner, or duly authorized agent, in writing that tree or shrub is a nuisance and should be trimmed or removed. Failure of the property owner or duly authorized agent to remove or trim such tree or shrub within thirty days after receipt of such notice by the director shall be a violation of this chapter, and the director may then remove or trim the tree or shrub and assess the cost against the property owner. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-11)

 

12.08.120 Damaging trees prohibited.
No person shall abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, plant or shrub in a street tree area or any other public place in the city or attach or place any rope, wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill or other things to or on any tree growing in a public place or cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to be placed or attached to any such tree, or allow any gaseous liquid or solid substances which are harmful to such trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the city council may upon written application therefor grant to any person upon such terms and conditions as the city council may determine a permit for the temporary attachment to trees or shrubs of wires charged with electricity for purposes such as Christmas tree decorations. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-12)

 

12.08.130 Appeals.
Appeals to the city council from any direction or order given or made by the director under the provisions of this chapter may be made by filing written notice thereof with the city clerk within ten days after the receipt of such direction or order, stating in substance that the appeal is being made from such direction or order to the city council. The city clerk shall thereupon call such appeal to the attention of the city council at their next regular meeting, at which time and place the appellant and director may present evidence. Action by the city council after such hearing shall be conclusive and final and in the event the city council shall uphold the direction or order of the director, the property owner, or duly authorized agent, shall within fifteen days thereafter comply with such direction or order. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-13)

 

12.08.140 Liability disclaimer.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his or her property or under his or her control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the city. (Ord. O2018-13 § 1; prior code § 21-14)

Chapter 12.12 PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITY USE
12.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety, comfort and convenience of the public use and enjoyment of any park, parkway, playground or recreation center and the use and enjoyment of any building, structure, equipment or apparatus thereon. (Prior code § 2-60)

 

12.12.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:

A.    “Alcoholic beverages” means spirits, liquor, beer, wine and other liquid which contains one-half of one percent or more alcohol by volume.

B.     “Amplified music, sound or speech” means music, sound or speech projected and transmitted by electronic equipment including amplifiers; the total output shall not exceed that shown in Tables I and II, Article 20, Section 20-301 of the Zoning Ordinance No. 537.

C.     “Camping” means the occupation of any campers, trailers or other vehicles equipped for human habitation, or the erection of any tent, or other shelter, or the arrangement of sleeping bags or bedding for the purpose of, or which will permit, remaining overnight.

D.    “Children’s playground area” includes areas containing the playground apparatus or tot lots.

E.     “City manager” means the city manager, assistant city manager, or designee.

F.     “Director” means the department head of the city’s parks and recreation department or designee.

G.    “Parks” includes all parks, parkways, greenbelts, and any other property owner by the city, including structures thereon, and used, operated or maintained for recreational purposes, whether passive or active. “Owned” includes any property interest under which the department of parks and recreation operates, maintains or controls the property. The term shall include any property owned and maintained as open space, including undeveloped sites for future parks.

H.    “Picnic area” means the special area set aside with tables for the purpose of picnicking.

I.      “Picnicking” means the consumption of food and beverage.

J.      “Trash” means garbage, refuse, litter, paper, vegetable matter and rubbish.

K.    “Vehicle” includes gasoline, electric or other fuel powered devices by which any person or object may be propelled, moved or drawn including go-carts, dirt bikes, minibikes, model cars, boats and planes. (Prior code § 2-61)

 

12.12.030 Compliance required.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to enter or remain in any park or building unless they comply with all regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park or building. (Ord. 1166 § 1, 2000; prior code § 2-62)

 

12.12.040 Department jurisdiction.
All public parks, recreational areas, recreational buildings, swimming pools, and landscaped areas around public buildings shall be under the jurisdiction of the parks and recreation department. (Prior code § 2-63)

 

12.12.050 Director—Duties—Jurisdiction.
It shall be the duty of the director of parks and recreation to administer the areas under his or her jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such other rules and regulations related to such areas which are now in effect or might be adopted by the city council. (Prior code § 2-64)

 

12.12.060 Director—Deputies.
When authorized, any deputy of the director of parks and recreation may perform the duties of the director of parks and recreation in his or her name. (Prior code § 2-65)

 

12.12.070 Park and/or facility permit—Required.
The city parks and/or facilities shall be made available for the exclusive use of persons and groups subject to the issuance of a permit by the director of parks and recreation. No exclusive use of any park and/or facility for preadvertised assemblies or groups may be made without the issuance of a permit therefor. All applications for exclusive use must be signed or cosigned by an adult, which adult shall agree to be responsible for the exclusive use. A permit shall be issued unless:

A.    The city has scheduled a city-sponsored event at the same time and place as the activity proposed in the application;

B.     The requested time and place has been preempted by a previously issued permit;

C.     The conduct of such activity will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic;

D.    The concentration of person, animals and vehicles will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to such area;

E.     The conduct of such activity will unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or the movement of other emergency equipment;

F.     The conduct of such activity is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; or

G.    Such activity is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1987; prior code § 2-66)

 

12.12.080 Permit—Application.
Any person applying for a permit under this chapter shall file an application with the director of parks and recreation not less than twenty-one days nor more than one year prior to the proposed use of the park and/or building. The director, on a showing of good cause, shall have the authority to consider the application under this chapter which is filed less than twenty-one days before the date such proposed activity is to be conducted. (Ord. 837 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2-67)

 

12.12.090 Permit—Contents.
The application shall contain the following:

A.    Name of applicant, the sponsoring organization and the name of the person in charge of the proposed activity;

B.     The addresses and telephone numbers of those named in subsection A of this section;

C.     The park and/or facility being applied for;

D.    The starting time of the proposed activity;

E.     The finishing time of the proposed activity;

F.     The number of persons expected;

G.    Additional facilities requested, such as personnel, tables, chairs, etc.;

H.    The nature of the proposed activity or activities, including equipment and vehicles, to be brought onto the park and nature and duration of the use of any amplified sound, whether speech or music;

I.      The form of application shall be provided or prescribed by the parks and recreation department. (Prior code § 2-68)

 

12.12.100 General use regulations.
The following acts or activities are prohibited:

A.    Bringing any domesticated animal or pet into the swimming pool, golf course or children’s playground area;

B.     Littering, soiling or defacing restrooms, facilities or buildings;

C.     Climbing any trees or walking, standing or sitting on any monuments, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designed or customarily used for such purposes;

D.    Making or kindling a fire for any purpose, except at places provided for such purpose, unless prior special permission is obtained from the director of parks and recreation in writing;

E.     Remaining, staying or loitering on any public park between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. of the following day, or as may otherwise be designated by minute, order or resolution of the city council;

F.     Any section or part of a park or facility may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for intervals of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director may reasonably find necessary;

G.    No person shall play or practice golf or use any golf clubs in any area of a city-owned park;

H.    Playing or betting at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on for money, chips, shell, credit or any other representative of value or maintaining or exhibiting any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming or playing any game prohibited by any other ordinance of the city;

I.      No person shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace;

J.      Discharging, carrying or possessing firearms of any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife, park facilities or human safety. Shooting into park areas from beyond the park boundaries is prohibited;

K.    Killing, chasing, wounding, harassing or capturing wild or domestic birds or animals in a park;

L.     Using any park or facility for fundraising for personal profit of any kind without requesting permission and permit from the director of parks and recreation;

M.    Disposing of trash or garbage not accumulated within park areas; disposing of trash and garbage in other than receptacles provided for this purpose;

N.    Hitching, fastening or riding any horse or animal except at a place specially designated for such purposes;

O.    Dumping, depositing or leaving any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, refuse or trash on the park or facility grounds thereof. Such items shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;

P.     Consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all city parks except as follows:

1.     Lincoln Park. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed in the designated picnic area only.

2.     Northgate Community Park.

a.     Consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed in the designated picnic area;

b.     Beer may be consumed in the softball complex provided the beer is purchased from the authorized concessionaire and it is dispensed in paper cups;

c.     No ice chests, cans, bottles, glasses, cups, or any other container capable of containing alcoholic beverages arc permitted in the softball complex unless they are dispensed by the authorized concessionaire except as set forth below:

i.      Plastic or metal containers of five gallon capacity or less which contain water or water and ice are permitted;

ii.     Empty paper or plastic cups for drinking water only are permitted;

iii.    Bottles or other containers containing food or liquid to feed infants are permitted;

d.     All containers, equipment, paper bags, boxes or other receptacles shall be subject to inspection by a person authorized by the director of parks and recreation to assure compliance with this section.

3.     Big League Dreams Softball Complex. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted at the Big League Dreams Softball Complex at a location west of Airport Way and north of Highway 120, provided the alcohol beverage is purchased from the authorized operator of the Big League Dreams Softball Complex or said consumption is with permission of said authorized operator.

4.     By permit issued pursuant to Section 9.12.030 of this code.

Q.    Operation of gasoline or other fuel powered vehicles (excepting authorized and city-operated equipment) in any park, except persons with special permission for delivery of supplies or equipment. All vehicles after delivery of supplies or equipment shall then be removed and parked in proper parking areas;

R.     1.     No person within any park shall use, attempt to use or interfere with the use of any table, space or facility within the park which at the time is reserved for any other person or group which has received a permit from the parks and recreation department,

2.     Unless the actual use of the table or facility referred to in such permit is commenced within one hour after the period covered by such permit begins, such permit shall thereupon be void and all rights under such permit be cancelled;

S.     No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty or persons participating in a city-sponsored activity shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower or any portion thereof growing in any park or city-owned property. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1106 § 2, 1999; Ord. 927 § 1, 1991; prior code § 2-69)

 

12.12.110 Drug-free zones designated.
All public parks in the city are designated as drug-free zones pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 1995)

 

12.12.115 Protective equipment required while using a city skate park or BMX facility.
No person shall use a city skate park or the BMX facility located in Spreckels Recreation Park who is not wearing a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads suitable to provide protection in the event of falls or collisions. A violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable as set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this code. (Ord. 1435 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1164 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1161 § 1, 2000)

 

12.12.120 Violation—Misdemeanor.
A.    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person who is not wearing the protective equipment required by this chapter to remain at the skate park facility after having been directed to leave by any peace officer.

B.     It is further unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, who has been directed to leave the skate park facility for the reason set forth above, to return to the skate park facility for the purpose of using the facility unless said person is wearing the protective equipment required by this chapter.

C.     No parent, guardian or other adult person having custody of a minor under the age of eighteen years shall allow such minor to use the skate park facility unless said minor is wearing the protective equipment required by this chapter. Violation of this provision shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 12.16 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
12.16.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes the standards for the issuance of a permit for parades, assemblies and other special events in the city. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-1; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

A.    “Applicant” means any person or organization who seeks a special event permit from the city clerk to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this chapter.

B.     “Assembly” means the gathering of more than ten persons for the purpose of deliberation and/or demonstration.

C.     “City council” means the city council of the city of Manteca.

D.    “Other special event” means a street fair, art and craft show, carnival, soap box derby, rally and other special events which occur on a city street, sidewalk or other city-owned land and improvements which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws and controls.

E.     “Parade” means a march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, on any city street, sidewalk or other city-owned land and improvements which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws or controls.

F.     “Permit application fee” means the non-refundable fee to be paid by the special event permit applicant to cover the full costs (or a portion thereof) of processing and investigating special event applications, and administering the special event permit program.

G.    “Permittee” means any person or organization who has been issued a special events permit by the city council.

H.    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

I.      “Street” has the same meaning as in subsection G of Section 12.04.010. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-2; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.030 Permit—Required—Exceptions.
Any person desiring to sponsor a parade, assembly or other special event on a city street, sidewalk or other city-owned land and improvements in the city shall first obtain a special event permit from the city clerk. A special event permit is not required for the following:

A.    Funeral processions;

B.     Parades involving a total of ten or fewer pedestrians marching along a parade route which is restricted to marching on sidewalks, and crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls. (Ord. 1408 § 1, 2008; Ord. 953 § 2(part), 1993; Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-3; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.040 Permit—Application—Procedure.
Any person desiring to sponsor a parade, assembly or other special event not exempted by Section 12.16.030 shall apply for a special event permit by filing a verified application with the city clerk on a form supplied by the city clerk not less than thirty days nor more than one hundred eighty days before the event date. (Ord. 1408 § 2, 2008; Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-4; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.050 Permit—Application—Contents.
The application for a special event permit shall provide the following information:

A.    All events:

1.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and an alternative contact person;

2.     If the event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the organization, the authorized head of the organization, and written authorization to apply for the special event permit by an officer of the organization;

3.     The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be present and in charge of the event on the day of the event;

4.     The nature/purpose of the event;

5.     Date and time (starting and ending) of the event;

6.     Location of the event, including its boundaries;

7.     Estimated number of participants in the event;

8.     The type and number of vehicles, animals and structures which will be used at the event. Whether there will be water aid stations at the event;

9.     Description of any sound amplification equipment which will be used at the event;

10.   Whether any food or beverages will be sold at the event;

11.   Whether monitors will be employed at the event;

12.   Parking requirements for the event;

13.   The attachment of a certificate of insurance complying with the provisions of Section 12.16.110.

B.     Additional information required for parades, and other events occurring along a route:

1.     The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the parade or other event will begin to assemble;

2.     The route to be traveled;

3.     Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be transverse;

4.     Maximum length or components of parade in miles or portions thereof;

5.     The number, type, size and material of any floats or banners.

C.     Supplemental Information. Such supplemental information as the city clerk shall find necessary, under the particular circumstances of a special event application, to supply the city clerk with sufficient information to determine whether to approve or conditionally approve an application. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-5; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.060 Permit—Approval—Denial.
The city clerk shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for the grounds specified in Section 12.16.070. Notice of the city clerk’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant’s address. If the application is denied, the notice shall state the grounds for the denial in writing, or the reasons for a change in the date, time, route or location of the event. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-6; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.070 Special event permit—Denial.
A.    The city clerk shall approve an application for a special event permit unless it determines from consideration of the application, and other pertinent information, that any of the following conditions exist:

1.     Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material detail.

2.     The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been requested to do so.

3.     The sole purpose of the event is advertising of any product, goods, wares, merchandise or event, and is designed to be held for private profit.

4.     Another special event permit application has been received prior in time, or has already been approved to hold another event at the same time and place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the police department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both events.

5.     The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion.

6.     The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event, will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event.

7.     The size or nature of the event will require the assignment of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the line of movement of an event, or the boundaries or areas contiguous to an event, as to prevent normal police protection to the rest of the city. Nothing in this section authorized denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed to allow for adequate protection of event participants with the number of police officers available to police the event.

8.     The location of the event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets or a previously granted encroachment permit.

9.     The event shall occur at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof.

B.     When the grounds for denial of an application for permit are any of those specified in subdivisions 4 through 9 of subsection A of this section, can be corrected by altering the date, time duration, route or location of the event, the city clerk shall instead of denying the application conditionally approve the application upon the applicant’s acceptance of conditions for permit issuance. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-7; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.080 Requirements.
The city clerk may condition the issuance of a special events permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the control of traffic; provided, that such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such conditions include:

A.    Alteration of the route, time or location of the event proposed on the event application;

B.     Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parades or other events occurring along a route;

C.     Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street transversed;

D.    Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;

E.     Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;

F.     Requirements for use of event monitors, and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;

G.    Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats and other decorated vehicles for fire safety by the Manteca fire department;

H.    Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of city property;

I.      Restrictions on use of amplified sound;

J.      Requiring proof of permission to use private property for a portion of the event. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-8; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.090 Permit issuance.
The city clerk shall issue the special events permit once the application has been approved, and the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, if any, and the following sections of this chapter have been complied with:

A.    Section 12.16.100, pertaining to indemnification;

B.     Section 12.16.120, pertaining to cleanup deposits;

C.     Section 12.16.130, pertaining to traffic control fees. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-9; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.100 Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization (if any), must sign an agreement or reimburse the city for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to city property in connection with the event proximately caused by the action of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was or reasonably should have been under the permittee’s sponsoring organization’s control. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee/sponsoring organization shall defend the city against, and indemnify and hold the city harmless from, any liability to any persons resulting from any damage or injury in connection with the event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees or agents, or any person who was or reasonably should have been under the permittee’s/sponsoring organization’s control. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-10; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.110 Insurance.
A.    The applicant/sponsor of an event must possess or obtain liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as additional insureds the city, its officers, employees, agents and volunteers. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event.

B.     Coverage shall be provided by a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars. If food or nonalcoholic beverages will be sold or distributed at the event, the comprehensive general liability coverage must include products liability coverage. If alcoholic beverage will be sold or distributed at the event, the policy must also include coverage for liquor liability.

C.     A certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the permit application. A copy of the policy may be requested and shall be submitted prior to approval of application.

D.    The insurance requirements of subsections A, B and C of this section shall be waived by the city clerk if the following conditions are satisfied:

1.     The applicant or an officer of the sponsoring organization signs a statement verified in compliance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 2015.0; setting forth the following:

a.     A current financial statement setting forth the net worth of the applicant/sponsoring organization;

b.     A current income and expense statement of the applicant/sponsoring organization;

c.     The following statement:

The least expensive quote for the cost of the insurance required to comply with the provisions of Section 12.16.110 of the Manteca city code exceeds five percent of the applicant/sponsoring organizations net worth or two and one-half percent of the applicant/sponsoring organizations annual income.

d.     The name, address and phone number of at least three insurance brokers from whom the applicant/sponsoring organization received quotes and the amount of premium quoted by each; and

2.     The city clerk finds that waiver of the insurance requirement will not result in the cancellation of any existing city general liability insurance policy or joint power insurance agreement.

(Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-11; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.120 Cleanup deposit.
A.    The applicant/sponsor of an event involving the sale of food or beverages, the erection of structures, the use of horses or other large animals, or water aid stations will be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the issuance of special event permit in an amount set by the director of finance. The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the event if the area used for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event.

B.     If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost by the city for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup deposit (or a portion thereof) shall be applied to payment of the bill. If the applicant/sponsor disputes the bill, he or she may appeal to the director of finance within five days after the receipt of the bill. Should there by any unexpended balance on deposit after completion of the work, this balance shall be refunded to the applicant/sponsor. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-12; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.130 Traffic control fees—Pre-established routes.
A.    Assignment of police officers for traffic control. The police chief may require the assignment of overtime officers to provide traffic control at the event. Traffic control by officers includes clearing the event route or site of unauthorized vehicles, diversion of traffic around the event and direction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic along the route of the event.

B.     Payment and computing of traffic control fees. If overtime officers will be assigned for traffic control at the event, the applicant/sponsor of the event shall be required to prepay the estimated costs of providing the officers prior to the issuance of the event permit. The traffic control fees will be computed by determining the number of police officers who will be required for traffic control, the number of hours the officers will be on duty, and the city’s full costs of providing officers on an hourly basis as established by city fee schedule.

C.     An applicant may request assignment of officers. An applicant may request assignment of overtime officers for policing and/or traffic control at the event. Assignment of overtime officers at the request of an applicant/sponsor is discretionary with the police chief and is subject to availability of overtime officers. The applicant/sponsor shall be required to prepay the estimated costs of providing the officers prior to the issuance of the event permit.

D.    Billing and refunds. If the actual costs to the city of providing police officers pursuant to subsections B or C of this section on the day of the event is in excess of the applicant/sponsor’s police fee deposit, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the difference. If the actual costs of providing police services pursuant to subsections B or C of this section is less than the applicant/sponsors deposit, the applicant/sponsor shall be refunded the difference.

E.     Pre-established routes. The city clerk may determine certain pre-established routes for parades and other special events within the city, and predetermine the number of officers required for traffic control along those routes. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-13; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.140 Permittee/sponsor duties.
A.    Each permittee/sponsor of an event shall comply with all terms, and conditions of the special event permit.

B.     Each permittee/sponsor of an event shall ensure that the person leading a parade or other event along a route, or the person in charge of any other event carries the special event permit on his or her person for the duration of the event.

C.     Each permittee/sponsor of an event shall ensure the area used for the permitted event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event, immediately following the completion of the event. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-14; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.150 Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to sponsor or conduct a parade, athletic event or other special event requiring a special event permit unless a permit has been issued for the event. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to participate in such an event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the event has not been issued the required permit. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to interfere with or disrupt a lawful parade, assembly or other special event. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-15; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.160 Exceeding scope of permit—Prohibited.
The special event permit authorized the permittee/sponsor to conduct only such event as is described in the permit, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee/sponsor to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit, or for any event participant with knowledge thereof, to willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. 757 § 2(part), 1987; prior code § 4B-16; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

 

12.16.170 Appeal.
Any action by the city clerk under this chapter may be appealed to the city council. The city clerk shall publish notice of any decision granting the permit in the Manteca Bulletin, with an appeal period designated at least ten days from the date of publication. Any decision may be appealed to the city council by any person. The appeal must be filed, in writing, with the city clerk within the designated timeframe, and must be accompanied by the filing fee established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. The appeal shall be heard at a public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1408 § 3, 2008; Ord. 1247 § 6(part), 2003)

Chapter 12.20 CAMPING
12.20.010 Purpose.
The streets and public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for other than a minimal duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and private areas within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public or private property. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.020 Definitions.
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

“Camp” means to place, pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.

“Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits or temporary shelter.

“Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or cooking facilities and similar equipment.

“City manager” means the city manager or designee.

“Establish” means setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials on to public or private property to “camp” or operate camp facilities.

“Exigent circumstances” means any emergency situation requiring swift action to prevent imminent danger to the health, safety, or life of a person or serious damage to property or to forestall the imminent escape of a suspect or destruction of evidence.

“Government-issued identification card” means any identification card issued by a county, state, or federal government.

“Maintain” means keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain on public or private property in order to camp or operate camp facilities.

“Operate” means participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or camp facility.

“Park” means the same as defined in Section 12.12.020 of this title.

“Private property” means all private property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, and improved or unimproved land.

“Public property” means all public property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land and parks.

“Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

“Street” means the same as defined in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.030 Unlawful camping.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:

A.    The Manteca Transit Center located at 220 Moffat Boulevard in Manteca, California;

B.     The Moffat Community Center located at 580 Moffat Boulevard in Manteca, California;

C.     Any public property except when the person is sitting or lying on public property between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. of the following day; or

D.    Any private property.

1.     It is not intended by this section to prohibit overnight camping on private residential property by friends or family of the property owner, so long as the owner consents and the overnight camping is limited to not more than one consecutive night.

2.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of an owner of private property or other lawful user of private properly that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and provided further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by the city’s comprehensive zoning ordinance or other laws, ordinances and regulations.

3.     The city manager may, as provided in Section 12.20.050 of this chapter, issue a temporary permit to allow camping on public or private property in connection with a special event.

4.     The police chief may issue a permit to allow camping in a motor home or trailer on public property in an R-1 district provided the health, safety or welfare of the public is not affected. The permit will be valid for a period not to exceed five consecutive days. Upon expiration of the permit issued under this section, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional temporary camping permits; if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth herein. In no event will temporary camping permits be issued to an applicant for a total period in excess of ten days within any ninety-day period.

5.     A permit must be denied if the police chief finds that:

a.     The applicant is not a bona fide resident of the city of Manteca;

b.     The proposed location is not on a street adjacent to the applicant’s residence;

c.     The out-of-town visitor is not the applicant’s guest;

d.     Information submitted by the applicant is materially false.

A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370, the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter.

This section does not affect Section 12.12.100, which prohibits remaining, staying, or loitering on any public park between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. of the following day, but does not prohibit sleeping in a public park during hours of operation. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.040 Storage of personal property on public and private property.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property, including camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

A.    Any public property; or

B.     Any private property without the written consent of the owner.

A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370 the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter.

Law enforcement shall not remove personal property from any public property without providing seventy-two hours written notice unless there are exigent circumstances. After providing written notice, any personal property removed from public property shall be stored for ninety days from the date of removal except for government-issued identification cards, which shall be stored for one year from the date of removal. Personal property that is removed from public property can be reclaimed by contacting the telephone number listed on the written notice or appearing personally at the Manteca police department located at 1001 West Center Street in Manteca, California during regular business hours. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.050 Permit for special events required.
The city manager, in his or her discretion, may issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the departments of the city, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting events and scouting activities. The city manager may consult with various city departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department or person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. A reasonable fee, to be set by the city council shall be paid, in advance, by the applicant. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the city manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located.

Any person who establishes, maintains or operates a camp or camp facility without a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to remedies provided in Penal Code Section 370 the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.060 Posting copy of permit.
It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any camp or camp facility unless there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place upon the area or tract of land upon which the camp or camp facility is located a permit obtained from the city manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.20.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

 

12.20.070 Power of the city manager to make rules and regulations.
The city manager is further empowered to ascertain that the operation or maintenance of any camp or camp facilities to which a temporary permit shall apply will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare and for this purpose may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to their establishment, operation or conduct. The city manager may also impose conditions on the establishment, maintenance and operation of the camp or camp facility, including, but not limited to, security, sanitation facilities, the number of occupants, posting of bonds or deposits, insurance, quiet hours, duration of the permit, and permitted activities on the premises. When the city manager shall issue any permit under the terms of Section 12.20.050 of this chapter, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the city manager if the city manager becomes satisfied that the maintenance or continuing operation of the camp or camp facilities is adverse to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

12.20.080 Current ordinance provisions.
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provision applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1592 § 2, 2016)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.02 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Chapter 13.04 WATERWORKS SYSTEM
Chapter 13.06 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
Chapter 13.08 WATER WELLS
Chapter 13.12 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
Chapter 13.14 SEWER CAPACITY CHARGES
Chapter 13.16 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Chapter 13.20 INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Chapter 13.24 SEPTIC TANK CLEANING
Chapter 13.28 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGES
Chapter 13.32 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Chapter 13.34 UNDERGROUNDING UTILITY DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES
Chapter 13.38 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM FEES
Chapter 13.40 DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR THE SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY MULTI-SPECIES HABITAT CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE PLAN (SJMSCP)
Chapter 13.42 AGRICULTURAL MITIGATION FEE
Chapter 13.44 COUNTY FACILITIES FEE PROGRAM
Chapter 13.46 REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE PROGRAM
Chapter 13.50 INTERIM URBAN LEVEL OF FLOOD PROTECTION LEVEE IMPACT FEE

Chapter 13.02 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
13.02.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Cart” means a receptacle for solid waste, with a separate receptacle for the type and volume of solid waste, including but not limited to a receptacle for refuse, a receptacle for recyclable materials and a receptacle for green waste, which is provided to a premises by the city, and which is dumped and left at the premises.

“Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste at the place of waste generation and transporting such refuse to the point of disposal.

“Commercial customer” means a customer at a premises operated as commercial (non-manufacturing) enterprise.

“Container” means any receptacle for solid waste, which is approved for use by the city, and which is dumped and left at the premises. The term “container” includes a cart or bin.

“Customer” means the person or entity whose name appears on the city’s records as the person or entity who is obligated to pay for solid waste collection service for a premises.

“Director” means the director of public works of the city of Manteca.

 

“Green waste” means refuse consisting of grass, leaves, wood chips, green plants, weeds, tree branches, garden trimmings, and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens.

“Health officer” means the duly appointed representative of the San Joaquin County Environmental Health Department.

“Premises” means a building or part of a building which houses a specific use. Each individual place or residence or business shall be considered a premises.

“Recyclable construction materials” means those materials that are a product of construction and demolition that are suitable for recycling, as established by the rules and regulations of the director, including, but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, clean wood waste, brick and scrap metal.

“Recyclable materials” means those materials that are suitable for recycling, as established by the rules and regulations of the director.

“Refuse” means all matter and materials which are rejected by the owners or products thereof as offensive or useless, or which by their presence and accumulation may injuriously affect the health, comfort, safety or public welfare of the community, or constitute a disease, fire or other hazard to the community, and it shall include garbage, wet garbage, green waste, food waste or any matter or materials deemed refuse by the director.

“Residential customer” means a customer at a residential premises, including single-family and multifamily dwellings.

“Solid waste” means refuse and recyclable materials. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.020 Rules and regulations.
The director shall establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, governing the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.030 Collection services required.
Every person owning or occupying residential or commercial premises within the city limits shall utilize the solid waste collection services of the city and shall pay the charges for those services as established by the city council. Each owner or occupier of residential or commercial property shall directly arrange with the city for the provision of solid waste collection services.

Every commercial or residential dwelling unit shall subscribe to the solid waste collection services of the city and shall pay the charges for those services unless otherwise provided by the director. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.040 Collection services provided by the city.
A.    The city has the exclusive right and duty to provide solid waste collection services within the city limits, under such terms and conditions as it deems necessary for the public health, safety and well-being. This provision shall not be construed to prevent residential customers from hauling occasional loads of solid waste from their own premises to a legal point of disposal.

B.     The city is not required to provide collection services for oversized, overweight or unsafe containers, hazardous waste, or any waste where the director deems it unsafe to do so.

C.     The city’s solid waste collection service is a containerized service, which means that the city provides for collection of solid waste with mechanical handling containers, which are furnished by the city.

D.    Any solid waste deposited, kept, accumulated or permitted to accumulate within the city shall be in a container, the covers to which shall be kept closed at all times except when necessarily opened to permit solid waste to be taken therefrom or to be deposited therein.

E.     Solid waste shall be collected on a schedule fixed by the director, and the schedule may be changed from time to time as deemed necessary or useful. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.050 Charges for solid waste collection services.
A.    Each customer shall pay charges for services related to solid waste collection. The amounts of the charges shall be the amounts which the city council from time to time may determine and establish.

B.     Each new residential dwelling unit or newly constructed commercial unit initiating solid waste collection service shall pay a service initiation cost recovery charge in the amount which the city council may determine and establish from time to time. New service charges shall be due and payable at the time building permits are obtained, or when no building permit is required, prior to initiation of solid waste collection service. All revenue derived from this charge shall be deposited in a fund, and used for the acquisition and delivery of containers, and other equipment including solid waste collection trucks. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.060 Billing and collection of charges—Delinquent charges.
A.    The director of finance is designated as the collector of charges for solid waste collection services.

B.     The city shall bill customers for solid waste collection services as part of, at the same time as, in the same manner as the city’s utility service bill for water and sewer service charges, or in such other manner as deemed necessary or appropriate by the director of finance. If the monthly service rate is not paid when due, on the first day of each calendar month thereafter a penalty of two percent of the amount of the delinquent rate shall be added.

C.     Pursuant to the authority and subject to the requirements prescribed in Article 4 of Chapter 6 of Part 3 of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 5470), as amended from time to time, delinquent charges and penalties may be collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes of the city.

D.    It is the obligation of the owner of each premises to pay the monthly fee and charges, unless a tenant has made written application for city refuse service.

E.     Subscription to refuse service separate from water and sewer service will be allowed only for industrial and commercial uses.

F.     Bills for services will be rendered at regular intervals, and are due and payable upon presentation. Payment shall be made at the finance department in the City Hall, or at the city’s option, to duly authorized collectors in the city. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.065 Temporary suspension of service.
When a premises is temporarily scheduled to be unoccupied, service may be suspended for a period not to exceed six months upon completion of a “Request for Interruption of Refuse Service” form and payment of the “Vacation Suspended Service” Fee per the adopted rate schedule. Following payment, all carts will be pulled, and the monthly service charges will not be collected until the specified return date when carts will be returned. Suspension will not be initiated until carts are collected by the city. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.070 Containers.
A.    Every premises shall use the solid waste collection carts or bins provided by the city, or solid waste collection containers approved by the director, for collection services. The containers shall be used in the manner required by the rules and regulations established by the director.

B.     It shall be the responsibility of the customer to maintain containers in a safe and sanitary condition.

C.     Within twelve months of the initiation of service, the city will, upon request, change the size of a residential container one time at no charge. A second request for a residential container size change within twelve months of initiation of service, or later will be charged based on time to perform the service, per the rate stated on the rate schedule for special pick-ups.

D.    Charges for changing residential containers maybe waived by the city manager if the requested change is made within ninety days of revisions in city collection policies and practices. (Ord. O2018-31 § 1; Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.080 Removal of solid waste from a container prohibited.
No person other than authorized city staff or the owner or occupier of a premises shall remove or collect solid waste from a container for such premises. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.090 Mandatory multifamily recycling.
A.    All owners of multifamily dwellings shall subscribe to the city’s collection service for recyclable materials.

B.     All owners or managers of multifamily dwellings shall provide a location for the placement of containers for recyclable materials in a manner that is convenient for tenants and approved by the director or the director’s designated representative. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.100 Mandatory commercial collection services.
A.    Any commercial customer that generates two or more cubic yards of recyclable materials shall subscribe to the city’s collection service for recyclable materials. Such commercial customer shall provide a location for the placement of containers for recyclable materials in a manner approved by the director or the director’s designated representative.

B.     Any commercial customer that generates two or more cubic yards of green waste shall subscribe to the city’s collection service for green waste. Such commercial customer shall provide a location for the placement of containers for green waste in a manner approved by the director or the director’s designated representative. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.110 Contamination.
A.    Contaminants Are Prohibited. Solid waste deposited in a container in a manner other than the manner established by the rules and regulations of the director is considered a contaminant. If a contaminant is placed in a container, the city may charge the customer for any expense incurred by the city in disposing of contaminated waste, the cleaning of contaminated equipment, and the required processing of other materials that come in contact with contaminated materials.

B.     A customer subject to the mandatory recycling or green waste collection services shall prevent excess contamination. “Excess contamination” means:

1.     A container for recyclable materials that contains more than ten percent by weight of refuse;

2.     A container for green waste that contains more than ten percent by weight of refuse; or

3.     A container for refuse to contain more than ten percent by weight of recyclable material, or more than ten percent by weight green waste, or more than ten percent by weight of recyclable material and green waste combined.

C.     A person shall not deposit in any solid waste container wearing apparel, bedding, bandages or other articles from any home or place where an infectious or contagious disease has prevailed. The owner or occupant of any premises where an infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall forthwith notify the health officer and shall dispose of articles which are, or might be affected in accordance with his or her directions.

D.    Hot coals or ashes shall not be placed in any solid waste container. Cold ashes shall be boxed or bagged in such manner that they will not escape when handled.

E.     A person shall not deposit in any solid waste container dead animals.

F.     Animal feces shall be enclosed in a plastic bag prior to depositing it in a refuse container.

G.    No person shall deposit in a solid waste container any explosive or highly flammable, radioactive, toxic or other hazardous material or substance as defined by the director, or by state or federal law. The city may, but is not obligated to, provide special arrangements to collect such hazardous material. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.120 Construction and demolition recycling.
A.    All contractors on all construction and demolition projects within city limits, where the total cumulative square feet of the project area exceeds five thousand square feet, shall recycle all recyclable construction materials.

B.     All recyclable construction materials shall be separated at its source and placed in a separate container approved by the director or the director’s designee.

C.     A contractor may contract with a resource recovery collector to comply with this section. A “resource recovery collector” means a service that provides collection and processing of recyclable construction materials in a manner demonstrated to be satisfactory to the director and that meets any such other requirements established by the rules and regulations of the director.

D.    Any person providing a container for recyclable construction materials shall prevent contamination. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.130 Special services.
A.    The director may provide special services for solid waste collection, and the director may charge a customer for such services for the city’s actual cost of performing the collection service, including fees or expenses for disposal.

B.     The city may provide special services to a residential customer who is physically unable to move a cart for collection services. The director or the director’s designee shall determine whether such residential customer has demonstrated that he or she is physically unable to move the loaded cart and that no individual living at the residence is capable of moving the cart. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.140 Commercial food waste collection required.
A.    Commercial establishments producing greater than fifty pounds of food waste per week must segregate food waste from general refuse and participate in the food waste collection service provided by the city.

B.     After January 1, 2020, any business producing greater than two cubic yards of solid waste per week must segregate food waste from general refuse and participate in the food waste collection service provided by the city.

C.     The city may charge separate service charges for the collection of clean food waste and dirty food waste, as such terms are defined by the rules and regulations of the director. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.150 Unlawful dumping.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to throw into or dump upon any public street, highway or grounds, or in any gutter or ditch, or upon any private premises, or anywhere except in such places as may be designated for such purposes by the director, any glass, broken ware, garbage, dirt, rubbish, refuse or filth; nor shall any solid waste be allowed to remain upon any property.

B.     Any solid waste on any property, which the city or other legally authorized health officer, for the health of the city, deems necessary to be removed, shall be carried away therefrom by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of such property, and removed to such place as may be designated by the city or other legally authorized health officer. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.160 Access to containers—Placement of containers.
A.    It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person owning or occupying any real property within the city limits to keep all trees and shrubs on that property trimmed in such a manner that there is a clearance of at least fourteen feet above any street or alley, and a distance of at least seven feet over any sidewalk.

B.     Residential customers shall place carts in the gutter immediately adjacent to the curb or other areas as designated by the rules and regulations of the director.

C.     All containers must be placed in a location readily accessible to the city, free of obstacles. The placement shall also not impede pedestrian (including wheelchair) sidewalk access. Containers should be spaced two feet apart and three feet from any parked vehicles. If alley service is provided, containers shall be within two feet from the alley point of access.

D.    Solid waste containers shall not be placed at the curb prior to sundown on the day prior to collection. All containers shall be removed from curb within such collection day. Containers shall be stored out of sight when viewed from the street, except during the collection process.

E.     At a premises where refuse collection is provided in an alley, containers may be stored in the alley but only in places where vehicular traffic is not impeded. In the event it is determined by the director or the director’s designee that the storage of containers interferes with vehicular traffic in an alley, the director shall provide written notice to the customer that containers shall not be stored in the alley.

F.     Commercial customers shall place solid waste containers in a location that is readily accessible to the city’s collection vehicles, and that has received the director’s prior approval as conforming to requirements for solid waste container facilities.

G.    Failure to place containers in an approved location shall constitute cause for the city’s refusal to perform collection services.

H.    Any gate to the container storage area must be maintained by the property owner in good working condition, and shall be left unlocked on the regularly scheduled collection day. Any animals shall be restrained.

I.      It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, renter, person having the care of, or occupant of any such property to refuse to allow representatives of the city to enter upon any property, during daylight hours whereon any nuisance is reasonably believed to exist, for the purpose of inspection. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.200 Public nuisance—Declaration.
A.    The existence of solid waste of any kind which is not stored and collected as required by this chapter is dangerous and injurious to neighboring property, and to the health and welfare of the residents of the vicinity or the public and is a public nuisance.

B.     Any person occupying, leasing or owning real property within the city shall remove from such property solid waste which constitutes a public nuisance within five days after written notice to remove the public nuisance. “Real property” as used in this section shall also include those areas as sidewalks, parking strips between sidewalks, curb lines and alley ways from the property line to the center right-of-way of such alley. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

 

13.02.210 Enforcement.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or to comply with a written order of the director, which is authorized by this chapter, shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of this code. (Ord. 1599 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 13.04 WATERWORKS SYSTEM
13.04.010 Meters required.
A.    Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all water supplied by the city waterworks to its consumers shall be measured by means of suitable water meters and a cubic foot shall be the unit of measurement.

B.     When requested by a developer of a project in the city, no separate water meter shall be required to be installed to measure water usage to landscaped areas within the public right-of-way provided the director of public works determines that it is impractical or undesirable to install such meter. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 2000; prior code § 22-1)

 

13.04.020 Connection fees and capacity charges.
A.    Surface Water Debt Service Fee. Prior to connection of a new water meter, the applicant shall pay a surface water debt service fee in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Meter Size

Surface Water Debt Service Fee

5/8″ & 3/4″

$4,275.00

1″

$7,312.00

1-1/2″

$14,580.00

2″

$23,335.00

3″

$43,783.00

4″

$72,983.00

6″

$145,924.00

8″

$233,487.00

 

B.     Water Meter Installation Fee. Prior to connection of a new water meter, the applicant shall pay a water meter installation fee in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Meter Size

Meter Installation Fee

5/8″ & 3/4″

$335.00

1″

$472.00

1-1/2″

$818.00

2″

$953.00

3″

$4,506.00

4″

$5,462.00

6″

$15,452.00

8″

$19,928.00

 

C.     Surface Water Capital Fee. Prior to connection of a new water meter, the applicant shall pay a surface water capital fee in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Meter Size

Surface Water Capital Fee

5/8″ & 3/4″

$133.00

1″

$223.00

1-1/2″

$443.00

2″

$710.00

3″

$1,330.00

4″

$2,218.00

6″

$4,435.00

8″

$7,099.00

 

D.    The connection fees and capacity charges set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section shall be adjusted beginning January 1, 2010 based on the change of the Twenty-City U.S. Average Engineering News Record Official July Construction Costs Index.

E.     Well System Conversion.  Connection fees and capacity charges as set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section for residential dwellings existing and lawfully occupied as of July 1, 1991 within the city limits utilizing a well system may be paid over a five-year period (twenty percent of the charge per year), where the dwelling is owner-occupied at the time of application for connection and the household income for the occupants of the dwelling does not exceed the moderate income level designated by the income standards used by the county in administering community development block grant funding in effect at the time of application.  In such cases, the first payment shall be made at the time of actual connection to the city system, and the remaining payments shall be due annually on the anniversary date of the connection.

F.     Notwithstanding subsection C, the surface water capital fee required by this section for a residential development shall be paid upon final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the required fee is not fully paid prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of any portion of the residential development encumbered thereby, the property owner, or lessee if the lessee’s interest appears of record, as a condition of issuance of the building permit, shall execute a “Development Fee Deferral Agreement and Notice of Lien with Power of Sale” to pay the fee or charge, or applicable portion thereof, within the time specified above. The contract shall be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fee. No certificate of occupancy for a dwelling unit within a residential development subject to this section will be issued unless and until the fees are paid in full. For purposes of this section, “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” shall be defined as those terms are defined in Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Memo dated 12/20/18; Memo dated 12/29/17; Ord. O2017-14 § 4; Ord. O2017-11 § 4; amended during 3/15 supplement; amended during 12/12 supplement; Ord. 1422 § 8, 2008; Ord. 1237 § 8, 2003; amended during 2/02 supplement; Res. R1997-61; Res. R1997-6; Res. R1993-227; Ord. 906 § 1, 1991; Ord. 887 § 1, 1990; prior code § 2-2)

 

13.04.030 Meter installation.
A.    All meters shall be installed by the city. Such meters wherever practicable shall be placed in suitable meter-boxes located in the sidewalk adjacent to the curb line. When it is practicable to place meters in the sidewalk, the meters shall be installed in some convenient place approved by the city upon the consumer’s premises, and so placed as to be at all times accessible for inspection, reading and testing.

B.     The consumer shall not make or maintain any by-pass or other connection between the meter and the city’s main and shall not tamper with the meter or disturb it in any way. (Prior code § 22-3)

 

13.04.040 Separate service required when.
Each separate property ownership shall be served with an individual meter and service line. (Prior code § 22-4)

 

13.04.050 Connection to be made by city.
Only duly authorized employees of the city shall connect the consumer’s service to or disconnect the same from the city’s water mains. (Prior code § 22-5)

 

13.04.055 Violation of Sections 13.04.030 through 13.04.050 and 13.04.150 unlawful.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, company, corporation or any other business entity to violate the provisions of Section 13.04.030, 13.04.040, 13.04.050, or 13.04.150 of this code. (Ord. O2018-21 § 1; Ord. 1057 § 1, 1997)

 

13.04.060 Monthly rates.
A.    Customers of the city’s waterworks shall pay monthly charges calculated as the sum of the fixed monthly charge plus the water use charge.

1.     Fixed monthly charge per meter size:

 

Meter Size

Jan. 1, 2009 through
Dec. 31, 2009

Jan. 1, 2010 through
Dec. 31, 2010

Jan. 1, 2011 through

Dec. 31, 2011

Jan. 1, 2012 through

Dec. 31, 2012

Jan. 1, 2013 and thereafter

5/8″ & 3/4″

$19.95

$18.50

$17.15

$17.15

$17.15

1″

$30.80

$28.60

$26.50

$26.50

$26.50

1-1/2″

$57.65

$53.55

$49.65

$49.65

$49.65

2″

$90.00

$83.60

$77.55

$77.55

$77.55

3″

$165.60

$153.85

$142.70

$142.70

$142.70

4″

$273.50

$254.10

$235.80

$235.80

$235.80

6″

$543.05

$504.60

$468.20

$468.20

$468.20

8″

$866.70

$805.30

$747.25

$747.25

$747.25

 

2.     Water use charge per one hundred cubic feet (HFC) used:

 

Rate Type*

Jan. 1, 2009 through
Dec. 31, 2009

Jan. 1, 2010 through

Dec. 31, 2010

Jan. 1, 2011 through

Dec. 31, 2011

Jan. 1, 2012 through

Dec. 31, 2012

Jan. 1, 2013 and thereafter

Block 1

$1.03

$1.03

$1.03

$1.03

$1.03

Block 2

$1.35

$1.35

$1.35

$1.35

$1.35

Block 3

$2.72

$2.72

$2.72

$2.72

$2.72

 

*       The applicable rate is determined by the amount of water usage. In any given month, if a customer uses an amount of water that is below the applicable Block 1 limit, then the customer will pay based on the Block 1 rate. In contrast, if the customer uses an amount of water that is above the applicable Block 1 limit, then the customer will pay as follows: (a) Block 1 rate for each HCF up to the Block 1 limit, (b) Block 2 rate for each HCF above the Block 1 limit but below the Block 2 Limit, and (c) Block 3 rate for each HCF used above the Block 2 Limit.

 

Block 1 and Block 2 limits in HCF for the various meter sizes are as follows:

 

Meter Size

Block 1 Limit (HCF)

Block 2 Limit (HCF)

5/8″ & 3/4″

20

300

1″

30

300

1-1/2″

60

300

2″

90

300

3″

180

300

4″

280

300

6″

340

*

8″

520

*

 

                                        *           For 6″ and 8″ meters, usage above the Block 1 limit will trigger the Block 3 water user charge.

 

B.     Single Meter-Multiunit Discount. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, all multiresidential water customers that have more than ten units and are served by one water meter shall receive a monthly discount of one dollar and four cents per non-vacant unit for each unit over ten units.

C.     Areas with No Water Meter. In those areas where no water meter is required pursuant to Section B of Section 13.04.010, the city’s director of public works shall estimate the monthly water usage based on the rates set forth above. (Ord. 1514 § 2, 2012; Res. R2011-220; Ord. 1409 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1236 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1178 § 2, 2000; amended during 2/01 supplement; Ord. 1089 § 1, 1998; Res. R1997-61; Res. R1997-6; prior code § 22-6)

 

13.04.070 Deposit required.
A.    All persons making application for new service, or making application for a change of service site who have not maintained a satisfactory collection record with the city, shall make a deposit at the time of making the application. The amount of the deposit for utility services shall be one hundred dollars.

B.     All persons who have a delinquent account(s) at the point of being disconnected shall be required to make a deposit of one hundred dollars if there is not a current deposit available on the delinquent account.

C.     Upon satisfactory collection of a subscriber’s utility bill for a consecutive twelve-month period, the deposit paid under this section shall be applied to the current balance of the account.

D.    “Satisfactory collection” as used in this section means a payment record reflecting no more than two delinquent notices within a consecutive twelve-month period. (Ord. 1156 § 1, 2000; Ord. 816 § 1, 1989; prior code § 22-7)

 

13.04.080 Disconnection—Service reestablishment.
Any consumer whose service has been disconnected for failure to pay bills as provided in this chapter, may be required, before service is resumed, to reestablish his or her credit as provided in the preceding section. (Prior code § 22-8)

 

13.04.090 Service disconnection.
Water bills are due and payable within thirty days from the mailing of the bill. Water service may be shut off for nonpayment; provided, that the delinquent customer is first notified of the intended shut off and given an opportunity for a hearing on the matter. Once shut off, service will not be restored until the delinquent bills are paid. (Ord. 775 § 14, 1987; prior code § 22-9)

 

13.04.100 Unsafe apparatus—Service discontinuance.
The city shall have the right of refusing to or ceasing to deliver water to a consumer if any part of the consumer’s service appliances or apparatus shall at any time be unsafe, or if the utilization of water by means thereof shall be prohibited under authority of any law or municipal ordinance or regulation (until such law, ordinance or regulation shall be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction), and may refuse to serve until the consumer shall put such part in good and safe condition and comply with all the laws, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto. (Prior code § 22-10)

 

13.04.110 Fraud—Refusal of service.
The city shall have the right to refuse to serve water to any person or premises at any time or to discontinue service if found necessary to do so in order to protect itself against fraud or abuse. (Prior code § 22-11)

 

13.04.120 Vacation of premises—Notice to city.
Each consumer about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the city shall give written notice of his or her intended removal at least two days prior thereto, specifying the date service is desired to be discontinued, otherwise, he or she will be held responsible for all water furnished to such premises until the city shall have notice of such removal or discontinuance. (Prior code § 22-12)

 

13.04.130 Reconnection charge.
When water service has been discontinued for nonpayment of water bill pursuant to Section 13.04.090, reconnection will be made only after payment of the delinquent payment and reconnection charges as adopted by city council resolution. (Prior code § 22-13)

 

13.04.140 Billing—Payment.
A.    Bills for metered water services will be rendered according to registration of the meter at regular intervals, and are due and payable upon presentation. Payment shall be made at the water office in the City Hall or at the city’s option, to duly authorized collectors of the city.

B.     All bills for water supplied customers shall be delinquent on the fifteenth of the following month for which the service was rendered.

C.     Removal bills, special bills, bills rendered on vacation of premises or bills rendered to persons discontinuing the service, shall be paid on presentation. Bills for connections of service shall be paid on presentation, and bills for reconnection likewise. Payments for deposits or to reinstate deposits as required under the rules and regulations of the city shall be paid before service will be connected or reconnected.

D.    All water service revenues collected shall be retained by the city regardless of the date of termination of water service and no rebates will be made for midmonth disconnection.

E.     If the monthly service charge is not paid when due, on the first day of each calendar month, thereafter a penalty of two percent of the amount of the delinquent rate shall be added. (Ord. 1409 § 3, 2008; prior code § 22-14)

 

13.04.150 Temporary service—Fee.
A.    Temporary service, as considered in this chapter, refers to service to circuses, bazaars, fairs, temporary restaurants, construction works, etc., of a temporary nature.

B.     The city will, if in its opinion the furnishing of such service will not create a hardship upon it or its consumers, furnish temporary services under the following conditions: The applicant for such temporary services shall be required to pay to the city, in advance or otherwise, as the city may elect, the net cost of installing and removing any facilities necessary in connection with furnishing of such service by the city.

C.     Potable water use for construction purposes is prohibited, except on projects of less than twenty acres in total project acreage and physically located further than one mile from the water quality control facility’s (WQCF) recycled water fill station. Projects in excess of twenty acres or closer than one mile to the WQCF’s recycled water fill station may use city supplied recycled water. In order to receive recycled water, the water truck operator must obtain a certification card from the public works department for recycled water handling by attending a mandatory workshop on recycled water.

D.    Persons authorized to use potable water for construction purposes shall obtain a water permit from the city and shall obtain a water meter and backflow prevention assembly from the city. All potable water used for construction purposes shall be metered by said city-provided assembly. The charges associated with potable water consumption and the use of the water meter / backflow prevention assembly are as follows:

 

Meter Size

Deposit*

Monthly Rental Charge

Water Consumption Charge per Hundred Cubic Feet Used

Sept 1, 2018 and thereafter

Sept 1, 2018 and thereafter

Sept 1, 2018 and thereafter

1″

$1,500

$26.50

$3.76

3″

$5,000

$142.70

$3.76

* The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon return of the water meter/backflow prevention assembly provided it is returned in the same condition as furnished.

 

E.     The monthly rental charge and water consumption charges shall be adjusted beginning January 1, 2019 based on the change of the Twenty-City U.S. Average Engineering New Record Official July Construction Costs Index. (Ord. O2018-21 § 1; Ord. 1423 § 2, 2008; prior code § 22-15)

 

13.04.160 Interruption of service—City not liable.
A.    The city will exercise reasonable diligence and care to furnish and deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the consumer, and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery of same. The city shall not be liable for interruption or shortage or insufficiency of supply, or any loss or damage occasioned thereby, if the same is caused by inevitable accident, act of God, fires, strikes, riots, war or any other cause not within its control.

B.     The city, whenever it shall find it necessary for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system, shall have the right to suspend temporarily the delivery of water, but in all cases, reasonable notice thereof, as circumstances will permit, will be given to the consumers, and the making of such repairs and improvements will be prosecuted as rapidly as may be practicable, and, if practicable, at such times as will cause the least inconvenience to the consumers. (Prior code § 22-16)

 

13.04.170 Resale of water—Prohibited.
Unless specifically agreed upon, the consumer shall not resell any of the water received by him or her from the city to any other person, or to any other party or for any other purpose, or on other premises than specified in his or her application for service. (Prior code § 22-17)

 

13.04.180 Right of entry.
The city shall have the right to remove any of its property installed on the consumer’s premises at the termination of service. (Prior code § 22-18)

 

13.04.190 Damage to city property—Liability.
Any damage occurring to a meter or other appliance or pipes owned by the city caused by carelessness or negligence of the consumer, including any damage which may result from hot water or steam from any boiler or heater on consumer’s premises, shall be paid for by the consumer on presentation of a bill therefor. (Prior code § 22-19)

 

13.04.200 Inspectors, agents and employees—Personal compensation prohibited.
All inspectors, agents and employees of the city are prohibited to demand or accept any personal compensation for services rendered to a consumer. (Prior code § 22-20)

 

13.04.210 Unlawful water use.
It is unlawful for any person to use, permit or allow the use of water in any of the following manners:

A.    1.     For washing of sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, aprons or other non-landscaped exterior ground areas, except as allowed by a city issued washing permit for the washing of drive-ways, parking lots, aprons and other non-landscaped areas of commercial and industrial properties for the purpose of maintaining the area in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.

2.     All businesses proposing to water wash areas identified in subsection (A)(1) shall obtain a washing permit from the department of public works.

B.     Watering of landscaping, washing of exterior buildings or filling of swimming pools:

1.     At locations bearing a street address ending in an even number except on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday during daylight savings time;

2.     At locations bearing a street address ending in an odd number except on Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday during daylight savings time;

3.     At any location between the hours of twelve noon to six p.m. on any day;

4.     At all locations and all times, watering of landscapes is prohibited on Monday;

5.     The following shall not be subject to the watering day and time restrictions:

a.     All locations within twenty-one days of landscape installation,

b.     Manteca public golf course,

c.     City parks, the City Hall complex, and Manteca Unified School District landscapes;

6.     Irrigating outdoors during and within forty-eight hours following measurable (at a minimum any amount of rainfall that generates run-off or puddles) rainfall.

C.     Taking of water from any fire hydrant except by regularly constituted fire protection agencies or provided a permit for construction water has been obtained through the public works department.

D.    Allowing the escape of water through leaks, breaks or malfunction in the user’s plumbing or distribution system for more than twenty-four hours after discovery thereof by, or notice thereof to, the user.

E.     Washing of automobiles or boats except:

1.     By use of a quick-acting positive shut-off nozzle on the hose or bucket and sponge;

2.     At a commercial car wash.

F.     Serving water by restaurants except upon request of a customer.

G.    In such a manner so that water flows into a gutter or other drainage area for a period exceeding five minutes.

H.    Using potable water in decorative water features that do not recirculate the water.

I.      Hotels and motels must offer their guests the option to not have their linens and towels laundered daily, and prominently display this option in each guest room. (Ord. 1583 §§ 1, 2, 2016; Ord. 1569 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1548 §§ 2, 3, 2014; Ord. 1239 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1126 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1111 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1110 § 2, 1999; Ord. 986 § 1, 1994; Ord. 915 § 1, 1991; Ord. 911 § 2, 1991; Ord. 870 § 1, 1990)

 

13.04.220 Penalties.
Penalties shall be imposed for violation of any of the provisions of Section 13.04.210 and shall follow Chapter 1.10 Administrative Enforcement Provisions, of the Manteca Municipal Code. (Ord. 1583 § 3, 2016; Ord. 1548 § 4, 2014; Ord. 915 § 2, 1991; Ord. 870 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 13.06 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
13.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is as follows:

A.    To protect the public water system against actual or potential contamination through cross-connections by isolating sources of contamination that may occur within a water user’s premises because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises;

B.     To eliminate existing connections between public water systems and other sources of water, plumbing fixtures, or industrial piping systems that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption;

C.     To eliminate cross-connection between drinking water systems and sources of contamination;

D.    To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future; and

E.     To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. 926, 1991)

 

13.06.020 Responsibility and scope of program.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Public Health, entitled “Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections.”

The cross-connection control program includes the following elements:

A.    The conducting of surveys and on-site inspections to identify water user premises where cross-connections are likely to occur;

B.     The requirement of backflow protection by the water user, at his or her expense, at the user’s service connection or within the user’s premises, or both;

C.     The provision of at least one person trained in cross-connection control to carry out the cross-connection program;

D.    The requirement for testing of approved backflow prevention devices, at the user’s expense, on an annual or more frequent basis, and establishment of a procedure or system for notification of the schedule for testing;

E.     The maintenance of records of locations, tests and repair of approved backflow prevention devices. (Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms have the following meanings:

“Air-gap separation” means a physical break between a supply pipe; and a receiving vessel. The air-gap separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, and in no case shall it be less than one inch.

“Approved backflow prevention device” means any device which has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests per-formed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services and which is acceptable for installation within the city of Manteca.

“Approved water supply” means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

“Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.

“AWWA standard” means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association.

“Backflow” means a flow condition caused by a differential in pressure that creates a flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow; back pressure is the other cause.

“Contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

“Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, unwholesome and potable as determined by the health agency. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, are considered to be cross-connections.

“Double check valve assembly” means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.

“Health agency” means the California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system.

“Local health agency” means the county or city health authority.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.

“Premises” means any and all areas on a water user’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

“Public water system” means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five persons daily at least sixty days out of the year.

“Reclaimed water” means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable uses.

“Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.

“Service connection” refers to the point of connection of a water user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

“Water supplier” means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.

“Water user” means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (Ord. 1107 § 2, 1999; Ord. 1058 § 1, 1997; Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.040 Cross-connection protection requirements.
A.    General Provisions.

1.     Unprotected cross-connections with the public water system are prohibited.

2.     Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary, the city shall require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device at his or her expense for continued service or before a new service will be granted.

3.     Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user’s premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of device to be installed shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Where Protection is Required.

1.     Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to premises have an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.

2.     Each service connection, from the city water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system, shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city water system which have been subjected to deterioration of sanitary quality.

3.     Approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health department and the city, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.

4.     Where several businesses and/or buildings at one location are served by a single service connection to the city water system, an approved backflow prevention device will be required at the service connection point. In addition, any business/building use that requires a backflow prevention device, shall have a separate device installed on their premises where the service connection line enters their business/building.

C.     Type of Protection Required.

1.     The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type or types of protective device or devices that shall be required (listed here in increasing level of protection) include: reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP), or an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city, but not a lower level of protection than required by the city. Existing double check valve assembly devices which are currently installed may remain in service until such time as they need to be replaced, at which time they shall be replaced with a currently approved protective device. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user’s water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard, are given in Table 13.06.040. Situations which are not covered in Table 13.06.040 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city and/or health agency.

2.     Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet flow may occur, shall have at least a double check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters.

 

Table 13.06.040

 

BUSINESS TYPES OR ON-SITE USES REQUIRING THE PROTECTION OF A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE

Fire systems (no auxiliary supply)

BUSINESS TYPES OR ON-SITE USES REQUIRING INSTALLATION OF A REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW DEVICE

Animal services, pet shops (retail or supplies)

Automotive repair or wrecking

Auxiliary water systems* (interconnected or not) (*Private wells are considered auxiliary water systems.)

Barber and beauty shops (all services)

Beverage, bottling or processing plants

Blueprint machines

Brewery

Buildings with booster pump systems and/or water storage tanks

Canneries, packing houses, or reduction plants

Car washes or car washing equipment

Chemical processing or storage facilities

Cold storage plants

Cooling towers

Dairies

Dehydration tanks

Dye works

Fertilizer manufacturing

Film processing laboratories

Fire systems (auxiliary supply)

Fish ponds

Food processing plants

Gas stations

Grocery store

HVAC systems using water

Hospitals

Hotels, motels

Hydraulic lifts

Industrial fluid systems

Irrigation systems for commercial/industrial users

Irrigation systems with chemical feed

Laboratories

Laundries

Lavatories, restrooms (open to public use)

Livestock or poultry

Manufacturing or processing using toxic materials

Medical/dental buildings and clinics

Metal plating plants

Mobile home parks

Morgues

Mortuaries

Multi-story buildings

Nursing homes

Oil or gas production facilities

Oil or gas tanks

Open reservoirs, tanks

Paper or paper products plants

Petroleum process or storage locations

Plating plants

Ponds, pools, fountains (ornamental)

Power plants

Radioactive material processing/handling

Reclamation systems (any location with)

Restaurants

Sand and gravel plants

Schools (lab facility, auxiliary supply)

Schools (lab facility, no auxiliary supply)

Schools (no lab facility, auxiliary supply)

Schools (no lab facility, no auxiliary supply)

Sewage treatment plants

Soda fountains

Solar heating

Steam-generating facilities

Storage tanks for liquids

Swimming pools, public

Veterinary clinics

Warehousing and storage

Water-cooled equipment

Water treatment facilities

Water-using mechanical equipment

Wastewater reclamation*(*not interconnected)

BUSINESS TYPES OR ON-SITE USES REQUIRING THE PROTECTION OF AIR-GAP SEPARATION

Sewage pumping facilities

Spray tanks (portable for insecticide/herbicide

Storm drain pumping facilities

Tank trucks using hydrant supply

Wastewater reclamation (interconnected)

 

(Ord. 1107 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1076 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1058 §§ 2, 3, 1997; Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.050 Backflow prevention devices.
A.    Approved Backflow Prevention Devices.

1.     Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city potable water system.

2.     A list of approved backflow prevention devices shall be provided upon request to any affected customer.

B.     Approved Backflow Prevention Device Installation.

1.     Approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17, of the California Code of Regulations. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user’s connection. The city shall have the final authority in determining the required location of an approved backflow prevention device.

a.     Air-gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters from the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.

b.     Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above grade but not more than thirty-six inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The device shall be installed in a horizontal position so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the city.

C.     Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance.

1.     The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the city. Approved backflow prevention devices shall be tested immediately after installation, relocation, or repair, and at least annually thereafter. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning and approved by the city. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled and/or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.

2.     The city shall supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test approved backflow prevention devices. The city may notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. It is the responsibility of the affected customer to maintain annual testing of any device, whether the city notifies that customer or not. It is, and always will be, the water user’s responsibility to comply with state and federal laws with regard to backflow prevention. Notification of affected customers is provided by the city as a courtesy only and does not absolve the customer from their responsibility for compliance.

D.    Backflow Prevention Device Removal. Approval shall be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, repaired, or replaced.

1.     Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future.

2.     Relocation. A device may be relocated following approval by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device.

3.     Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device.

4.     Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved.

(Ord. 1058 §4, 1997; Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.060 Administrative procedures.
A.    Water System Survey.

1.     The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the city, upon its request, for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device shall be installed before service will be granted. A city building permit is required for installation of the device.

2.     The city may require an on-premises inspection by a water division employee to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his or her piping system shall be required to install the approved backflow prevention device the city considers necessary.

3.     The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his or her piping system shall be required to install the approved backflow prevention device the city considers necessary.

B.     Customer Notification—Device Installation.

1.     The city will notify the water user of the survey findings listing the corrective actions to be taken, if any are required. A period of time, not to exceed sixty days, shall be given to complete all corrective actions required, including installation of approved backflow prevention devices.

2.     A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in the first notice within the specified period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may discontinue water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken.

C.     Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance.

1.     The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the device tested, and will include the necessary form to be completed and submitted to the city by the water user.

2.     A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his or her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his or her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may discontinue water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested.

(Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.070 Water service discontinuation.
A.    General. In the event the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service.

B.     Basis for Discontinuation. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service discontinuation shall include the following items:

1.     Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device;

2.     Refusal to test a backflow prevention device;

3.     Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device;

4.     Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device;

5.     Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;

6.     Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

7.     Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water supply; and/or

8.     A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.

C.     Water Service Discontinuation Procedures.

1.     For conditions 1, 2, 3 or 4 of subsection B of this section, the city shall discontinue service to a water user’s premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be discontinued.

2.     For conditions 5, 6, 7 or 8 of subsection B of this section, the city will take the following steps:

a.     Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to discontinue water service;

b.     Discontinue water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city.

(Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.080 Requirements for certification to check backflow prevention devices.
A.    Each applicant for certification to check backflow prevention devices shall file a valid American Water Works Association, California/Nevada Section, certificate for backflow prevention device general tester with the director of public works, together with a copy of their city business license.

B.     Each applicant for certification to check backflow prevention devices must demonstrate competency in all phases of backflow prevention device testing and repair by means of education and/or experience. Each applicant shall furnish evidence that they have the necessary tools and equipment available to properly test and repair backflow prevention devices.

C.     Person certified to check backflow prevention devices shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests conducted, repairs made, and reports prepared in their name.

D.    The list of certified testers of backflow prevention devices shall be kept on file with the city director of public works. Testers shall provide verification to the director of public works that they possess a valid certification; and a valid city business license at least annually. Failure to do so shall be cause for removal from the city’s list of certified testers for improper testing, improper repairs and/or improper reporting. The city shall notify the tester that their name is to be removed form the list of qualified testers, giving the reasons for removal. The tester will have ten days from the date of notification to file an appeal with the city council. (Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.090 Miscellaneous.
The California State Manual of Cross-Connection Control Practices and Procedures, the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California, and the Accepted Procedure and Practice in Cross-Connection Control Manual of the American Water Works Association are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. If any conflict exists between these manuals and this chapter, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

 

13.06.100 Violation—Penalty.
It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, for any person at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the water division of the department of public works, and any other source of water supply; or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction or otherwise, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the public water system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. It is further unlawful, and a misdemeanor, for any person to violate any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 926 (part), 1991)

Chapter 13.08 WATER WELLS
13.08.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Abandoned well” means any well whose original purpose and use has been permanently discontinued or which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its original purpose.

“Agricultural well” means any water well used to supply water for irrigation, livestock operation or other agricultural purposes not including any uses of domestic water.

“Air conditioning wells” means wells constructed to return to the ground, in a closed system, well water which has been used as a coolant in air-conditioning processes.

“Board of trustees” means the board of trustees of the San Joaquin Local Health District.

“Cathodic protection well” means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet deep constructed by any means for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground (commonly referred to as cathodic protection).

“Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the waters by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. Contamination shall include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste, whether or not waters of the city are affected.

“Destruction of well” means to restore as nearly as practicable those conditions which existed prior to the construction of the well.

“Disposal well” means a hole dug, bored or drilled into any known aquifers in which are deposited matters or substances, which, by reason of temperature or content, may be deleterious to ground water.

“District health officer” means the health officer of the San Joaquin Local Health District or his or her authorized representative.

“Geophysical well” means a well used for testing or logging strata or to obtain data from the underground.

“Health district” means the San Joaquin Local Health District.

“Individual domestic water well” means any water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or duplex.

“Industrial well” means any water well used to supply industry on an individual basis.

“Injection or recharge well” means any well constructed to introduce water into the underground as a means of replenishing ground water basins.

“Person” means any natural person, individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association, joint venture, joint stock company, organization, club, company, business trust, lessee, agent, servant, officer, employee, unincorporated association or representative of same.

“Pollution” means an alteration of the quality of the waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects:

1.     The value of such water for beneficial uses; or

2.     Facilities which serve such beneficial uses.

“Pollution” may include “contamination.”

“Public domestic water supply well” means any water well used to supply domestic water to more than one individual parcel or property or any water supply which services any premises which contains a temporary or permanent resort, hotel, apartment house, triplex, motel, institution, labor camp, trailer park, gas station, cafe, school, subdivision or any commercial establishment.

“Pump contractor” means any person or company licensed by the state contractors license law, as provided in Division 3, Chapter 9, of the Business and Professions Code, to install, service or repair a pump.

Recharge Well. See “Injection well.”

“Sanitary hazards” means inadequacies, actual or potential, which may permit the entrance of pollutants, contaminants or pathogenic organisms into the water, thereby impairing the water quality or rendering it injurious to public health.

Seal, Annular. “Annular seal” means the cement grout between the conductor casing or bore and the casing.

Seal, Sanitary. “Sanitary seal” means a grout, mastic or mechanical device used to make a water-tight joint between the pump and casing or the concrete base.

Seal, Surface. “Surface seal” means a monolithically poured concrete platform constructed around the top of the well casing on thoroughly compacted earth.

Test Well. See Geophysical Well.

“Waters of the city” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the city.

“Water quality” is a term used to describe the chemical, physical and biological characteristics of water in respect to its suitability for a particular purpose. The same water may be of good quality for one purpose or use, and bad or poor for another, depending upon its characteristics and the requirements for the particular use.

“Well contractor” means any person or company licensed by the State Contractors License Law, as provided in the business and professions code in Title 5.

“Well pit” means an excavation in which the well head or top of well casing is installed below the ground surface.

“Well” or “water well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting or recharging ground water or testing or logging of stratum to obtain data from the underground. This definition shall not include:

1.     Oil and gas wells or geothermal wells constructed under jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells;

2.     Wells used for the purpose of:

a.     Dewatering excavation during construction, or

b.     Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.

(Prior code § 22-30)

 

13.08.020 Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to all territory lying within the city limits of the city, the county and the state. (Prior code § 22-31)

 

13.08.030 Special requirements.
Special requirements may be set to protect the good quality of the water in the city. (Prior code § 22-32)

 

13.08.040 Permit—Required.
No person, as principal, servant, agent or employee, shall dig, drill, bore, drive, repair, replace, install or set a pump for use on any well, whether the well is to be used for domestic, irrigation, testing, geophysical or cathodic protection or other purposes without having a valid unrevoked or unsuspended permit to do so from the district health officer. The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issue. No permit is necessary to replace or repair equipment if the sanitary seal is not broken. A standard fee may be charged for issuing permit. This fee will be determined by the city after a public hearing. (Prior code § 22-33)

 

13.08.050 Permit—Application.
Every person proposing to dig, drill, bore, drive, repair, deepen or destroy any well, shall, before commencing the work, apply to the district health officer for approval of the well site and method of installation or destruction, and for a permit to do the work. Such application shall be on forms furnished by the district health officer and contain such information as the district health officer may require. Such application is to be submitted at least forty-eight hours prior to the proposed commencement of work on such permit application, as prescribed in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 22-34)

 

13.08.060 Permit—Compliance.
The applicant applying for a permit for the construction, repair or destruction of the well shall assume the responsibility of complying with all requirements of such permit and this chapter, including such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 22-35)

 

13.08.070 Permit—Granting.
Permits shall be granted to any owner or his or her authorized representative and to those persons having a valid city business license and a license from the State Contractors License Board as well or pump contractor. (Prior code § 22-36)

 

13.08.080 Emergency repairs.
In the event of an emergency, as evidenced by lack of water, repairs may proceed without a permit. Emergency repairs include the construction of a new well or the repair, deepening or replacement of a well or pump. All work done under emergency conditions shall comply with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. In all such cases, the owner or contractor must file a statement that this was an emergency repair and the reason for the repair. Application for emergency repairs must be made within forty-eight hours after such repairs are begun, excluding weekends and holidays. (Prior code § 22-37)

 

13.08.090 Special permits—Issuance.
The district health officer may grant special permits for limited periods of time when, in his or her opinion, the application of this chapter or rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter would be impracticable or unnecessary. In issuing such special permits, the district health officer may prescribe such conditions as in his or her judgment will be necessary to protect the public health. (Prior code § 22-38)

 

13.08.100 Well driller’s report.
Upon completion of a well, the applicant or the licensed contractor shall file a copy of a well driller’s report with the health district. These report forms will be furnished by the district health officer. (Prior code § 22-39)

 

13.08.110 Well pits.
The construction, use or installation of well pits shall not be permitted, except under unusual circumstances as determined by the district health officer. (Prior code § 22-40)

 

13.08.120 Well drilling requirements.
A.    Sanitary Seal. All wells shall have a sanitary seal.

B.     Concrete Platform or Slab Required. All wells, except cathodic protection wells, shall have a concrete platform or slab constructed to prevent the entrance of surface water from any source into the well or the underground water source.

C.     Disinfection. After the construction or repair of individual domestic or public domestic water wells and prior to the use of the wells, the wells an all appurtenances thereto shall be adequately disinfected.

D.    Grout Seal on Individual or Public Domestic Water Supply Wells. Public domestic water supply and individual domestic wells shall have a grout seal in the annular space.

E.     Health Limitations. The district health officer may order changes in the location of water wells and in the methods, means and manner of constructing water wells in order that the same shall not constitute a menace to the health of human beings or animals, or a detriment to the ground water sources. The order of the district health officer shall designate the period within which such changes are to be made.

F.     Inspections. The well site, location, material and methods used may be inspected by the district health officer at any time prior to or during construction or destruction of any well. The district health officer shall be informed when the work is completed and thereafter shall make a final inspection.

G.    Abandonment of Wells. Upon determination that any well is abandoned as provided in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, that well must be destroyed in the manner prescribed so that entrance of degraded or contaminated water into usable aquifers or creation of a safety hazard are minimized.

H.    Destruction of Wells. The district health officer is authorized, after reasonable efforts to eliminate pollution, contamination or a safety hazard, to enforce the permanent abandonment by destruction of any well that is polluted, contaminated or is so located as to become polluted or contaminated or is a safety hazard. The district health officer is authorized to destroy any such well and to recover the cost of the destruction from the owner of the property on which the well is located.

I.      Out-of-service Wells. If the owner intends to cease use of a well for a period of six months or more, he or she shall inform the district health officer. Such a well shall be protected from any source of contamination while the well is temporarily out of service. The owner shall maintain such a well as required in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter pertaining to out-of-service wells. (Prior code § 22-41)

 

13.08.130 Rules adoption.
A.    Adoption. The board of trustees shall adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, standards for implementation of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this chapter or with the laws of the state. The rules and regulations shall be adopted only after the board of trustees has considered the matter at a public hearing at which all interested persons have been afforded the opportunity to urge or oppose adoption of the proposed rules and regulations.

B.     Appeals to the Board of Trustees. Any person whose application for a permit or for approval of a proposed action under this chapter, has been denied by the district health officer may, within thirty days after the date of such denial, appeal therefrom in writing to the board of trustees. Such appeal shall be heard by the board of trustees at its next regular meeting thereafter unless the appeal was filed within five days of such meeting, in which event, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting subsequent thereto. The board of trustees shall uphold or reverse the denial of the application or of the approval sought and shall make such orders in connection with the matter as may be necessary to protect and preserve the public health. (Prior code § 22-42)

 

13.08.140 Appeals.
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of trustees acting pursuant to subsection B of Section 13.08.130, he or she may, within ten days after that decision, appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. Thereafter, the city council shall set the appeal for hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant no less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, any interested party may present oral or written evidence. Following the hearing the city council shall render a decision on the appeal and may sustain, modify or reverse any action of the board of trustees. (Prior code § 22-43(a))

 

13.08.150 Enforcement.
The district health officer shall enforce this chapter and all orders, rules and regulations enacted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 2243(b))

Chapter 13.12 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
13.12.010 Sewer connection charges.
Sewer connection charges are established in the amounts set forth in this chapter for the privilege of connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the city. (Prior code § 14-7)

 

13.12.055 Additional connection charge.
A.    Each residential dwelling utilizing Phase 3 wastewater treatment capacity and each commercial, industrial and institutional facility shall pay a sewer connection charge as follows:

 

LAND USE

CHARGE

Residential

Very Low Density

$3,961 per unit

Low Density

$3,961 per unit

Medium Density

$3,301 per unit

High Density

$3,301 per unit

Commercial

Office Professional

$1,493 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Neighborhood/Community Commercial

$1,640 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Business/Visitor Services

$1,640 per 1,000 sq. ft.

General Commercial

$1,640 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Commercial Recreation

$1,640 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Light Industrial

$1,692 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Heavy Industrial

$1,692 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

B.     The connection charges specified in subsection A shall be subject to payment in accordance with Section 13.12.070 of this chapter. Nonpayment of such charge may result in disconnection in accordance with Section 13.12.080 of this chapter. All revenue derived from the connection charges provided by this section shall be used for the Manteca wastewater quality control facility Phase 3 upgrade and expansion project. (Ord. 1518 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1294 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1244 § 2, 2003)

 

13.12.057 WQCF Phase 3 completion charge.
A.    In addition to the sewer connection charges provided by Section 13.12.055 of this chapter, each residential dwelling utilizing WQCF Phase 3 wastewater treatment capacity and each commercial, industrial and institutional facility shall pay a sewer connection charge as follows:

 

Land Use

WQCF Phase 3 Completion Charge

Basis on Which Charged

Residential

Very Low Density

$2,003

per unit

Low Density

$2,003

per unit

Medium Density

$1,802

per unit

High Density

$1,802

per unit

Commercial

Office Professional

$815

per 1,000 sq. ft.

Neighborhood/Community Commercial

$895

per 1 000 sq. ft.

Business/Visitor Services

$895

per 1 000 sq. ft.

General Commercial

$895

per 1,000 sq. ft.

Commercial Recreation

$895

per 1 000 sq. ft.

Light Industrial

$924

per 1,000 sq. ft.

Heavy Industrial

$924

per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

B.     The connection charge specified in subsection A of this section shall be subject to payment in accordance with Section 13.12.070 of this chapter. Nonpayment of such charge may result in disconnection in accordance with Section 13.12.080 of this chapter. All revenue derived from the connection charge provided by this section shall be used for the Manteca wastewater quality control facility Phase 3 upgrade and expansion project. (Ord. 1518 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1411 § 2, 2009)

 

13.12.070 Payment.
A.    Except as provided in subsection C, connection charges shall be due and payable at the time building permits are obtained or, when no building permit is required, prior to actual connection to the city system. For mobile home parks, connection charges shall be paid prior to the time of first connection for the total number of mobile home spaces permitted by the terms of the use permit.

B.     The charges paid shall be the charge that is applicable at the time the permit is obtained or connection is made.

C.     Connection charges for residential dwellings existing and lawfully occupied as of July 1, 1991 within the city limits may be paid over a five-year period (twenty percent of the charge each year) where the dwelling is owner-occupied at the time of the application for connection and the household income for the occupants of the dwelling does not exceed the moderate income level designated by the income standards used by the county in administering community development block grant funding in effect at the time of application. In such cases, the first payment shall be made at the time of actual connection to the city system and the remaining payments shall be due annually on the anniversary date of the connection. (Ord. 905 § 1, 1991; Ord. 884 § 1, 1990; prior code § 14-7.6)

 

13.12.080 Disconnection for nonpayment.
The city may disconnect any facility from the sewer system if connection was made without city permission and without the payment of the appropriate connection charge. The cost to the city of disconnection shall be paid in addition to connection charges prior to reconnection. (Prior code § 14-7.8)

 

13.12.090 Revenue use.
All revenue derived from connection charges shall be deposited in the capital improvement fund and used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, reimbursement, maintenance and operation of the sanitary sewer and treatment system of the city. (Prior code § 14-7.9)

Chapter 13.14 SEWER CAPACITY CHARGES
13.14.010 Pestana Avenue sewer capacity charges.
Those property owners who are served by the Pestana Avenue sewer trunk line shall pay a sewer capacity charge in the amount set forth in the Table of Pestana Avenue Sanitary Sewer Capacity Charges adopted by the city council and on file in the department of public works. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 1994)

 

13.14.020 Collection of capacity charges.
Capacity charges required pursuant to Section 13.14.010 shall be due and payable at the time that a building permit is obtained for a building that will connect to the Pestana Avenue sewer. However, if no capacity charge was paid at the time that a building permit was issued for a building that will connect to the Pestana Avenue sewer, then the capacity charge will be paid prior to actual connection to the Pestana Avenue sewer. For mobile home parks, capacity charges for the total number of mobile home spaces shall be paid prior to the time of the connection of the first space to the Pestana Avenue sewer.

The capacity charge shall be paid in the amount that is in effect at the time of payment. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 1994)

 

13.14.030 Adjustment.
Capacity charges shall be adjusted on January 1st of each year based upon the change to the Twenty-City Engineering News-Record Construction Costs Index. The adjusted capacity charges shall be calculated by the public works director using the following formula:

 

Adjusted capacity charge =

(Capacity charge set forth in the Table of Pestana Avenue Sanitary Sewer Capacity Charges)

X

(ENR index for January 1st

ENR index of 5070.66 for January, 1993)

 

The adjusted capacity charge shall be rounded to the nearest dollar. (Ord. 1008 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 13.16 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
13.16.010 Monthly rates.
Customers of the city’s sewer collection and treatment system shall pay monthly charges as follows:

 

Rate Category

Jan. 1, 2009 through
Dec. 31, 2009

Jan. 1, 2010 through
Dec. 31, 2010

Jan. 1, 2011 through
Dec. 31, 2011

Jan. 1, 2012 through
Dec. 31, 2012

Jan. 1, 2013 and Thereafter

Basis on Which Rates Charged

Residential and equivalents

$39.50

$43.30

$43.30

$43.30

$43.30

per unit

Trailer park

$33.36

$36.57

$36.57

$36.57

$36.57

per 1,000 CF

Rooming houses

$25.26

$27.70

$27.70

$27.70

$27.70

per 1,000 CF

Commercial/retail

$28.24

$30.96

$30.96

$30.96

$30.96

per 1,000 CF

Hotel/motel

$30.84

$33.81

$33.81

$33.81

$33.81

per 1,000 CF

Hotel/motel w/kitchen

$56.47

$61.89

$61.89

$61.89

$61.89

per 1,000 CF

Car washes/ laundromats

$22.37

$24.53

$24.53

$24.53

$24.53

per 1,000 CF

Service stations (metered)

$31.05

$34.04

$34.04

$34.04

$34.04

per 1,000 CF

Office/light industrial

$23.12

$25.35

$25.35

$25.35

$25.35

per 1,000 CF

Restaurants

$66.09

$72.42

$72.42

$72.42

$72.42

per 1,000 CF

Markets

$68.85

$75.45

$75.45

$75.45

$75.45

per 1,000 CF

Mortuaries

$68.85

$75.45

$75.45

$75.45

$75.45

per 1,000 CF

Hospitals

$29.82

$32.69

$32.69

$32.69

$32.69

per 1,000 CF

Elementary schools

$21.94

$24.06

$24.06

$24.06

$24.06

per 1,000 CF

Secondary schools

$21.94

$24.06

$24.06

$24.06

$28.71

per 1,000 CF

Churches

$26.18

$28.71

$28.71

$28.71

$28.71

per 1,000 CF

Nonprofit

$25.37

$27.82

$27.82

$27.82

$27.82

per 1,000 CF

Commercial mixed use

$36.70

$40.23

$40.23

$40.23

$40.23

per 1,000 CF

Industrial

flow

$1,841.15

$2,023.24

$2,023.24

$2,023.24

$2,023.24

per MG

biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)

$0.368

$0.404

$0.404

$0.404

$0.404

per lb

suspended solids (SS)

$0.696

$0.765

$0.765

$0.765

$0.765

per lb

nitrogen (N)

$2.608

$2.866

$2.866

$2.866

$2.866

per lb

Septage

$150.76

$165.16

$165.16

$165.16

$165.16

per 1,000 gallons

City of Lathrop

per contract

Raymus Village

per contract

 

(Ord. 1515 § 2, 2012; Res. R2011-221; Res. R2010-268; Ord. 1410 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1242 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1155 § 1, 2000; Ord. 916 § 1, 1991; Ord. 817 § 1, 1988; Ord. 794 § 1, 1988; Ord. 788 §§ 1-3, 1988; Ord. 770 § 1, 1987; prior code § 14-8)

 

13.16.011 Industrial sewer service charge for Eckert Cold Storage.
A.    Effective June 1, 2020, the industrial sewer system service charge for Eckert shall be as provided in subsections B through D of this section.

B.     The variable charge is the sum of: (1) the actual electricity costs for the Moffat Boulevard pump station, the pond pump station and the pond aerator system; (2) the actual wastewater laboratory testing costs for the industrial sewer system; and (3) fifty percent of rental costs associated with treatment option investigation in year one. Variable charges are payable each month, are based on actual usage, and shall be billed monthly based on the previous month’s actual costs.

C.     The fixed charge is an annual charge that is based on estimated operations, maintenance and replacement costs. Also included is a pond pump upgrade cost which is $11,000 for each year with a lump sum of $22,000 due and payable in 2020 and 2021. The annual fixed charge for 2020, including the pump upgrade, is $172,153. The annual fixed charge for 2021, including the pump upgrade, is $176,425. The annual fixed charge, including the pump upgrade, is payable in six equal installments on the first business day of each month, beginning in June and ending in November of each year.

D.    In the event Eckert’s flows exceed the storage capacity of the industrial pond system or if the monthly flow exceeds the NPDES permit limits driven by BOD and TDS, the city will make all reasonable efforts to accommodate the excess flow. The city may allow Eckert’s to discharge the excess flow to the domestic sanitary sewer system subject to approval from the acting director of public works. All industrial wastewater discharged to the domestic sanitary sewer will incur charges at the sanitary sewer ordinance rate for 2016 as provided below:

Category

Rate

Unit

Flow

$ 2,023.24

Per million gallons

Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)

$ 0.40

Per pound

Suspended Solids (SS)

$ 0.77

Per pound

Nitrogen (N)

$ 2.87

Per pound

 

E.     In any calendar year in which Eckert does not discharge industrial wastewater to the industrial sewer system or the modified industrial sewer system due to acts of God, acts of a government, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions, strikes, earthquakes, explosion or any similar catastrophic event or occurrences beyond the control of Eckert, the city shall determine the fixed charge per the following formula:

Fixed Charge in Calendar Year of Catastrophe

=

Fixed Charge

X

Actual days discharged in calendar year of catastrophe

Average total days discharged in the immediately preceding three consecutive calendar years

 

(Ord. O2020-04 § 1; Ord. O2017-10 § 1; Ord. 1534 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1469 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1439 § 2, 2009)

 

13.16.015 Senior citizen rebates.
A.    A senior citizen shall be defined as a resident who is age sixty or older.

B.     Low-income senior shall be defined as a senior citizen whose combined family income does not exceed fifty percent of the medium income for San Joaquin County, according to the income limitations for the Federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and Home Investment Partnership Act (HOME) programs.

C.     The amount of the rebate shall be five dollars per month per unit, which will be credited annually to the billed customers. Credits will cover the fees charged in a fiscal year. This credit becomes effective February 1, 2004.

D.    In order to qualify for the rebate, the qualifying low-income senior must provide the following:

1.     A copy of the most recent 1040 federal income tax form demonstrating income eligibility and/or social security annual statement;

2.     A signed affidavit provided by the city ensuring that all information provided is accurate and complete;

3.     In the event the low-income senior does not have a utility account established with the city because the sewer charges are paid as part of a multi-unit meter, the property manager and/or owner responsible for the utility account will collect the signed low-income forms from the individuals and submit them to the city finance department. This credit will be applied to the multi-unit account. The property manager and/or owner are/is responsible to pass on the credit to the eligible senior. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate this provision.

E.     Documentation noted above shall be provided to the city no later than July 15th of each year. The city will have sixty days from this date to apply the credit to the account.

F.     Customers who cancel their services prior to the July 15th deadline may request a rebate. The noted documents above need to be submitted along with their request to cancel the services. The credit will be applied to their final utility billing. This provision shall not apply to multi-unit customers. (Ord. 1256 § 1, 2004)

 

13.16.020 Billing—Collection.
A.    The charges fixed in this chapter for any premises shall be billed and collected with the charges and rates for city utility services furnished by the city to such premises. Such charges fixed in this chapter shall be due and payable in advance at the same time that such charges for city utility services are due and payable.

B.     In the event the premises to be charged for sewer service are not connected to the city water distribution system, then, and in that event, the city water department shall bill and collect for the appropriate sewer service charges.

C.     All sewer service revenues collected shall be retained by the city regardless of the date of termination of sewer service and no rebates will be made for midmonth disconnection.

D.    If the monthly service rate is not paid when due, on the first day of each calendar month thereafter a penalty of two percent of the amount of the delinquent rate shall be added. (Ord. 1410 § 3, 2008; Ord. 1184 § 1, 2001; prior code § 14-9)

 

13.16.030 Delinquent charges—Lien.
Charges for services and facilities furnished by the city shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which such charge is imposed if such charges remain delinquent for a period of sixty days. (Prior code § 14-10)

 

13.16.040 Discontinuance of service.
A.    In the event the owner, occupant or lessee of premises connected to the sewer system shall fail to pay the sewer service charges provided in this chapter by the fifteenth day of the month following presentation of a bill therefor, the city may in addition to all of the remedies it may have, discontinue furnishing sewer service by means of water service disconnection, and shall not resume the same until all delinquent charges and penalties under this chapter together with any service charge necessitated by the resumption of sewer service have been fully paid. However, service to delinquent customers will not be shut off until the customer is first notified of the intended shut off and given an opportunity for a hearing on the matter.

B.     As an alternative to any of the other procedures provided in this chapter or given by law, the city may bring an action against the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises to whom the service was rendered for the collection of the amount of the delinquent rate and all penalties and costs of collection including a reasonable attorney’s fee. (Ord. 775 § 12, 1987; prior code § 14-11)

 

13.16.050 Privately owned water system—Charge.
In any case where rates are based on water used and the premises are not connected to the city water system, then, in such case, all unmetered water service which flows from a privately owned water system shall be estimated by the city or measured by a meter approved by the city to be furnished and installed by the user, and a sewer service charge will be applied which will be equivalent to that which would be applied if the water were being purchased from the city. (Ord. 775 § 12, 1987; prior code § 14-12)

Chapter 13.20 INDUSTRIAL WASTE
13.20.010 Purpose.
A.    The city of Manteca does ordain that this waste ordinance shall be known as the “City of Manteca Industrial Waste Ordinance (Waste Ordinance)” and may be so cited.

B.     This waste ordinance is adopted pursuant to provisions of California Government Code Section 54725 and modifications and inclusions of Senate Bill 1024. This waste ordinance does hereby replace Title 13 Chapter 13.20 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

C.     This waste ordinance sets forth the uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors to the Manteca water pollution control system, and enables the city of Manteca to protect its collection, treatment, pumping, and disposal systems and to comply with all state and federal laws.

D.    Objectives. The objectives of this waste ordinance are:

1.     To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Manteca water pollution control system that will interfere with the operation of the POTW, including the land disposal facilities.

2.     To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Manteca water pollution control system that could cause pass-through into receiving waters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW systems.

3.     To regulate the acceptance of wastes to:

a.     Protect the physical structures of the water pollution control system and the efficient functioning of its component parts.

b.     Protect the health and safety of the personnel of the city of Manteca and its member jurisdictions, and to preserve the health and safety of the public.

c.     Comply with all of the applicable and compatible local, state of California, and federal laws, rules, regulations, codes, or orders.

d.     Protect the environment from threat of hazard or harm resulting from the disposal of wastes.

E.     Applicability. The requirements of this waste ordinance are applicable to all persons within the city of Manteca, and to all persons outside the city of Manteca who are, by contract, agreement or action, users of the city of Manteca water pollution control system; including any and all new and prospective users and any and all existing users.

F.     The director of public works for the city of Manteca shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this waste ordinance. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.020 Definitions and abbreviations.
A.    List of Definitions.

Act: Any regulation contained in or amendment of the Clean Water Act.

Administrative Order: An enforcement document which directs industrial users to implement corrective or remedial measures. Levels of enforcement include: cease and desist orders, compliance orders, and show cause orders.

Agent: Any person designated or retained by Manteca to fulfill the sampling, monitoring, reporting, or inspection services of Manteca as required by this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit and/or all applicable state, federal, or local regulations, and/or to perform the enforcement actions required by this waste ordinance. Agents may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: the Manteca director of public works, deputy director of public works, inspector, permit compliance coordinator, and city attorneys, and any consultant retained by the city to perform such services.

Approval Authority: The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region.

Authorized Representative of the Industrial User: An authorized representative of an industrial user shall be: a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, a general partner or proprietor of the user, or a duly authorized representative of the person holding the industrial discharge permit, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the industrial facilities from which the discharge originates. The authorized representative shall be identified on the industrial discharge permit.

Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

Categorical User: Any industrial user who, on the basis of the industrial activity at the facility in question, must comply with National Categorical Standards.

Cease and Desist Order: An administrative order issued by Manteca requiring a discharger to halt discharge to the water pollution control system.

Chronic Violation: A violation of significant noncompliance when sixty-six percent or more of sample measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit over a six-month period.

City: “City” or “Manteca” refers to the city of Manteca.

Compliance Order: An administrative order directing the discharger to achieve or restore compliance by a specified date. A compliance order may include a compliance schedule with specific milestones for achieving steps toward compliance, for tracking progress, and for the discharger to report progress.

Control Authority: The POTW or the city of Manteca.

Deputy Director of Public Works: Deputy director of public works for the city of Manteca or agent.

Director of Public Works: Director of public works for the city of Manteca or agent.

Discharger: Any person discharging industrial waste to the water pollution control system. This term specifically includes any categorical users connected to the water pollution control system, whether or not they discharge process wastewater. It also includes any facilities with a reasonable potential for discharging significant quantities of industrial waste, whether or not they are currently discharging process waste.

Domestic Waste: Any waterborne waste of the type normally resulting from flushing and washing waste products from residences and lavatories.

Federal Pretreatment Regulations: Any regulations promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) and 402(b)(8) of the “Act” (33 U.S.C. 1317) for the implementation, administration, and enforcement of pretreatment standards.

Illegal Discharge: Any discharge of waste prohibited by state or federal law, or local limits including discharge to the wastewater treatment plant and collection system, or to the storm drain system.

Indirect Discharge: Any discharge of waste which enters or flows into the Manteca water pollution control system through a connection of a member jurisdiction (e.g., city of Lathrop collection system) or through a septic contributor.

Industrial Discharge Permit: A control mechanism issued to a significant industrial user, or any person discharging to the water pollution control system that the director of public works determines needs a permit, to regulate its discharge of toxic, organic, or hydraulic loading to the water pollution control system.

Industrial User or Users: Any source of direct or indirect discharge of commercial or industrial waste.

Industrial Waste: Any waterborne waste, excluding domestic waste. Waterborne wastes from “commercial” activities, such as automobile repair or photo processing, are expressly included in this definition.

Interference: Any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: (1) inhibits or disrupts the treatment processes or operations of the water pollution control system, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Manteca NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent California state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including California state regulations in any California state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

Manteca Pretreatment Program: The purpose of the Manteca pretreatment program (MPP) is to provide a means to control and regulate the discharge of industrial and hazardous waste to the Manteca water pollution control system and the wastewater treatment plant. The program applies to all discharges to the water pollution control system and the wastewater treatment plant. The components of the MPP include the development and use of the following:

1.     Local limits: Specific limits on the concentration of materials and chemical constituents allowed in the industrial waste discharge;

2.     Enforcement response plan: Guidelines for Manteca’s enforcement of federal, state, and local laws related to waste discharge to the POTW, either directly or indirectly, and to waters of the state and/or United States, and enforcement of the Manteca Waste Ordinance Chapter 13.20;

3.     Manteca Waste Ordinance Chapter 13.20: Describes the authorities of the city of Manteca to enforce EPA and local requirements related to waste discharge to the Manteca water pollution control system.

4.     Manteca industrial discharge permit: A permit stating the conditions, prohibitions, limits, and requirements for discharges to the Manteca water pollution control system that is issued to all significant industrial users and any other users that discharge to the water pollution control system a waste, of substantial volume or of a concentration, that the director of public works deems significant and therefore requires a permit.

Member Jurisdiction: Any city or agency, such as the city of Lathrop, which owns and operates a collection system connected to the city of Manteca water pollution control system. The relation of a member jurisdiction is specified in a jurisdictional agreement.

National Pretreatment Standards: Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) and which apply to a specific category of industrial users. These regulations are found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to [40 CFR] Section 403.5.

New Source: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commences after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

1.     The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site which no other source is located; or

2.     The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

3.     The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection 2 or 3 but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:

1.     Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

a.     Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;

b.     Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

2.     Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.

Noncompliance: Any violation of any part of this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or National Categorical Standards.

Notice of Violation (NOV): An official communication from the city to the non-compliant industrial user informing the industrial user that a violation has occurred.

Nuisance: Any nuisance defined by California statutes or known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.

Pass-Through: A discharge which exits Manteca’s treatment works into the waters of the state or into Manteca’s land disposal system in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Manteca’s NPDES permit or of Manteca’s RWQCB permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

Permittee: The person to whom an industrial discharge permit has been issued pursuant hereto.

Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or public agency, including the state of California and the United States of America. The singular shall include the plural.

Premises: The location of the process, storage, discharge, and business actions of any person discharging to the water pollution control system.

Pretreatment: Any operations performed on sewage prior to discharge into the water pollution control system.

Pretreatment Requirement: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, applicable to an industrial user.

Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW: A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

Self-Monitoring: Wastewater sampling performed by a discharger, in accordance with Manteca’s pretreatment program. Self-monitoring requirements will be specified in the user’s industrial discharge permit.

Service Area: The geographical area served by the Manteca water pollution control system.

Sewage: Any combination of domestic waste and industrial waste together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.

Show Cause Order: An order for the industrial user to appear before the Manteca director of public works, to explain the noncompliance and why more severe enforcement actions should not be taken. Manteca may designate a hearing officer to hear testimony for the hearing.

Significant Industrial User (SIU): Significant industrial users include all of the following in accordance with 40 CFR 403.3(t). All categorical industrial users and any non-categorical industrial user which discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or more of process wastewater, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater; contributes a process wastewater which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS, TDS, ammonia, and/or phosphorus) capacity of the POTW; or has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the director of public works or agent, to adversely affect the POTW’s operation or to violate a pretreatment standard or requirement.

Significant Noncompliance: The director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates subsection (3), (4) or (8) of this definition) and shall mean:

1.     Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits;

2.     Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

3.     Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by this chapter (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;

4.     Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

5.     Failure to meet, within ninety days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

6.     Failure to provide within forty-five days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

7.     Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

8.     Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

Slug Discharge: Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

Waste Ordinance: This Chapter 13.20 and any amendments thereto.

Water Pollution Control System: All facilities of the city of Manteca and/or all facilities of any member jurisdiction for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

Working Day: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, excluding federal or California state holidays.

B.     List of Abbreviations.

BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand

CCR - California Code of Regulations

CFR - Code of Federal Regulations

City - City of Manteca

CWA - Clean Water Act

DDPW- Deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca

DPW - Director of public works of the city of Manteca

EPA - Environmental Protection Agency of the United States

IU - Industrial user

Manteca - City of Manteca

mg/L - Milligrams per liter concentration

µg/l – Microgram per liter concentration

NOV - Notice of violation

NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

pH - A numerical value representing the relative acidity or alkalinity of the waste discharge

POTW - Public owned treatment works

RWQCB - Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region

SIU - Significant industrial user

TDS - Total dissolved solids

TSS - Total suspended solids

(Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.030 Authority and responsibility.
A.    Authorities of the City of Manteca Public Works Department.

1.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to inspect the premises of any person discharging waste to the Manteca water pollution control system, including, but not limited to, any areas or points of sampling, discharge, process, storage, record keeping and/or any other areas as deemed reasonable and necessary by the director of public works to document the person’s compliance with the requirements of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit.

2.     Manteca and its agent, shall have the authority to witness any sampling and sampling procedures as required of the user as part of the self-monitoring program and under the terms of this waste ordinance and the industrial discharge permit.

3.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to terminate service and disconnect any person from the water pollution control system who does not comply with the requirements of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit.

4.     Manteca and its agent, shall have the authority to obtain copies of any monitoring and sampling records as necessary to establish compliance or non-compliance with the objectives of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit, and if necessary, remove those records from the premises for copying purposes. These records include, but are not limited to, record keeping required under 40 CFR 403.12 of the Act.

5.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to require an industrial waste discharger to install and operate pretreatment facilities as deemed reasonable and necessary by the deputy director of public works to meet the EPA categorical pretreatment standards and the local limits described in this waste ordinance.

6.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to specify a compliance schedule for the user to install pretreatment, monitoring, and sampling equipment, and shall have the authority to require compliance reports on meeting scheduled milestones.

7.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to inspect the installation and operation of the pretreatment facilities.

8.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to issue an administrative order, including a show cause order, cease and desist order, and compliance order to any person discharging to the water pollution control system.

9.     Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to seek injunctive relief and pursue civil and criminal penalties for violations of this waste ordinance as may be provided for under the Act and state and federal laws.

10.   Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to levy fees for additional services or to recover damage costs, which are a result of a discharge, as described in Section 13.20.050(F) of this waste ordinance.

11.   Manteca and its agent shall have the authority to halt or suspend a discharge in the event of an actual or threatened discharge which is in violation of this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or the regulatory conditions of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B), or in the event of an emergency, or a condition in which the safety of humans or the environment is threatened.

B.     Authorities of the Director and/or Deputy Director of Public Works.

1.     The deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca or agent shall have the authority to inspect the premises of the industrial waste discharger, including, but not limited to, the process facilities, discharge points, sampling points, and storage facilities, and/or any other facilities as deemed reasonable and necessary by the deputy director of public works, to ensure that the user is in compliance with all provisions of the user’s industrial discharge permit and of this waste ordinance. The authority to inspect includes the authority to collect samples of any wastes either being discharged to the water pollution control system or having the potential to be discharged.

2.     The deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca or agent shall have the authority to require submission of all notices and self-monitoring reports from any industrial user as required by this waste ordinance and the user’s permit, and any additional reports required to demonstrate compliance with this waste ordinance and the permit requirements, including, but not limited to, the reports required in Section 403.12, and signatory and record keeping requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(1).

3.     The deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca or agent shall have the authority to require industrial users to develop a compliance schedule to meet all applicable National Pretreatment Standards, California state regulations, Manteca local limits, and all provisions of the industrial discharge permit, and of this waste ordinance. The deputy director of public works also shall have the authority to require any person in non-compliance to submit progress reports for meeting the goals provided under the compliance schedule.

4.     The deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca or agent shall have the authority to enter the premises of any person discharging industrial waste into the Manteca system, at any time, as deemed reasonable by the deputy director of public works.

5.     The deputy director of public works of the city of Manteca or agent shall have the authority to witness sampling and sampling procedures of any person discharging industrial waste into the Manteca water pollution control system.

C.     Responsibilities of the Director of Public Works.

1.     The director of public works shall be charged with the administration of the water pollution control system and the enforcement of the provisions of this waste ordinance. For such purposes, upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, he or she, or his or her agent may enter at reasonable times any premises in the service area to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this waste ordinance.

2.     The director of public works shall be responsible for checking the quantitative or qualitative compliance with the established regulations. Such quantitative or qualitative analysis may be made either by spot checks or regularly scheduled checks of all waste material.

3.     If the waste material is found to be in violation of the standards established in Section 13.20.040, Standards and limitations of this waste ordinance, it will be the responsibility of the director of public works or agent to request compliance and compliance reports from the user on the progress of corrective measures.

4.     The director of public works or agent shall have the authority to invoke emergency powers as described in Section 13.20.090(C) of this waste ordinance. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.040 Standards and limitations.
A.    The city of Manteca has set forth the following prohibitions and limitations for waste discharge to the Manteca water pollution control system. Where National Categorical Standards are applicable, the discharger must comply with the more stringent requirement of the Manteca local limit or the applicable categorical standard for the given pollutant.

B.     General Discharge Prohibitions. These general prohibitions and specific prohibitions that follow apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other National Pretreatment Standards or any national, state or local pretreatment requirements.

C.     No person shall contribute to or cause to be contributed to the water pollution control system any waste or any pollutant that will:

1.     Interfere with, inhibit, or disrupt the operation, processes, or performance of the water pollution control system (including the collection, treatment, disposal systems, and sludge processes) or adversely affect the effluent and sludge quality, in violation of Manteca’s NPDES permit or any other state or federal permit; or which cause Manteca to be in noncompliance with statutory authorities cited in 40 CFR 403.3(i)(2).

2.     Damage the water pollution control system.

3.     Cause pass-through of the water pollution control system.

4.     Obstruct Manteca’s wastewater treatment or collection facilities.

5.     Cause hazard to the public safety, the environment, or to Manteca personnel.

6.     Singly, or in combination with waste present in the water pollution control system, exit the Manteca water pollution control system into waters of the United States and cause Manteca to violate any requirement of its NPDES permit or any other state, federal, or local permits or laws, including magnitude of the violation.

D.    Other Prohibitions. No person shall discharge any pollutant(s), waste, industrial or domestic, to the water pollution control system, except through sewer connections approved by Manteca and the relevant member jurisdiction or at approved discharge locations at the Manteca treatments works. Discharge at any other location, including collection system manholes, is prohibited without prior written approval from the director of public works.

1.     Storm Drainage and Groundwater Prohibition. Stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage shall not be discharged, either directly or indirectly, to the water pollution control system. If such discharge is necessary, the city of Manteca director of public works may approve an application for temporary discharge of such substances in the event no alternate method of disposal is reasonably available. Application for discharge of stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage shall be made to the director of public works in writing and must be approved by the director of public works prior to discharge to the water pollution control system. Such discharges shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this waste ordinance and any applicable fees of the city of Manteca.

2.     Unpolluted Water Prohibition. Unpolluted water, such as single-pass cooling water, boiler blow-down water, and swimming pool water, shall not be discharged, either directly or indirectly, to the water pollution control system. If such discharge is necessary, the city of Manteca director of public works may approve an application for temporary discharge of such substances in the event no alternate method of disposal is reasonably available. Application for discharge of unpolluted water shall be made to the director of public works in writing and must be approved by the director of public works prior to discharge to the water pollution control system. Such discharges shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this waste ordinance and any applicable fees of the city of Manteca.

3.     Additional Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, to the water pollution control system any of the following described waters, pollutants or wastes:

a.     Any solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the collection system or the treatment works, or which will require unusual attention or expense to convey and/or treat.

b.     Any discharge which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the collection system or the treatment works, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

c.     Any heated discharges which cause the influent into the treatment works to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit, and any heated discharges which create a hazard to the water pollution control system personnel or inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant.

d.     Any discharge which has been diluted as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this waste ordinance, the user’s industrial discharge permit, or the National Categorical Standards.

e.     Any discharge of hazardous waste, as defined by Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations without the written approval of the director of public works.

f.      Any discharge which causes noxious or malodorous gases at or near the Manteca water pollution control system facilities or the facilities of any member jurisdiction of the city of Manteca, or which otherwise creates a public nuisance.

g.     Any discharge which results in the formation of toxic gases, fumes, or vapors in a quantity that endangers the health or safety of Manteca personnel or the public.

h.     Any discharge of pesticides, herbicides, or polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in quantities deemed significant by the director of public works.

i.      Any radioactive wastes, except as allowed under the “California Radiation Control Regulations,” CCR Title 23 Section 30100 et seq.

j.      Any discharge of any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or concentration which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants will cause interference with the water pollution control system.

k.     Any discharge waters having an average daily flow greater than one-half of one percent of Manteca’s average dry weather flow (ADWF), without the approval of the director of public works.

l.      Any discharge containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, will cause interference or pass-through.

m.    Pollutants that will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 6.0, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges.

n.     Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.

o.     Any solid material not capable of passing through a three-eighths-inch mesh screen.

p.     Floor drains in production areas with the exception of food processors that drain to a pretreatment system, janitor’s sinks, domestic drains in restrooms, or with the written approval of the director of public works.

E.     Limits. Any exceedance or violation of these limits is considered to be a violation of this waste ordinance and is enforceable by penalties.

1.     Any discharge with a pH less than 6.0 or greater than but not equal to 12.5.

2.     Any discharge having a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

3.     The following table lists the maximum waste discharge concentration for the listed pollutants. The director of public works may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place of the maximum concentration limits.

 

Pollutant

Maximum Concentration (mg/L)

Antimony

0.6

Arsenic

0.6

Barium

12.0

Beryllium

6.0

Boron

12.0

Cadmium

0.12

Chromium (Total)

0.6

Copper

2.4

Lead

0.6

Manganese

0.6

Mercury

0.005

Molybdenum

0.06

Nickel

4.1

Selenium

0.12

Silver

0.6

Tin

24

Vanadium

1.2

Zinc

1.0

Cyanide (Total)

1.2

Iron

None

 

F.     National Categorical Standards. The National Categorical Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated into this waste ordinance and made a part thereof. All categorical users are required to comply with those National Categorical Standards, which are applicable to them.

G.    Point of Application of Limits. Compliance with the discharge limits and standards listed in this section shall be determined at a location or locations deemed appropriate by the director of public works. Where the National Categorical Standards are applicable, the point of application shall be appropriate for these standards.

H.    Right of Revision. The city of Manteca reserves the right to establish, by this waste ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. The city reserves the right to establish, by this waste ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, discharge limitations or prohibitions for pollutants not specifically listed in this waste ordinance. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.050 Administration.
A.    Classification of Users. All users shall be classified for wastewater disposal purposes in accordance with the activities conducted upon the premises, as determined by the director of public works. The purpose of classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater dischargers and the recovery of equitable and appropriate fees. The classification of a user will be used to determine the discharge fee and connection fee, as described in the Manteca fee schedule.

B.     Notification of Industrial Discharge. Any person contributing industrial waste to the Manteca water pollution control system is required to notify the Manteca department of public works of their discharge. Any new business is required to notify the department of public works of their intent to discharge industrial waste ninety days prior to commencing the discharge. These notification requirements are effective upon the adoption date of this waste ordinance.

Discharge of industrial waste from any of the following sources is subject to the approval of the director of public works: new connections, added burden from increased or changed discharge by existing sources, contaminated groundwater disposal, septage disposal, and limited and temporary disposal of trucked or hauled waste.

Discharge Limitations. All industrial waste dischargers, users of the Manteca water pollution control system, and permittees shall comply with all provisions of this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, any applicable waste ordinance or permit of a member jurisdiction; and any other applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations, or permits for all discharges to the water pollution control system.

C.     Industrial Discharge Permit Requirements. Industrial discharge to the Manteca water pollution control system may be permitted by the deputy director of public works. Upon notification of an occurring or potential industrial waste discharge the deputy director of public works or agent will evaluate the waste flow, concentration, and make-up to determine if the user requires an industrial discharge permit. If a permit is required, the user will be required to complete an application for an industrial discharge permit, to be submitted to the Manteca department of public works within ninety days of the date of the notice to apply. The submittal of an application form, application fee, or renewal form does not guarantee the granting of a permit, and the application for permit may be denied.

Industrial discharges which may require an industrial discharge permit, and the permit requirements, procedures and industrial user classification are described as part of this waste ordinance.

1.     Individual Wastewater Discharge and General Permit—Duration. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of director of public works. Each individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.

2.     Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit and General Permit—Contents. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director of public works to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.

a.     Individual wastewater discharge permits and general permits must contain:

i.      A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date.

ii.     A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with this waste ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.

iii.    Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards.

iv.    Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law.

v.     A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.

vi.    Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary.

vii.   Record Keeping Requirement. All persons subject to the reporting requirements of this waste ordinance and 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(B)(4) shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities and results, and make such records available for inspection and copying by EPA officials and Manteca personnel or agents, for a minimum of three years, or a period of litigation whichever is longer.

b.     Individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

i.      Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

ii.     Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

iii.    Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;

iv.    Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;

v.     The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;

vi.    Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;

vii.   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit; and

viii.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this waste ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.

D.    Permit Limitations.

1.     All industrial discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of the waste ordinance and all rates and charges established by Manteca. All permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. The deputy director of public works may establish renewal dates from one to sixty months.

2.     No vested rights of any type whatsoever of discharge to or sewerage capacity in the sanitary sewer system is created by the issuance of an industrial discharge permit.

3.     Each permit is subject to renewal upon request to Manteca. Applications for permit renewal shall be submitted to Manteca by the deadline stated in the user’s waste discharge permit. Permit renewal is not guaranteed and shall be subject to capacity limitations, treatment requirements, and compliance history considerations.

4.     The permitted discharge is accepted only on a capacity available basis. Such discharge is subject to reduction, modification, suspension, or termination at any time by Manteca with a phone call or written notice. Discharge shall cease immediately upon request by Manteca and shall not be continued without written permission from Manteca.

5.     Any permit issued pursuant to this waste ordinance may be revoked or suspended at any time by the director of public works for fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in an application for permit, or for violation of any condition of permit, or of any provisions of this waste ordinance.

6.     Any permit issued pursuant to this waste ordinance may be modified, at any time, by the deputy director of public works, including the term and conditions for industrial discharge, discharge quantity, and/or concentration limits authorized therein.

E.     Permit Transfer. The industrial discharge permit is issued only to a specific person and for a specific location, as designated in the permit, and shall not be assignable nor transferable to any other person or any other location. Sale or relocation of a business, public agency, or person shall obligate the business, public agency, or person to obtain written approval from the deputy director of public works prior to continuing the discharge under the terms and conditions of the original permit, and to make application to obtain new industrial discharge permit ninety days before commencing the continued discharge. Permit transfer as a result of corporate or personnel reorganization, insolvency or bankruptcy shall be subject to the approval of the deputy director of public works and must be requested in writing by the user.

F.     Authority to Assess and Collect Fees. All discharges to the Manteca water pollution control system shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this waste ordinance and to the terms, conditions, fees, and fines as described below and as contained in the Manteca Fee Schedule and as set forth in Section 13.20.090 of this waste ordinance.

Manteca shall have the authority to assess and collect fees, for cost recovery purposes. The fees are cumulative and may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     Permit Fee. A permit fee is due when the permit application is submitted to Manteca. The purpose of this fee is to recover costs incurred by Manteca for application review, permit issuance, and administration of the permit. The permit fee shall be as below, based on the classification of the discharger by the director of public works or agent. The classification will be based primarily on the amount of Manteca resources expected to be required for permit issuance and administration. Where a permit is denied, after payment of the permit fee, a portion of the fee may be refunded to the discharger, at the discretion of the director of public works.

2.     Inspection Fee. The purpose of this fee is to recover Manteca costs for review and/or inspection of a user’s pretreatment system design, drawings, construction and/or operations, chemical or hazardous materials storage and/or sampling facilities, and procedures used by the user, as applicable and as deemed necessary and reasonable by the deputy director of public works, to demonstrate compliance with this waste ordinance or any directive of the director of public works or Manteca. This fee is due when the service is rendered.

3.     Sampling Fee. The purpose of this fee is to recover Manteca costs for sampling, lab fees, travel, equipment, labor or any other costs accrued by Manteca to complete sampling as required by this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or under directive of the director of public works to demonstrate compliance. This fee is due when the service is rendered.

4.     Noncompliance Fees. These are fees resulting from violations of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit. There is no upper limit for noncompliance fees which may include any or all of the following, dependent upon the severity of the violation or violations.

a.     Inspection Fee. The purpose of this fee is to reimburse Manteca for any inspection costs as necessary and reasonable to demonstrate compliance with this industrial ordinance and/or the industrial discharge permit, following a violation.

b.     Additional Sampling Fee. The purpose of this fee is to recover Manteca costs for sampling, lab fees, travel, equipment, labor and any other costs incurred by Manteca, to complete sampling and to demonstrate compliance with this waste ordinance and/or the industrial discharge permit.

c.     Damage Fee. The purpose of this fee is to recover costs incurred by Manteca for the protection from or repair of damage to the water pollution control system because of a harmful or hazardous discharge in violation of this waste ordinance by any person.

d.     Manteca Permit Violation Fee. The purpose of this fee is to recover costs assessed to Manteca as a result of a user discharge violation causing pass-through or interference, such that Manteca is unable to meet the requirement of its NPDES permit or any other permit requirements, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. The fee shall include the amount of any fine(s) levied against Manteca by EPA or any other regulatory agency issuing a fine, because of a violation of Manteca’s permit. The permit violation fee shall also include reimbursement of costs for sampling, travel, labor, and any other expenses incurred by Manteca as a result of the person’s discharge causing Manteca to be in violation of its permit.

The fees listed and described in this section, shall be payable to Manteca only and do not include any additional fees which may be levied by any member jurisdiction providing collection services.

5.     Delinquent Fees. All fees as described above, are due and payable within five days of the posted mailing date of the notice. All fees not paid within thirty days of issuance will be considered delinquent and are subject to a subsequent delinquent charge amounting to ten percent of the amount of the fee in question. Failure to pay fees within ninety days of issuance shall result in enforcement action by Manteca. This enforcement action may include termination of service and/or civil action to collect all outstanding fees, and delinquent charges. All costs resulting from this enforcement action will be paid by the user. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.060 Reporting requirements.
A.    What to Report. Under the terms and conditions of this waste ordinance and the industrial discharge permit all persons discharging to the Manteca water pollution control system shall report to Manteca any and all of the following events:

1.     Noncompliance. Any person required to perform self-monitoring shall report any violation to the deputy director of public works or agent, within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. Notification to Manteca may be by telephone, in person, or in writing. All verbal notifications shall be followed by a written report of the violation. This reporting will coincide with, or be in addition to, any self-monitoring reports required by the industrial discharge permit. Where the discharge in violation has a reasonable potential to affect the water pollution control system, notification to Manteca will be made immediately. The authority to require such reporting is provided in the Federal Clean Water Act.

Under the requirements of 40 CFR, 403.12(g), if sampling by the discharger indicates a violation of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit requirements, the discharger shall notify Manteca of the violation within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation and shall repeat the sampling and analysis in two separate sampling events and submit the results of the repeat analysis to Manteca within thirty days after becoming aware of the violation and taking actions to prevent further occurrence.

The city shall perform a resample event of the discharge violation to verify compliance with this waste ordinance.

2.     Change in Process. All persons discharging industrial waste to the water pollution control system shall report in writing in their industrial, manufacturing, or operating processes that could affect the quality or quantity of their discharge, prior to commencing the changed discharge. Notification will be to the deputy director of public works or agent. Where the anticipated changes in discharge volume or content have a reasonable potential to affect the water pollution control system, notification shall be at least ninety days prior to commencing the changed discharge.

3.     Storage of Materials and Waste. Within the Manteca service area, all persons storing or using materials or waste in such quantities that a spill or leakage could adversely affect the water pollution control system, shall report in writing such storage to the deputy director of public works or agent. The director of public works may, as deemed necessary, require a written report including, but not limited to, any or all of the following elements. The deadline for submission of the report shall be as deemed necessary and reasonable by the director of public works.

a.     Description of stored materials and waste, including description of storage and disposal practices.

b.     Description of discharge practices, including non-routine “batch” discharges.

c.     Procedures for immediately notifying Manteca of spills or other atypical discharges to the water pollution control system.

d.     Procedures for preventing and/or mitigating spills or other atypical discharges to the water pollution control system. Procedures addressing spills to the storm drain or surface waters may also be required.

4.     Slug Discharge. Any person who must make a slug discharge shall notify the deputy director of public works or agent of the discharge immediately. This notification shall be by phone call or in person. The deputy director of public works may require a subsequent written report of the event.

At least once every two years, the deputy director of public works shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The deputy director of public works may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the deputy director of public works may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

a.     Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;

b.     Description of chemicals stored;

c.     Procedures for immediately notifying the deputy director of public works and the POTW and any accidental or slug discharge;

d.     Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operation, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvent, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

5.     Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the director of any significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty days before the change.

a.     The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application.

b.     The director may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit or a general permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

6.     Reports of Potential Problems.

a.     In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

b.     Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this waste ordinance.

c.     A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (6)(a). Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

d.     Significant industrial users are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.

7.     Discharge of Hazardous Waste. All industrial users shall notify Manteca, the EPA, and the California Waste Management Board, in writing, of any discharge into the water pollution control system of any substance which, if otherwise disposed, would constitute a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. The information required in the notification, the time frames for reporting, and conditions under which notification does not have to be made are all as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(p). The director of public works shall make determination if routine, permitted discharges of hazardous waste of no more than fifteen kilograms per one calendar month (less than one pound per day) to the water pollution control system must be reported to the POTW. This determination shall be made on a case-by-case and user basis.

8.     Baseline Monitoring Reports. All categorical industrial users must submit baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule progress reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic reports on continued compliance, and notices of slug loading per 40 CFR 403.12 at a frequency deemed reasonable by the director of public works.

B.     Types of Reports. The deputy director of public works or agent may require any person discharging industrial waste to submit any or all of the following reports in addition to any reports required under Section 13.20.060(A) of this waste ordinance:

Baseline monitoring reports.

Compliance reports.

Compliance schedule progress reports.

Periodic reports on continued compliance.

Wastewater discharge permits and applications.

Any other reports as reasonable and necessary to demonstrate compliance with this waste ordinance or the waste discharge permit.

All submitted baseline monitoring reports, compliance reports, compliance schedule progress reports, periodic reports on continued compliance, and wastewater discharge permits and applications, shall be signed by the industrial user or authorized agent in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(1)(I). This person shall be the same person who signs the application for an industrial discharge permit, unless an agent is designated at the time the industrial discharge permit is issued. These reports shall contain the following certification statement specified in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii):

 

“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”

 

The reports which may be required by the deputy director of public works are discussed below.

1.     Baseline Monitoring Report. Within either one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the deputy director of public works a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B)(2). New sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit, ninety days before commencement of discharge, a report that contains the information listed in subsection (B)(2). This report shall be in writing and be submitted to the deputy director of public works. Baseline monitoring reports for categorical users shall include all the information set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7).

Baseline Monitoring Report Information. Users required to submit a baseline monitoring report shall include the following information in the baseline monitoring report.

a.     Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.

b.     Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

c.     Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process.

d.     Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

e.     Measurement of Pollutants. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, required by the standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operation and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.20.070 of this waste ordinance.

Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.20.070 of this waste ordinance.

f.      Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

g.     Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

h.     Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection B of this waste ordinance.

2.     Compliance Reports. Any person discharging industrial waste to the water pollution control system may be required to submit a report demonstrating compliance with this waste ordinance and any applicable industrial discharge permit to the deputy director of public works. This report shall be submitted, at a minimum, semi-annually and as specified in the person’s industrial discharge permit.

In cases of known or suspected noncompliance the deputy director of public works may require additional and more frequent compliance reporting.

All categorical users shall submit a report demonstrating compliance with the applicable National Categorical Standards within ninety days following the date for final compliance with those Standards.

All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the deputy director of public works, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flow for the reporting period. Categorical industry compliance reports shall include pollutants regulated by the applicable pretreatment standard. Non-categorical significant industry compliance reports shall include the pollutants identified in the user’s industrial discharge permit. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection B of this section.

All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the deputy director of public works, using the procedures prescribed in Section 13.20.070 of this waste ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

a.     Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. All persons found to be in violation of this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or any state or federal regulation prohibiting or limiting waste discharge, may be required to prepare a schedule of actions to bring the discharge into compliance under the direction of the deputy director of public works.

The director of public works shall have the final authority to: determine if an action is acceptable and appropriate; set the time frame to complete compliance action; set the frequency of required compliance reporting; set the frequency for required sampling; set monitoring and inspection requirements; and determine any additional actions necessary for the user to meet the compliance schedule on a timely basis.

Any user subject to a compliance schedule shall submit to Manteca, for each compliance step in the schedule, a report stating whether or not compliance was achieved. Where a compliance schedule milestone is not met, the report must state the reasons for noncompliance, the steps being taken to comply with the compliance schedule, and the date when the compliance will be met. Each report must be submitted not later than fourteen days after the date of the compliance step, specified in the compliance schedule.

The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (B)(2) of this section.

i.      The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operations);

ii.     No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;

iii.    The user shall submit a progress report to the deputy director of public works no later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not is complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and

iv.    In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the deputy director of public works.

b.     Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline Compliance Report. Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the deputy director of public works a report containing the information described in subsection (B)(2) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or another measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection B of this section.

3.     Changed Condition Reports. Each user must notify the deputy director of public works of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety days before the change. Any user increasing the volume of wastewater above its sewer allocation must apply for and receive an additional sewer allocation through the community development department.

a.     The deputy director of public works may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed conditions, including the submission of wastewater discharge permit application under Section 13.20.050 of this waste ordinance.

b.     The deputy director of public works may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.20.050(C) of this waste ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.20.050(C) of this waste ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

c.     For the purpose of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent or greater, flow increases greater than the user’s sewer allocation, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.

4.     Periodic Reports on Continued Compliance. [Note: All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they have been designated a non-significant categorical industrial user under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2).]

All significant industrial users and categorical industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the director submit no less than twice per year (June and December) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.

5.     Other Reports. All industrial users shall submit to the deputy director of public works any other reports as deemed reasonable and necessary by the deputy director of public works, in addition to those described above, to demonstrate compliance with this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or any applicable state and federal regulations. Such reports include, but are not limited to, any reports or plans required by federal, California state, or local laws or regulations.

C.     Record Keeping Requirement. All persons subject to the reporting requirements of this waste ordinance and 40 CFR 403.12 shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities and results, and make such records available for inspection and copying by EPA officials and Manteca personnel or agents, for a minimum of three years, or a period of litigation whichever is longer. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.070 Inspection and monitoring.
A.    Inspection Procedure. Manteca shall inspect the premises of any user to establish compliance with the provisions of this waste ordinance, the user’s industrial discharge permit, and any applicable California state, federal, and local laws pertaining to the treatment and discharge of waste to the water pollution control system.

1.     Inspections shall be made under the provisions of this waste ordinance and/or the user’s industrial waste permit. If the user refuses reasonable access to the premises for purposes of inspection and monitoring, Manteca shall notify the user that he or she is in violation of this waste ordinance and the deputy director of public works may issue an administrative order, mandating such access by a specified date and at all reasonable times subsequent to that date.

2.     An administrative warrant may be obtained in instances where the deputy director of public works or agent believes there is substantial evidence that user refusal to consent to inspection and/or monitoring is concealing criminal acts, or willful or negligent discharges in violation of this waste ordinance or any other applicable laws or regulations.

3.     Where deemed necessary to protect the water pollution control system, the environment, or the public health, safety, or welfare from the effects of present or imminent discharges, the director of public works or agent may invoke emergency measures, as described in Section 13.20.090(C) of this waste ordinance. These measures include providing access to a premises for the director of public works or agents, without the consent of the owner or user.

4.     Manteca retains the right to enter the premises to inspect the premises, processes, and records of the user; to sample or monitor the discharge, and to copy all records relating to pretreatment, chemical and waste storage, and waste discharge to the Manteca water pollution control system, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(v), to verify that the waste discharge is in compliance with industrial discharge permit, with this waste ordinance, and all applicable state, federal, and local laws pertaining to pretreatment and waste disposal to POTWs or waters of the United States. Manteca shall also have the right to install and operate any necessary sampling and monitoring equipment on the premises of the user, at a fee cost to the user, to document compliance.

5.     The user shall provide a discharge sampling point and Manteca staff shall have access to the sampling point at all reasonable times. Manteca has the right to observe any waste sampling conducted by the user.

6.     In the event of an emergency or a spill on the user’s premises, the user shall notify the Manteca POTW and the fire department that a spill has occurred or is occurring and of the type of spill, including the content, volume, location, and approximate time that the spill occurred or began. Notification to Manteca of a spill implies consent for Manteca to enter and inspect the premises. Manteca staff may enter and inspect the premises at that time, as reasonable, to abate the spill or emergency event and to determine the circumstances of the spill event.

B.     Monitoring Requirements. Manteca may require users to monitor their discharge to the water pollution control system and report the results of the monitoring to Manteca periodically. These monitoring and reporting requirements are specific to the discharger, and are listed in the industrial discharge permit. The deputy director of public works may require additional monitoring and reporting to document compliance.

1.     Manteca may require waste dischargers to install and operate monitoring facilities at the point of discharge to the water pollution control system, at the expense of the discharger. Manteca may also choose to install and operate monitoring facilities on the premises of the discharger to document compliance. These Manteca installed and operated facilities, if required, will be at a fee cost to the user. The monitoring facilities will be constructed, installed and operated to allow for inspection, sampling, and measurement of flow or other parameters of the regulated discharge. The monitoring facilities shall be in accordance with Manteca construction standards and specifications. The facilities also shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger.

2.     Manteca may require the discharger to conduct sampling and analysis of the discharge at a frequency and type as specified by the deputy director of public works or as required by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations to demonstrate compliance with the prescribed waste discharge limits.

C.     Sampling. The user shall sample his or her discharge to the waste pollution control system at the frequency provided in the industrial discharge permit or as deemed reasonable and necessary by the deputy director of public works to demonstrate compliance. The deputy director of public works may require sampling to be conducted by nonpermitted users, at his or her discretion, or if noncompliance is suspected, in which case, nonpermitted dischargers will be subject to the same sampling and reporting requirements as permitted dischargers. The discharger shall use the sampling and test procedures prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants,” or amendments thereto, or otherwise approved by EPA. Manteca also may specify additional sampling requirements or conduct sampling as necessary and reasonable to insure compliance with this waste ordinance and/or the industrial discharge permit.

1.     Initial sampling equipment and methods shall be observed by the deputy director of public works or agent. Before conducting initial sampling, the user shall notify Manteca three days in advance and schedule a time for Manteca staff to be present to observe the sampling procedure. All sampling required by the industrial discharge permit, this waste ordinance, or Manteca shall be at the expense of the user. The installation of sampling equipment and/or the conducting of sampling on the user’s premises is at a fee cost to the user. All discharge samples for monitoring and reporting shall be analyzed at a laboratory facility approved by the deputy director of public works.

2.     Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.

a.     Except as indicated in subsections b and c of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.

b.     Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

c.     For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

D.    Pretreatment. Persons discharging waste to the Manteca water pollution control system shall install and operate any necessary wastewater treatment facilities or equipment as required by the deputy director of public works to achieve compliance with this waste ordinance and all National Pretreatment Standards, within the time limitations specified in the National Pretreatment Regulations, this waste ordinance, or the industrial discharge permit, whichever occurs first. Any pretreatment facilities or equipment required to bring the discharge in compliance with federal regulations, the requirements of this waste ordinance, or the industrial discharge permit shall be provided by the user at his or her expense.

Detailed plans for the construction and operation of the pretreatment facilities shall be provided to Manteca for review and approval prior to commencing construction. However, the review and approval of such plans shall in no way relieve the user of the responsibility to modify the pretreatment facilities, equipment, or operating procedures as necessary to bring the discharge to an acceptable level of treatment. Any subsequent changes to the design, installation, construction, or operation of the pretreatment facilities or equipment shall be reported to Manteca in writing and shall be acceptable to Manteca prior to initiating such changes.

Manteca may specify operational and/or recording procedures relative to routine operation of the pretreatment facilities. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to, operation and maintenance manuals, operation logbooks, operator training, and on-site storage of spare parts and reserve treatment chemicals.

E.     Restaurant Grease Traps. Restaurant process drains shall be connected to a grease trap of a size and design deemed sufficient by the deputy director of public works. These will be accessible for inspection by the deputy director of public works or agent at all reasonable times. The traps will be maintained as deemed sufficient by the deputy director of public works. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.080 Confidentiality.
All information and data submitted by the industrial user or obtained from the user, in accordance with this waste ordinance, shall be available to the public or and governmental agencies without restriction; unless protected by state law. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.090 Enforcement.
A.    Enforcement Mechanisms. This section presents the enforcement mechanisms and penalties available to the city of Manteca to respond to instances of noncompliance. The remedies for noncompliance, enforcement mechanisms, and penalties are cumulative. The intent of this subsection is to provide adequate mechanisms to achieve a maximum degree of compliance from all waste dischargers. The following enforcement provisions apply to all users of the Manteca water pollution control system, either directly or indirectly, to the extent that a user violates any provision of this waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, or an administrative order issued by Manteca.

1.     Notice of Violation (NOV). An NOV is always presented to the user in writing. An NOV may be issued by the deputy director of public works or agent in response to minor violations of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit. Manteca shall issue an NOV within ten working days of a violation or notification that a violation has occurred. In an emergency, Manteca may issue a verbal NOV which will be followed by a written notice.

An NOV may also contain specific actions for the user to complete such as conducting additional sampling, monitoring, or reporting, or applying for an industrial discharge permit or permit renewal.

2.     Noncompliance Fees. Manteca has the authority to assess fees for the reimbursement of costs accrued by Manteca as a result of a violation by a user.

a.     Sampling and Inspection Fees. The deputy director of public works may assess fees to the user for additional sampling, inspection, monitoring, or the installation of Manteca equipment on the user’s premises to sample or monitor a discharge.

b.     Damage Fee. The deputy director of public works may also assess damage fees to recover costs for damage to the water pollution control system, Manteca, or the environment as a result of a discharge violation.

 

c.     Permit Violation Fee. The deputy director of public works may assess a permit violation fee to recover costs for fines assessed to Manteca as a result of a violation of its NPDES permit or any other federal, California state, or local permit. The deputy director of public works also may include reimbursement of costs accrued by Manteca for additional sampling, inspection, environmental clean-up, lab fees, and any other costs incurred by Manteca as a result of the permit violation. These costs may be included as part of the permit violation fee and damage fee which may be assessed to the user, if the discharge violation caused, singly or in combination with other discharges, Manteca to violate its permit. This includes an increase in the order of magnitude of the Manteca permit violation.

3.     Suspend Service. Manteca has the authority to suspend service to any user found in violation of the waste ordinance, the industrial discharge permit, California state and/or federal regulations, or the local limits.

The director of public works or agent may also suspend service in instances when a user refuses Manteca staff entry to the user’s premises for inspection, monitoring, or sampling purposes or to abate a perceived illegal discharge. The suspension of service may remain in force until the user allows entry to the premises.

4.     Administrative Order. Manteca has the authority to issue an administrative order to bring a user into compliance. An administrative order maybe either a cease and desist order, show cause order, or compliance order. The filing of an administrative order is under the discretion of the director and/or deputy director of public works and is considered to be an intermediate step to enforcing compliance.

5.     Annual Publication of SNC Dischargers. In order to comply with Federal Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), and to encourage users to remain in compliance, Manteca shall annually publish a list of all users which were in significant noncompliance (SNC) at any time in the past twelve months. This public notification shall be in the largest daily newspaper published in the service area.

6.     Other Noncompliance Penalties. The following enforcement measures will be used in instances of serious noncompliance, usually resulting in extreme damage to the water pollution control system, or from fraudulent practices, criminal noncompliance, violation of an administrative order, violation of a compliance schedule, or negligent or intentional discharge of waste which causes a threat to the health and/or safety of the public, Manteca personnel, or the environment.

a.     Terminate Service. Waste discharge service to the water pollution control system may be terminated, by disconnection of a user’s sewer connection, upon written notice by the director of public works or agent for any of the following reasons:

i.      Violation of an administrative order.

ii.     Refusal to cooperate with Manteca staff or comply with Manteca policies.

iii.    Refusal to allow Manteca staff reasonable access to a premises for purposes of inspection, monitoring, or abating an illegal discharge.

iv.    Fraudulent actions relating to reporting, self-monitoring, or Manteca sampling or inspection.

v.     One or more serious violations which endanger the health and/or safety of the public or Manteca personnel or which endangers the water pollution control system and/or the environment.

b.     Pursuit of Criminal Prosecution. Where Manteca or its director of public works determines that a criminal violation of the waste ordinance has occurred, Manteca may pursue criminal prosecution, pursuant to provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act and California Government Code Sections 54725 and 54739. For each violation the offender may receive thirty days in jail or a fine of one thousand dollars, or both. A violation may be recorded for each instance of non-compliance and for each day the noncompliance occurred.

c.     Pursuit of Civil Action. Where deemed appropriate by the director of public works and the city attorney, Manteca will pursue civil action. Actions taken may include, but are not limited to: civil suits for damage to the water pollution control system, injunctive relief, and/or civil penalties. Civil actions may be pursued on a strict liability basis, regardless of intent, and shall include reimbursement for all costs incurred by Manteca, including costs for repair, administrative costs, and a penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars per day for each violation pursuant to California Government Code Section 54740.

d.     Additional Administrative Remedies. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 54740.5 [Violations—Administrative Complaints; Civil Penalties], the director of public works may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates any requirement adopted or ordered by a local agency pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 54739. The administrative complaint shall allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of the local agency’s requirements, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty.

The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the person subject to the local agency’s discharge requirements, and shall inform the person served that a hearing shall be conducted within sixty days after the person has been served. The hearing shall be before a hearing officer designated by the governing board of the city of Manteca. The person who has been issued an administrative complaint may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the local agency shall not conduct a hearing. A person dissatisfied with the decision of the hearing officer may appeal to the governing board of the local agency within thirty days of notice of the hearing officer’s decision.

If after the hearing, or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the hearing officer or board may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the hearing officer or board may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any noncompliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the discharger.

Civil penalties may be imposed by the city of Manteca as follows:

i.      In an amount which shall not exceed two thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports.

ii.     In an amount which shall not exceed three thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule established by the local agency.

iii.    In an amount which shall not exceed five thousand dollars per violation for each day for discharges in violation of any waste discharge limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the local agency.

iv.    In an amount which does not exceed ten dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city of Manteca.

v.     The amount of any civil penalties imposed under this section which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the discharge originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder and when recorded shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien and continue for ten years from the time of recording unless sooner released, and shall be renewable in accordance with the provisions of Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure.

All moneys collected under this section shall be deposited in a special account of the city of Manteca and shall be made available for the monitoring, treatment, and control of discharges into the local agency’s sanitation or sewer system or for other mitigation measures.

Unless appealed, orders setting administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall be made within thirty days. Copies of these orders shall be served by personal service or by registered mail upon the party served with the administrative complaint and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy.

The city of Manteca may, at its option, elect to petition the Superior Court to confirm any order establishing civil penalties and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1285 to 1287.6, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure.

No penalties shall be recoverable under this section for any violation for which civil liability is recovered under Section 54740.

B.     Costs for Enforcement Actions. All costs accrued by Manteca to undertake enforcement actions shall be paid by the user in violation. These costs include, but are not limited to, all fees described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, attorney’s fees, and fees associated with termination of service. All such fees are payable to Manteca and are in addition to any costs accrued by member jurisdictions. All such fees are due and payable upon receipt of notice. Delinquent fees will result in delinquent charges and/or enforcement actions, as described in Section 13.20.050(F)(5) of this waste ordinance.

C.     Emergency Powers. The director of public works or agent shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions and measures to protect the water pollution control system, POTW personnel, public, and the environment from endangerment or threat of endangerment, or any condition that is likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare; or which, either singly or by interaction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the water pollution control system, places Manteca in violation of its NPDES permit or any other California state or federal law or permits. The available precautionary measures include suspension of wastewater treatment and collection services and/or an industrial discharge permit, issuance of a cease and desist order, and/or any of the following: decontamination, sewer closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life or property, or to prevent further damage to the environment of the water pollution control system. In pursuit of such precautionary measures, Manteca personnel or any agent of the city of Manteca shall have immediate access to the premises. In addition, the director of public works or agent shall have the authority to prohibit approach to the scene of such an emergency any vehicle, vessel, or thing, and all persons not specifically employed in the correction of the emergency condition or the preservation of life or property in the vicinity thereof.

Any user receiving cease and desist order or requested to suspend discharge to the water pollution control system from or by Manteca shall immediately cease or suspend the discharge or contribution to the water pollution control system. In the event a user fails to voluntarily comply with the requirements of the cease and desist order or suspension of service, the director of public works shall take such steps as deemed necessary to halt the discharge or contribution, including severance of the user’s connection to the water pollution control system, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to the public, the POTW, or the environment.

In addition to any enforcement actions issued to the user, the user shall submit a detailed written report of the emergency condition to the director of public works within fifteen days of the occurrence. The detailed report shall describe the cause(s) of the emergency event or harmful contribution and the measures which have been taken to prevent any future or repeated occurrence.

D.    Disclosure of Information. All users are responsible for notifying Manteca of known violations of this waste ordinance and/or the industrial discharge permit when they occur. In the event of a spill, accidental discharge, bypass of the pretreatment system, or the imminent danger of same, which may endanger the health or safety of Manteca staff, the public, or the environment is present, the user must immediately notify the Manteca director of public works or agent by a phone call or in person. Dischargers must also notify Manteca of any changes to their operations which may change the quantity or quality of their discharge, prior to the change. Failure to notify Manteca of a violation, spill, bypass or accidental discharge is a violation of this waste ordinance. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.100 Hearings and appeals.
A.    Any user, permit applicant, or permittee, found in violation of this waste ordinance or the industrial discharge permit, or adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination of the director of public works, agent, or Manteca interpreting or implementing this waste ordinance or in any permit enforcement action issued herein, may file a written request for reconsideration of the decision, action, or determination within ten working days of notification of said decision, action, or determination. The written request for reconsideration shall detail facts supporting the user’s request and such facts must include a statement listing all relevant facts which must be considered, including such facts that may not have been known or available to Manteca at the date of such decision, action, or determination.

B.     The deputy director of public works shall render decision in writing on the request for reconsideration within ten working days of receiving such request. If the decision on the request for reconsideration still is unacceptable to the user, the user may file a request for appeal to the director of public works, within ten working days of notice of the deputy director’s decision. When a written request for appeal has been received and logged with the director of public works, the director shall schedule a hearing within forty-five days from receipt of the request for appeal and the director of public works shall make a final ruling on the deputy director’s decision within ninety days from receiving the request for appeal.

C.     Except where deemed appropriate by the director of public works, this reconsideration and appeal process described in this section of this waste ordinance shall not halt or delay any enforcement action taken by Manteca.

D.    Manteca reserves the authority to designate a hearing officer to hear all testimony presented for a hearing or appeal. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.110 Fats, oils and grease (FOG) control.
A.    Findings. The city of Manteca finds that, in order to provide for the public health and welfare, and to comply with the laws and regulations of the state of California, State Water Resources Control Board Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ Statewide General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sanitary Sewer Systems and amendments thereto, and the United States Government, it is necessary to set uniform requirements for all users of the city’s sanitary sewer system to include, but not limited to, the following:

1.     To establish the appropriate authority for the city to condition or deny discharges to the city sewer system;

2.     To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the city sewer system that may cause a sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) to occur;

3.     To prevent the clogging or blocking of the city sewer lines due to grease buildup causing backup and flooding of streets, residences, and commercial buildings;

4.     To implement a procedure to recover the costs incurred in cleaning and maintenance of sewer lines and the disposal of grease blockages;

5.     To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in the flooding of streets, residences or commercial buildings;

6.     To establish requirements to install grease removal devices (such as traps or interceptors), design standards for the removal devices, maintenance requirements, BMP requirements, record keeping and reporting requirements. Additionally, to establish enforcement procedures for violations of any part or requirement of this chapter; and

7.     To establish the authority for the city to carry out routine and non-routine monitoring (sampling and inspections) of the grease traps and the food service establishments (FSEs).

B.     Applicability. The terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to all food service establishments to include restaurants, cafeterias, food preparation facilities, convenience stores preparing fast foods for sale; grocery stores providing cooked foods for sale; and other food preparation facilities.

C.     Definitions.

“City” means the city of Manteca, California, employees of the city, or an authorized agent of the city.

“Discharger” means the food service establishment that is discharging gray water to the city sewer system.

“Food service establishments” or “FSEs” means any business which prepares and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption, on- or off-site, with the exception of private residences. Food service facilities shall include, but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers with an average daily discharge volume of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or less, food packagers, restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, and all other food service facilities not listed in this chapter.

“Garbage disposal” means a device which shreds or grinds up waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system.

“Gray water” means all of the liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer.

“Grease” means a material either liquid or solid, composed primarily of fats, oils and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms “fats, oils, and grease (FOG),” “oil and grease” or “oil and grease substances” shall all be included within this definition.

“Grease interceptor” means a device located underground and outside of the food service establishment designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the balance of the liquid wastes (gray water) to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. Interceptors shall have at least one inspection hatch on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance.

“Grease trap” means a device located in a food service establishment or under a sink designed to collect, contain, or remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste (gray water) to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. Traps shall have a removable lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance.

“Grease trap service company” means a person, or company, who provides maintenance services for grease traps and interceptors. Maintenance services to include cleaning, minor repairs, grease and solids removal from the interceptor, and transport of the removed material to an appropriate recycling or disposal facility.

“Sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs)” means overflows from sanitary sewer systems of FSEs wastewater, as well as industrial and commercial wastewater, depending on the pattern of land uses in the area served by the sanitary sewer system. SSOs often contain high levels of suspended solids, pathogenic organisms, toxic pollutants, nutrients, oxygen-demanding organic compounds, oil and grease and other pollutants. SSOs may cause a public nuisance, particularly when raw untreated wastewater is discharged to areas with high public exposure, such as streets or surface waters used for drinking, fishing, or body contact recreation. SSOs may pollute surface or ground waters, threaten public health, adversely affect aquatic life, and impair the recreational use and aesthetic enjoyment of surface waters. Any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system.

SSOs include:

1.     Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that reach waters of the United States;

2.     Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that do not reach waters of the United States; and

3.     Wastewater backups into buildings and on private property that are caused by blockages or flow conditions within the publicly owned portion of a sanitary sewer system.

“Waste grease” means fats, oils, and grease that can be collected following use and prior to discharge to the sewer or interceptor. Waste grease is collected from pans, deep fat fryers and cooking grills.

D.    Grease Interceptor/Trap Required.

1.     Grease interceptors and/or traps shall be provided by the facility owner, when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary to prevent grease in excessive amounts from entering the sanitary sewer system. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city building division and shall be located as to be easily and safely accessible for cleaning and inspection. All prospective grease trap users must provide manufacturer’s capacity data and an estimate of the product rate at the facility that is within the capacity of the grease trap to be approved by the building permit department.

2.     Existing Facilities. For the purposes of sizing and installation of grease interceptors/traps, all food service facilities existing within the city’s sewer system service area, whether within, or without, the city limits, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be allowed to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors/traps provided their grease interceptors or grease traps are in efficient operating conditions.

On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city may require an existing food service facility to install, operate, and maintain a new grease interceptor or trap that complies with the requirements of this chapter or to modify, repair, or replace any noncompliant interceptor or trap within ninety days of written notification by the city when any one or more of the following conditions exist:

a.     The facility is found to be contributing grease and oil in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitates increased maintenance on the wastewater collection system.

b.     The facility does not have a grease interceptor or trap.

c.     The facility has an undersized, nonrepairable or defective grease interceptor or trap.

d.     Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a building permit to be issued by the city.

e.     The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership.

f.      The existing facility does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor or trap in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or current building codes.

3.     New Facilities or New Interceptor Installations. Grease interceptors or traps shall be located in the food service establishment’s lateral sewer line between all fixtures which may introduce grease into the sewer system and the connection to the city’s wastewater collections system. If dishwashers are connected to the grease interceptor, the interceptor must be properly designed to contain and cool the dishwasher discharge to prevent the hot water from causing carry through of the grease. Garbage disposals and restrooms should not be plumbed to the grease interceptor. Automatic hood washers, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas should be plumbed to the grease interceptor. Sanitary facilities (restrooms) shall not be plumbed to the grease interceptor under any circumstance.

4.     The use of a grease trap, in place of a grease interceptor will only be authorized for those facilities that do not operate a deep fat fryer, a cooking grill and conducts minimal dishwashing.

E.     Maintenance of Grease Interceptor/Trap Required.

1.     All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective operational condition by the discharger at the discharger’s expense. Typically maintenance consists of the removal of floatable solids and settleable solids collected in the grease interceptor/trap; and the cleaning of the walls and piping.

2.     Routine Maintenance Schedules. The discharger is responsible for establishing a routine maintenance schedule that includes the routine removal of floatable and settleable solids and cleaning of the interceptors/traps. The maintenance frequency should be such that the interceptor/trap does not allow fats, grease, oils, and food solids from leaving the interceptor and entering the city sewer collection system. The amount of time between pumping and cleaning services is dependent on the volume of wastes discharged, the volume of the interceptor/trap, and the physical integrity of the interceptor/trap structures and piping. It is the discharger’s responsibility that the interceptors/traps are routinely inspected and repaired as needed.

3.     Record Keeping Requirements. The discharger is responsible for maintaining appropriate maintenance records that documents the routine pumping, cleaning, and repairs made to interceptors and traps. Where the discharger hires a grease trap service company to clean the interceptor/trap and remove and dispose of the accumulated grease and solids, a copy of the pumping manifest or billing must be retained with the maintenance records. All maintenance records should include at a minimum the following information:

a.     Name of facility;

b.     Date service performed;

c.     Total volume of the interceptor/trap;

d.     Total volume of material removed from the interceptor/trap;

e.     List of all deficiencies identified from an inspection of the empty interceptor/trap;

f.      Name of the grease trap service company;

g.     Address of the grease trap service company;

h.     Name and address of final disposal site;

i.      Signature of the grease trap service company employee performing the work; and

j.      Signature of the discharger’s employee observing and accepting the services.

4.     Record Retention. All grease interceptor/trap maintenance records shall be retained for a period of not less than three years. These records shall be retained at the food service establishment and shall be made available for inspection by the city.

F.     Disposal of Wastes from Interceptors and Traps. Storage, handling, transportation and disposal of all wastes from interceptors/traps shall be performed in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations that pertain to the type and/or class of waste. Materials removed from waste interceptors/traps must be disposed of at legally designated locations for those specific type wastes. Materials removed from waste interceptors/traps shall not be discharged to the city sanitary sewers or storm drains.

G.    Collection, Storage, and Disposal of Waste Grease and Solids. Dischargers are encouraged to collect excess oil and grease from deep fat fryers, pots and pans prior to washing. This waste grease and oil should be collected and stored in appropriate containers that are appropriately labeled. The collected waste grease and oil should be collected by a waste grease service company for disposal. In no case shall the discharger dispose of deep fat fryer oils and other collected waste greases and oils by discharge to the grease interceptor/trap to the city sewer system.

H.    Clean-Up of Spilled Grease and Oil. The discharger shall clean up all spilled grease and oil using appropriate tools, including a mop and bucket. Bucket contents may be discharged to the grease interceptor/trap, and solid greases and oils that can be manually picked up should be held in the waste grease collection containers for final disposal. In no instance shall spilled grease and oils be washed to the stormwater drains. In the event that the city is required to clean up a grease and oil spill generated by a discharger, the city is authorized to assess cost recovery fees to the discharger for all costs associated with the clean-up.

I.      Use of Chemicals and Other Additives. The use of chemicals, emulsifying agents, enzymes, microorganisms, and/or other additives that are added to the grease interceptors/traps to reduce or eliminate the pumping and cleaning of the interceptor/trap is prohibited. Dischargers currently using a chemical or other additive must halt such use immediately on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

J.      Right of Access. The city, employees of the city, or authorized agents of the city, have the authority to enter the property of the discharger to conduct inspections of the entire facility, including the interceptors, traps, cooking and storage areas, restrooms, offices, service areas, and other areas of the facility. The city is also authorized to collect samples of any wastestream, including the discharge from the facility and the interceptors and traps. The city may obtain search warrants for inspection and sampling purposes. Failure to grant access may result in the suspension of sewer and water services provided by the city.

K.    Enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter is considered a misdemeanor and subject to enforcement actions under the city codes. In addition to these misdemeanor enforcement actions, the city is authorized to take the following actions to achieve compliance to the city chapter.

1.     Mandatory Interceptor/Trap Service. The city may issue an order requiring the discharger to conduct interceptor/trap maintenance services within a mandatory time period. The cost of the services shall be the direct responsibility of the discharger.

2.     Mandatory Interceptor/Trap Service Schedule. The city may impose a mandatory pumping and cleaning schedule to assure the proper maintenance of an interceptor not properly maintained by the discharger. The cost of the services shall be the direct responsibility of the discharger. Mandatory service schedules may cover a time period of up to three years.

3.     Cost Recovery. The city may assess the discharger the amount of those expenditures made by the city to clean up or prevent sewer blockages and overflows caused by the discharge from a food service establishment.

4.     Administrative Fines. Administrative fines shall be conducted in accordance with Section 13.20.090, Enforcement, of this industrial waste ordinance.

a.     Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of twenty-five percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.

b.     Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty days of being notified of the fine. Where a request is made, the city may convene a hearing on the matter before a hearing officer. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the cost of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.

c.     Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

d.     Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance. The city may issue wastewater discharge permits to food service establishments either on a case-by-case basis or as part of a general program. The authority and requirements established by this industrial waste ordinance shall apply to all such wastewater discharge permits issued under this section.

5.     Emergency Suspensions. The city may immediately suspend a discharge and/or water services, after informal notice to the discharger, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or property.

L.     FOG Disposal at Water Quality Control Facility (WQCF).

1.     The director or designee may establish minimum standards for FOG which shall be met prior to discharge of any FOG to the WQCF. Vendors failing to meet established standards are prohibited from discharging to the WQCF for a minimum of two years, or until they have demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that they have mitigated causes which led to initial failure to meet minimum standards.

2.     The following charges and fees are required to be paid for the delivery and discharge of FOG to WQCF’s FOG receiving station. For each load delivered to the receiving station the charge is one hundred dollars per thousand gallons or part thereof for FOG collected in Manteca and one hundred twenty five dollars per thousand gallons or part thereof for all others.

3.     Said charges and fees shall be adjusted as per the prior year’s Consumer Price Index (CPI) on March 1st, 2021, and every year thereafter.

 

FOG

Rate per 1,000 gallons

Said charges and fees shall be adjusted as per the prior year’s Consumer Price Index (CPI)

FOG collected within the City of Manteca

$100.00

Adjusted as per the prior year’s (CPI) on March 1st 2021 and every year thereafter

All others

$125.00

Adjusted as per the prior year’s (CPI) on March 1st 2021 and every year thereafter

 

(Ord. O2019-17 § 1; Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.120 Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this waste ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provision, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 2016)

 

13.20.130 Dental amalgam-mercury source control program.
A.    Best Management Practices. All owners and operators of dental facilities that remove or replace amalgam fillings shall comply with the following best management practices:

1.     No person shall rinse chairside traps, vacuum screens, or amalgam separators equipment in a sink or other connection to the sanitary sewer.

2.     Owners and operators of dental facilities shall ensure that all staff members who handle amalgam waste are trained in the proper handling, management and disposal of mercury-containing material and fixer-containing solutions, and shall maintain training records that shall be available for inspection by city environmental compliance staff during normal business hours.

3.     Amalgam waste shall be stored and managed in accordance with the instructions of the recycler or hauler of such materials.

4.     Dental unit water lines, chair-side traps, and vacuum lines that discharge amalgam process wastewater to a POTW must not be cleaned with oxidizing or acidic cleaners, including, but not limited to, bleach, chlorine, iodine and peroxide that have a pH lower than 6 or greater than 8.

5.     The use of bulk mercury is prohibited. Only precapsulated dental amalgam is permitted.

B.     Amalgam Separators.

1.     No later than July 14, 2020, all existing dental facilities must install, operate, and maintain one or more amalgam separators or amalgam removal devices that meet the following requirements to remove dental amalgam solids from all amalgam process wastewater:

a.     Compliant with either the American National Standard Institute (ANSI), American National Standards/American Dental Association (ADA) Specifications 108 for Amalgam Separators (2009) with Technical Addendum (2011) or the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 11143 Standard (2008) or subsequent versions so long as that version requires amalgam separators to achieve at least ninety-five percent removal efficiency. Compliance must be assessed by an accredited testing laboratory under ANSI’s accreditation program for product certification or a testing laboratory that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation’s Mutual Recognition Arrangement. The testing laboratory’s scope of accreditation must include ANSI/ADA 108-2009 or ISO 11143.

b.     The amalgam separator must be sized to accommodate the maximum discharge rate of the amalgam process wastewater.

c.     An existing dental facility that operates an amalgam separator(s) that was installed prior to June 14, 2017 satisfies the requirement of this section until the existing separator is replaced or until June 14, 2027, whichever is sooner.

d.     In the event that an amalgam separator is not functioning properly, it must be repaired consistent with manufacturer instructions or replaced with a unit that meets the requirements of subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section as soon as possible, but no later than ten business days after the malfunction is discovered by the owner, operator, agent or representative of the dental facilities.

2.     As of July 14, 2017, any newly constructed dental facilities must comply with the requirements of subsection (B)(1)(a), (b) and (d) and the reporting and recordkeeping requirement of subsection C.

3.     Proof of certification and installation records shall be submitted to the city environmental compliance staff within thirty days of installation.

4.     Amalgam separators shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer recommendations. Installation, certification, and maintenance records shall be available for immediate inspection upon request by the city environmental compliance staff during normal business hours.

C.     Reporting and Record Keeping Requirement.

1.     One-Time Compliance Report Deadlines. For existing dental facilities, a one-time compliance report must be submitted to city environmental compliance staff no later than October 12, 2020, or ninety days after a transfer of ownership. For newly constructed dental facilities, a one-time compliance report must be submitted to city environmental compliance staff no later than ninety days following the introduction of wastewater into a POTW.

2.     Signature and Certification. The one-time compliance report must be signed and certified by a responsible corporate officer, a general partner or proprietor if the dental facility is a partnership or sole proprietorship, or a duly authorized representative of the dental facility.

3.     Contents.

a.     The one-time compliance report for dental facilities that do not place or remove dental amalgam must include the facility name, physical address, mailing address, contact information, name(s) of the operator(s) and owner(s); and a certification statement that states that the facility does not practice the placement of dental amalgam and does not remove amalgam.

 

b.     The one-time compliance report for dental facilities subject to the standards of this section must include:

i.      The facility name, physical address, mailing address, contact information.

ii.     Name of the operator(s) and owner(s).

iii.    A description of the operation at the dental facility including: the total number of chairs, the total number of chairs at which dental amalgam may be present and may discharge into the resulting wastewater, and a description of any existing amalgam separator(s) or equivalent device(s) currently operated to include, at a minimum, the make, model, year of installation.

iv.    Certification that the amalgam separator(s) or equivalent device is designed and will be operated and maintained to meet the requirements specified in subsection B.

v.     Certification that the dental facility is implementing BMPs specified in subsection A and will continue to do so.

vi.    The name of the third party service provider that maintains the amalgam separator(s) or equivalent device(s) operated at the dental facility, if applicable. Otherwise, a brief description of the practices employed by the facility to ensure proper operation and maintenance in accordance with subsection B.

4.     Transfer of Ownership Notification. If a dental facility transfers ownership of the facility, the new owner must submit a new one-time compliance report to the city environmental compliance staff no late than ninety days after the transfer.

5.     Retention Period. As long as a dental facility subject to this section in operation, or until ownership is transferred, the dental facility or the dental discharger or an agent or representative of the dental discharger must maintain the one-time compliance report, installation, certification, maintenance and repair, inspection, waste hauling records shall be retained for a minimum of three years and make them available for inspection in either physical or electronic form.

D.    Vacuum Suction Systems Exemption. The following types of vacuum suction systems are exempt from requirements listed under subsection B:

1.     The system was installed before 2003.

2.     The system is a dry vacuum pump system with an air-water separator.

3.     The sedimentation tank is non-bottom draining, with a drain above the anticipated maximum level of accumulated sludge.

4.     Evidence of the regular pump outs (a minimum of once a year, or more often if either directed by the manufacturer or necessary to keep solids from exiting through the drain) is maintained and open to inspection by the city during normal business hours.

5.     The system has no direct discharge pipe to the sewer on the bottom of the sedimentation tank.

Any owner(s) or operator(s) whose dental facilities meet conditions of subsections (D)(1) through (5) may apply for this exemption by written letters to the city environmental compliance staff. The city environmental compliance staff will review the system and, if the exemption is approved, shall provide a written letter of exemption.

 

Any exemption obtained pursuant to the section shall expire upon installation of a new vacuum system. Upon expiration of the exemption, the facility shall comply with this section before commencing further operation.

E.     Exemptions. The following types of dental practices are exempt from this section, provided that the removal or placement of amalgam fillings occurs at the facility no more than three days per year: (1) orthodontics; (2) periodontics; (3) oral and maxillofacial surgery; (4) oral radiology; (5) oral pathology or oral medicine; (6) endodontistry and prosthodontistry; (7) mobile units. (Ord. O2019-07 § 1)

Chapter 13.24 SEPTIC TANK CLEANING
13.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter and of the receiving station service fees and charges prescribed under this chapter is to regulate the discharge of domestic septic tank cleanings, portable toilet wastes, leach pit and cesspool contents into the receiving station facilities at the city wastewater control facility and to derive revenue which shall be used only for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the city wastewater control facility receiving station and sewage treatment plant facilities. (Prior code § 14-24)

 

13.24.020 Permit—Required.
No person shall deliver or discharge domestic septic tank cleanings into the city wastewater control facility receiving station facilities approved for such delivery and discharge, unless such person has a valid and subsisting receiving station use permit (“permit” in this chapter) issued by the city pursuant to the provision of this chapter. (Prior code § 14-25)

 

13.24.030 Permit—Issuance.
A.    No person shall be issued a permit under this chapter to use the receiving station facilities to deliver and discharge domestic septic tank cleanings unless such person has filed with and furnished to the city’s department of public works the following:

1.     An application on a form provided;

2.     The cash or corporate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars described in Section 13.24.050;

3.     The insurance policies and/or certificates required by this chapter; and

4.     Evidence of current unrevoked registration with the San Joaquin local health district under Chapter 6 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code authorizing such person to engage in the business of disposing of the cleanings of domestic septic tanks.

B.     Upon receipt thereof, the city’s public works department shall issue such permit to the applicant. (Prior code § 14-26)

 

13.24.040 Permit—Nontransferable.
A permit issued under this chapter is personal to the applicant to whom it is issued and is not subject to transfer or assignment. (Prior code § 14-27)

 

13.24.050 Permit—Suspension—Revocation.
A.    The director of public works or his or her authorized deputy may, upon reasonable notice and hearing, suspend or revoke any permit issued under this chapter if he or she finds and determines that any person:

1.     Has submitted a permit application that is false in any material respect; or

2.     Has failed to maintain in full force and effect, the bonds or insurance required under this chapter; or

3.     Has personally or through an employee or other person engaged to do so, delivered or discharged any substances other than the cleanings of domestic septic tanks, etc., into the receiving station facilities or has delivered or discharged therein any substances prohibited from discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system under the provisions of Ordinance No. 435 or this chapter; or

4.     Has disposed of any sanitary sewage or waste in an unlawful manner anywhere within the service area; or

5.     Has violated any state, county or city law or regulation regarding the hauling of sanitary sewage, including liquid wastes; or

6.     Has failed to maintain an unrevoked registration for disposition of septic tank cleanings under California Health and Safety Code Section 25000 et seq., where required to dispose of such cleanings under this chapter;

7.     Has failed to conform to any provision of the ordinance required to be complied with by him or her; or

8.     Has failed to pay, before delinquency, any fee or charge due under this chapter.

B.     If the director determines by reason of emergency circumstances that the immediate preservation of the public health and safety require that such permit be suspended immediately and without prior hearing, he or she may do so; provided, however, that he or she shall make written finding as to the emergency circumstances which justify such immediate action and forthwith give to permittee written notice thereof of the time, not exceeding fifteen days, when the director will conduct a hearing to determine whether such suspension shall be continued and/or the permit shall be revoked.

C.     Notice of any proceeding under this chapter shall be served personally upon the permittee or by registered mail addressed to permittee as may be known to the director of public works. (Prior code § 14-41)

 

13.24.060 Bond—Required.
A.    No person shall deliver or discharge the cleanings of domestic septic tanks into the city wastewater control facility receiving station facilities unless such person maintains in full force and effect a cash bond or a corporate surety bond in the sum of one thousand dollars in form approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the permittee under this chapter.

B.     The condition of the bond shall be that the amount thereof shall be paid to the city if the permittee does any of the following:

1.     Delivers or discharges any substance other than the cleanings of domestic septic tanks, etc., into the city wastewater control facility receiving station facilities; or

2.     Discharges therein any of those substances which, by Ordinance No.435 are prohibited from discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system (referred to in this chapter as “prohibited substances”); or

3.     Dispose of sewage or wastes in an unlawful manner within the service area of the receiving station; or

4.     Is delinquent in paying for charges and fees billed by the director of finance under this chapter; or

5.     Otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

C.     Upon payment of any sum to city under such bond, the permittee shall immediately furnish and file with the city such cash surety bonds as may again equal the total amount of the bond required under this chapter.

D.    No interest shall be paid by the city or permittee on any cash bond deposited. (Prior code § 14-28)

 

13.24.070 Bond—Remedy not exclusive.
The remedies providing for satisfaction of this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedies to which the city may be lawfully entitled. Each person shall remain personally liable for any obligation or liability incurred in operations to the extent that bond proceeds are insufficient to satisfy the same. (Prior code § 14-29)

 

13.24.080 Insurance.
A.    No person shall deliver or discharge the cleanings of domestic septic tanks, etc., into the city wastewater control facility receiving station facilities unless such person, at his or her sole cost and expense, maintains in full force and effect the following policies:

1.     Public liability and property damage insurance insuring such person against claims for personal injury and property damage, (including motor vehicle coverage) which may arise by reason of the nature of the work or from the operations conducted by such person, his or her officers, employees, and all other persons engaged to conduct such operations by this chapter.

 

2.     A separate policy or policies naming the city and their officers and employees as sole insureds, insuring against all operations conducted by, for or on behalf of such person, and insuring against the omissions and supervisory acts of the city, their officers and employees with respect to the operations; the policy shall provide or contain an endorsement that the coverage afforded thereby shall be primary coverage to the full extent of liability stated in the declarations, and that if the city or its officers or employees have other insurance against the loss covered by the policy, such other insurance shall be excess insurance only.

B.     Each such policy shall provide coverage in the following minimum amounts: for personal injury, including death, one hundred thousand dollars per person, three hundred thousand dollars for more than one person, per occurrence; property damage fifty thousand dollars on account of any one occurrence, with an aggregate limit of not less than two hundred thousand dollars for any policy year.

C.     Each such policy shall bear an endorsement precluding cancellation or reduction in coverage unless, not less than ten days prior thereto, written notice is given by the insurer to the: City Clerk, City Hall, 1001 West Center Street, Manteca, California 95336.

D.    The permittee shall cause to be filed with the city clerk a certificate of insurance issued by the insurer evidencing the policy required under subdivision 1 of subsection A of this section, and the original policy required under subdivision 2 of subsection A of this section. Not less than ten days prior to the effective date of cancellation, expiration or other termination of each such policy, the permittee shall cause replacement coverage to be filed with the license collector.

E.     The city clerk shall file all certificates and insurance policies received under this chapter. (Prior code § 14-30)

 

13.24.090 Charges—Fees.
A.    The following charges and fees shall be required to be paid for the delivery and discharge of wastes as set forth in the city wastewater control facility receiving station facilities: For each load collected and delivered to the receiving station the charge is four dollars per thousand gallons or part thereof. Only wastes collected from within the county of San Joaquin shall be discharged to the receiving station.

B.     Said charges and fees may be changed by city council resolution. (Prior code § 14-31)

 

13.24.100 Source certification.
No person shall be permitted to deliver or discharge materials at the receiving station without delivering to the director of public works or his or her representatives, prior to such delivery or discharge, written certification of the source of collection of the material on a form approved by the director of public works. The source certification form shall note the date and time of collection, the city and street address of the property from which the materials were collected, and shall bear the signature of the owner or occupant of the property. (Prior code § 14-32)

 

13.24.110 Improper discharge.
No person shall deliver or discharge into the receiving station any industrial waste nor any substances whose discharge into the city’s sanitary sewer system is prohibited under Ordinance No. 435 notwithstanding that they may constitute the cleaning of domestic septic tanks, etc. (Prior code § 14-33)

 

13.24.120 Sludge and solids prohibited.
No person shall deliver or discharge into the receiving station facilities any sludge or solids of sewage treatment plants or water treatment plants from within or from outside the county of San Joaquin. (Prior code § 14-34)

 

13.24.130 Monitoring wastes.
A.    The city shall have the right by and through its officers, employees or other persons engaged by the city to do so, to take such samples of materials delivered by any person into the receiving station facilities as the city in its sole discretion may deem appropriate to obtain a representation sample of each delivery’s contents. Such sample may be taken prior to, during, or after any such delivery and discharge. Without being limited thereto, results of analysis made of such samples at the city wastewater control facility laboratory may be used to determine permittee’s conformance with the requirements of this chapter. By acceptance of the permit issued hereunder, the permittee consents and agrees that any such samples may be so taken and used.

B.     In the event the city determines that any such delivery contains substances not permitted to be delivered or discharged under this chapter, the permittee shall forthwith comply with the city’s order or direction that they not be so delivered or discharged. (Prior code § 14-35)

 

13.24.140 Records—Billing.
A record of deliveries of the cleanings of domestic septic tanks, etc. shall be made at the time of each delivery to the receiving station and shall be signed by or on behalf of the permittee. Within fifteen days after the close of each calendar month, the director of finance shall prepare and mail an invoice to each permittee for fees and charges incurred by such permittee during such calendar month. (Prior code § 14-36)

 

13.24.150 Payment—Delinquency.
Fees and charges for the cleanings of domestic septic tanks, etc., delivered and discharged into the receiving station facilities shall be paid by the permittee at the office of the director of finance, City Hall, Manteca, California or at such other place as the director may provide. Such fees and charges are immediately due and payable upon the deposit of an invoice therefor in the United States mail; they are delinquent if payment is not received by the director of finance on or before the fortieth day immediately following the date when due and payable. (Prior code § 14-37)

 

13.24.160 Rules and regulations promulgation.
The director of public works is authorized to adopt rules, regulations and procedures relating to the operation of the receiving station, to establish a schedule of service and to provide a safe, efficient and sanitary use of the receiving station facilities and to implement the provisions of this chapter. The director may deny or suspend the use of receiving station facilities to any person who fails to comply with such rules, regulations and procedures. (Prior code § 14-38)

 

13.24.170 Compliance.
It is unlawful for any person to not comply with any written rule, regulation or procedure adopted by the director of public works pursuant to this chapter which relates to the delivery or discharge of wastes into receiving station facilities of the city wastewater control facility. (Prior code § 14-39)

 

13.24.180 Hauling vehicles identification.
Access to and use of receiving station facilities shall be granted only to vehicles bearing, in four-inch-high letters on both sides of the hauling vehicle, the name and address of the holder of a permit issued under this chapter and the vehicle load capacity. A copy of the city receiving station use permit as provided by the city must accompany the truck. (Prior code § 14-40)

 

13.24.190 Director’s decision.
After any hearing required under this chapter, the director of public works shall make a written decision setting forth his or her findings and his or her action thereon. A copy of the decision shall be served upon permittee in the manner provided for notice of hearings; the decision is final in ten days after service. (Prior code § 14-42)

Chapter 13.28 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGES
13.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum storm water management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within the city of Manteca. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:

A.    Minimize increases in storm water runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of drainage channels;

B.     Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by storm water runoff from development that would otherwise degrade local water quality;

C.     Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and

D.    Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-point source pollution wherever possible, through storm water management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms have the following meanings:

“Accelerated erosion” means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind or chemical action.

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” means activities, practices, facilities and/or procedures that when implemented to their maximum efficiency will prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges and any program, technology, process, siting criteria, operational methods or measures or engineered systems that when implemented prevent, control, remove or reduce pollution. Examples of BMPs may include: public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets and proper sludge or waste-handling and disposal, among others.

“Building” means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal or property and occupying more than one hundred square feet of area.

“Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.

“City” means the city of Manteca.

“Detention” means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.

“Developer” means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities.

“Development” means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects: or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purposes of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

“Director” means the director of the city of Manteca’s department of public works.

“Erosion and sediment control plan” means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.

“Hazardous material” means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.

“Hazardous waste” means any hazardous waste having the characteristics identified under or listed pursuant to Section 6921 of Title 42 of the United States Code, but not including any waste the regulation of which has been suspended under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6901 et seq.) by act of Congress.

“Illegal discharges” means any discharge to the MS4 system that is prohibited under local, state or federal statutes, chapters, codes or regulations. This includes all non-storm water discharges except discharges pursuant to a separate NPDES permit and discharges that are exempted or conditionally exempted in accordance with State Water Resources Control Board Water Quality Order No. 2003-0005-DWD, National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit No. CAS 000004, Waste Discharge Requirements for Storm Water Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (General Permit).

“Illicit connections” means any human-made conveyance that is connected to the MS4 system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar types of connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets or outlets that are connected directly to the MS4 system.

“Infiltration” means the process of percolating storm water into the subsoil.

“Maintenance agreement” means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices.

“Material” means any substance including but not limited to: garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners and any fluid or solid containing chemicals.

“Municipal separate storm sewer system” or “MS4” means streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses or other facilities that are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of storm water.

“Non-point source pollution” means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances and includes but is not limited to pollutants from agricultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.

“NPDES permit” means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit administered by the State of California, through its various regional water quality control boards.

“Person” means any natural person, corporation, association, partnership or other entity.

“Pollutant” means those “pollutants” defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1362(6)) or incorporated into California Water Code § 13373. Examples of pollutants include but are not limited to the following:

1.     Commercial and industrial waste such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash and sludge;

2.     Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel and chromium and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic;

3.     Petroleum hydrocarbons such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

4.     Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state;

5.     Animal wastes such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables and show facilities; and

6.     Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or greater than nine or unusual coloration or turbidity or excessive levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus.

The term “pollutant” shall not include uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility.

The term “pollutant” also shall not include any substance identified in this definition if, through compliance with the best management practices (“BMPs”) available, the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent practicable. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable through compliance with the available BMPs.

“Redevelopment” means any land disturbing activity occurring on existing developed property.

“SSJID shared facilities” means facilities owned by the South San Joaquin Irrigation District (SSJID) that are also used by the city of Manteca for storm drainage.

“Spill” means to cause, allow or permit the flowing, running or falling, especially in an accidental manner, of any liquid, semi-liquid or solid substance or material.

“Storm water management” means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes and/or peak flow discharge rates.

“Storm water runoff” means water flow on the surface of the ground as the result of precipitation.

“Urban runoff” means any flow of water originating from urban areas including but not limited to rain, irrigation, wash water and air conditioning condensate.

“Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.030 Prohibition of illegal discharges.
No person shall discharge, permit to be discharged or cause to be discharged any materials including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards into either any part of the MS4 or any part of a water course.

A.    It is prohibited to throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, maintained or kept any refuse, rubbish, garbage or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place or upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water within the city. This subsection shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers, bags or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste pick up and disposal.

B.     It is prohibited to intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt or other landscape debris into the MS4.

C.     No person shall discharge or allow the discharge of any of the following types of non-storm water discharges into the MS4, unless done pursuant to the terms and conditions of a separate NPDES permit or pursuant to an exemption issued by either the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (“regional board”) or the State Water Resources Control Board:

1.     The discharge of untreated wash waters when gas stations, auto repair garages or other type of automotive service facilities are cleaned;

2.     The discharge of untreated waste water from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations;

3.     To the maximum extent practicable, discharges from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is undertaken;

4.     Discharges of untreated runoff from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances and uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials;

5.     Discharges of commercial/municipal swimming pool filter backwash;

6.     Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas; provided, however, that non-industrial and non-commercial activities which incidentally generate urban runoff, such as the hosing of sidewalks and the non-commercial hand-washing of cars, shall be excluded from this prohibition;

7.     To the maximum extent practicable, discharges from washing impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas which results in a discharge of untreated runoff, unless specifically required by state’s, city’s or San Joaquin County’s health and safety codes or permitted under a separate NPDES permit;

8.     Discharges from the washing out of concrete trucks;

9.     Discharges of any pesticide, fungicide or herbicide banned by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“USEPA”) or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation; or

10.   The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal, where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a direct or indirect discharge to the MS4.

(Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.035 Exceptions to discharge prohibitions.
The following discharges are excepted from the prohibitions set forth under Section 12.28.030:

A.    Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the MS4 system and to waters of the United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act or this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to the MS4 system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges and discharges or flows from fire fighting activities.

B.     The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the USEPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations and provided that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge to the MS4.

C.     The prohibition shall not apply to irrigation and drainage waters under control of the South San Joaquin Irrigation District (SSJID) that are being transported by SSJID shared facilities.

D.    With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the city may exempt in writing other non-storm water discharges which are neither a source of pollutants to the MS4 system nor waters of the United States. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.040 Prohibition of illicit connections.
A.    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 system is prohibited.

B.     This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.050 Waste disposal prohibitions.
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the MS4 system or water of the United States any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.060 Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit.
A.    Any person subject to an industrial NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director upon inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action or for any other reasonable cause.

B.     Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit a copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI) and the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted to the city. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.070 Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water pollutants.
A.    Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices (BMP). The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the MS4 system or waters of the United States as a separate BMP Guidance Series. Where best management practice requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state of California or regional agency for any activity, operation or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 system or water of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements.

B.     New Development and Redevelopment. The city may adopt requirements identifying appropriate design standards and best management practices to control the volume, rate and potential pollutant load of storm water runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter.

C.     Responsibility to Implement Best Management Practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections A and B, any person engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water. The MS4 system or waters of the United States shall implement best management practices to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses. facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator’s expense. Best management practices required by the city can be obtained from the public works department by requesting the BMP manual appropriate to a commercial or industrial activity from the BMP Guidance Series.

D.    Maintenance Agreements. All structural and non-structural permanent storm water BMPs not in the control of the city shall have an enforceable maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. The agreement shall include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the storm water BMPs and to perform routine maintenance as required. Such agreements shall specify the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all storm water BMPs. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.080 Landscaping and stabilization requirements.
Any area of land, not covered by an impervious surface, from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be landscaped within ten days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. No person shall use or otherwise employ impervious material, such as plastic, placed under decorative rock, bark or other landscape covers in meeting the landscaping requirements under this section. Backyards of residential single-family dwellings which would otherwise be covered by this section are exempt where storm water is contained on the property. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.090 Requirement to monitor and analyze.
The director may require by written notice that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges and/or non-storm water discharges to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States is to undertake at said person’s expense such monitoring and analyses and to furnish such reports to the city as the director shall deem necessary for determining that person’s compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.100 Spill prevention and response plan.
Any person subject to an Industrial NPDES storm water discharge permit shall maintain a spill prevention and response plan as part of their Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The methods, procedures, mechanisms and facilities established and utilized for the purpose of preventing accidental discharges or spills of materials with pollution potential shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense. The SWPPP shall outline the user’s spill prevention and response procedure, describe the nature and location of any chemicals stored on the user’s premises and shall contain procedures for immediately notifying the city and preventing adverse impacts of any discharge of chemicals, substances or materials. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.110 Prohibition of spills.
No person shall allow a spill to discharge into the MS4 or any watercourse. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.120 Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the MS4 or water of the United States from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release. In the event that a responsible person becomes aware of a release of hazardous materials, they shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the release via emergency dispatch services (i.e., by calling 911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the responsible person shall notify the city’s public works department in person, by phone or facsimile not later than five p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city’s public works department within three business days of the phone notice, lithe discharge of hazardous materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.130 Authority to inspect.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter or whenever the director has cause to believe that there exists or potentially exists, in or upon any premises within the city, any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director is authorized to enter such premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting said premises. The director is further authorized to inspect and copy all records at a facility which are related to storm water compliance. In the event that the owner or occupant of the premises refuses to allow either the director or persons authorized by the director to enter said premises for the purposes of conducting an inspection authorized by this chapter after the director or a person authorized by the director has asked the owner or occupant of said property to enter thereon for the purposes authorized by this chapter, the city may seek the assistance of a court of competent jurisdiction in order to facilitate the purposes of this section. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.140 Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, test and photograph.
During any inspection as provided herein, the director may take any samples, perform any testing deemed necessary and take photographs to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.150 Notice of violation.
Whenever the director finds that a person has violated or otherwise failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the director may order a person to comply with this chapter by either personally serving that person with a written notice or by sending written notice to that person by certified mail. Such notice may require without limitation:

A.    The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;

B.     The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

C.     That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;

D.    The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

E.     Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and/or

F.     The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.

If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline by which such remediation or restoration shall be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, if the violator fails to complete the remediation or restoration described in the written notice provided for under Section 13.28.150 within the time provided for therein, the city or a contractor designated by the director shall complete the work specified in the notice, and the city shall charge all expenses related to the city or contractor’s performance of said work to the responsible person as provided for under Section 13.28.180. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.160 Appeal.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.28.190, any person receiving a notice of violation under Section 13.28.150 may appeal the director’s determination to the city manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or his or her designee shall take place within fifteen days from the date of city’s receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.170 Abatement by city.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal under Section 13.28.160, within ten days of the decision of the city manager upholding the decision of the director, then the city or a contractor designated by the director shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It is unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.180 Charging cost of abatement/liens.
Within thirty days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the director shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final.

If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the city council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the county auditor so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.190 Urgency abatement.
The director is authorized to require the immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the director, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.200 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in California Penal Code Section 19. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.205 Strict liability.
By securing a permit from the city of Manteca for development, encroachment, or the construction of a work improvement the permittee shall be strictly liable, in any criminal proceeding, for allowing or failing to prevent a violation of this chapter by the permittee, its employees, subcontractors or material men.

In any prosecution for a violation of this chapter against a permittee based on the act or omissions of an employee, subcontractor, or material men it shall only be required that it be shown that the permittee was issued a development, encroachment, or construction permit and that a violation of this chapter occurred at the site for which a permit was issued. (Ord. 1293 § I, 2005)

 

13.28.210 Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this chapter, the director may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.220 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties herein before provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

 

13.28.230 Acts potentially resulting in violation of Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter, may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 13.32 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
13.32.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

B.     “Person” includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

C.     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

D.    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.32.030.

E.     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 21A-1)

 

13.32.015 Overhead facilities prohibited.
Where none currently exist, new poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, supplying electric energy at nominal voltages under thirty-four and one-half kiloVolts, communication, or similar or associated services shall be prohibited. All such new installations shall be installed underground except therefrom as provided by Section 13.32.060. (Ord. O2018-23 § 1)

 

13.32.020 Public hearing by council.
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 775 § 13, 1987; prior code § 21A-2)

 

13.32.030 Underground utility district designation.
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 21A-3)

 

13.32.040 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.32.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.20.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 21A-4)

 

13.32.050 Exceptions—Emergency.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council* in order to provide emergency service. The council* may grant special permission, on such terms as the council* may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 21A-5)

 

*       Editor’s Note: If the city prefers, this could be the director of public works or some other appropriate city official.

 

13.32.060 Exceptions—Designated.
In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

B.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.

C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts.

E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 21A-6)

 

13.32.070 Notice to property owners.
A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the line of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 21A-7)

 

13.32.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipments required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 21A-8)

 

13.32.090 Responsibility of city—Disconnection and removal of overhead wires.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.32.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served.

B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. [For alternative procedures, see Section 13.32.100.] (Prior code § 21A9(part))

 

13.32.100 Responsibility of city—Alternative procedure—Lien for work completed.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.32.090 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

B.     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appear on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to general delivery, City of Manteca. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

C.     The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council, setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

E.     The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

F.     Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there by any, and then proceed to affirm modify or reject the assessment.

G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate as specified in Sections 2617 and 2618 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state as presently existing or as hereafter amended. (Prior code § 21A9(part))

 

13.32.110 Equipment removal.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030. (Prior code § 21A-10)

 

13.32.120 Time extension.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of material, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 21A-11)

Chapter 13.34 UNDERGROUNDING UTILITY DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES
13.34.010 Purpose and scope.
A.    The city desires to increase the diversity of fiber providers in the city and increase the ease of broadband service access to businesses and citizens. To this end, the city has adopted this open trench—joint trench fiber standard for undergrounding utility distribution facilities.

B.     This standard will allow for the placement of dedicated conduit assigned to the city for future fiber deployments and will create a city owned conduit network across the city. (Ord. O2019-10 § 1)

 

13.34.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and definitions shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Abutting streets” shall mean on the same side of the abutting street as the property being developed, not the other side of the street.

B.     “Facility” or “facilities” shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, cabinets, ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes, pipes, pipelines, splice boxes, surface location markers, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or person, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way.

C.     “Television services” shall mean all methods of transmitting video, shows, programs that can be watched by viewers on any screen type.

D.    “Utility distribution facilities” shall mean facilities, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting, and advanced technology systems installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development.

E.     “Advanced technology systems” shall mean all necessary appurtenances, equipment and facilities required for the provision of Internet, computer, fiber optic, television services, telephone, and other communication service within the public right-of-way and upon private property. The design, installation, inspection and testing requirements of said system shall be in accordance to in the city of Manteca standards. (Ord. O2019-10 § 1)

 

13.34.030 Undergrounding utility distribution facilities.
A.    General Provisions.

 

1.     Utility distribution facilities, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, street lighting, and advanced technology systems installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development, shall be placed underground, except for transmission facilities or electric energy in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts and otherwise approved small cell sites. Advanced technology systems shall be defined as: all necessary appurtenances, equipment and facilities required for the provision of Internet, computer, fiber optic, television services, telephone, and other communication service within the public right-of-way and upon private property. The design, installation, inspection and testing requirements of said system shall be in accordance to the city of Manteca standards.

2.     All existing utility distribution facilities either along abutting streets or within a development shall also be underground at the time of development. Along abutting streets shall mean on the same side of the abutting street as the property being developed, not the other side of the street.

3.     All crossings at existing streets shall be accomplished by horizontal directional boring unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

4.     The developer is responsible for complying with all requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities.

B.     Electric, Communication, Street Lighting, and Advanced Technology Systems. All costs of placing existing or new facilities, required to underground by the developer, shall be paid for by the developer subject to the current California Public Utility Commission rules and regulations.

C.     Advanced Technology Conduit Systems.

1.     For a right-of-way width greater than fifty feet, the developer shall design, install, proof, tag, and dedicate to the city a fiber optic conduit system consisting of two four-inch conduits, with four one-inch innerducts in one conduit and leaving the second conduit vacant, all within the public right-of-way or public utility easement. The fiber optic conduit system shall be installed in accordance with the city of Manteca standards and include all necessary appurtenances to allow for ready installation of fiber optic cable. The developer shall bear all design construction, inspection, and testing associated with these underground requirements. Furthermore, the developer shall design, install, test and dedicate to the city all necessary components of the advanced technology system as depicted in the city of Manteca standards.

2.     The television services or advanced technology company provider that elects to install facilities in the city’s vacant conduit shall provide design plans and as-built construction plans to the developer and city of Manteca, in whatever digital form the city request. The service provider shall also inspect the facilities and certify to the city prior to final approval of the development and television facilities or advanced technology systems are properly installed and serviceable. The design and installation shall meet the minimum criteria as outlined in the city of Manteca standards. (Ord. O2019-10 § 1)

Chapter 13.38 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM FEES
13.38.010 Findings and intent.
A.    It is the intent of the city to require every person who develops land to mitigate the impacts of that development on the city’s water, sewer, storm drainage and transportation facilities. The city will therefore require developers to construct such facilities in accordance with facility master plans for the city or pay fees that will be used to construct such facilities pursuant to those master plans.

B.     The amount of the public facilities fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to the cost of public facilities attributable to new development. The amount of fees collected shall not include the cost of facilities attributable to demand generated by existing development.

C.     The city has determined that sources of city revenue other than development fees, including tax revenues which would be paid by new commercial and residential development, will be used for many public purposes and therefore will not be sufficient to offset the burdens on public facilities created by new commercial and residential development. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water facility construction and fee requirement, a sewer facility construction and fee requirement, a storm drainage facility construction and fee requirement, and a transportation facilities construction and fee requirement that impose upon future development projects an equitable share of the cost of mitigating future water, sewer, storm drainage and transportation demands created by such projects. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth in this section:

“Developer” means the owner of land which is being developed.

“Development” means the construction or addition of floor area, roofed structures or paved area to a property. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.040 Establishment of a water development fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a developer of a property shall pay a water facilities development fee pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.050 Establishment of a sewer fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a developer of property shall pay a sewer facilities development fee pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.060 Establishment of a storm drainage fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a developer of property shall pay a storm drainage facilities development fee pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.070 Establishment of a transportation fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a developer of property shall pay a transportation facilities development fee pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.080 Exemptions.
Developers of the following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A.    Developments constructed pursuant to a development agreement with the city, if such development agreement specifically exempts the developer from the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Developments constructed by the city or any governmental entity whose governing body is appointed by the city council. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.090 Construction of public facilities.
A developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of fees required by this chapter to the extent that the developer constructs, pursuant to city standards and requirements, water, sewer, storm drainage or transportation facilities that were included in the project lists used to determine the fees established pursuant to this chapter. The fees required by this chapter shall be reduced by the amount of the engineering and construction costs that would be reasonably incurred by the city in building those facilities. The amount of such reduction shall be approved, in writing, by the director of public works prior to construction of the facilities. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

 

13.38.100 Payment of fees.
A.    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 66007(b), the city has established reserve accounts and appropriated funds to those accounts for the purposes of funding water, sewer, storm drainage and transportation facilities and the city has adopted a public facilities implementation plan for the construction of such facilities. Therefore, fees required by this chapter shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for a development. The fees assessed to a development shall be paid in an amount equal to the fees in effect at the time that a developer submits a complete and adequate application for a building permit for such development.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A, fees required by this chapter for a residential development shall be paid upon final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the required fee is not fully paid prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of any portion of the residential development encumbered thereby, the property owner, or lessee if the lessee’s interest appears of record, as a condition of issuance of the building permit, shall execute a “Development Fee Deferral Agreement and Notice of Lien with Power of Sale” to pay the fee or charge, or applicable portion thereof, within the time specified above. The contract shall be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fee. No certificate of occupancy for a dwelling unit within a residential development subject to this chapter will be issued unless and until the fees are paid in full.

C.     For purposes of this section, “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” shall be defined as those terms are defined in Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Ord. O2017-14 § 1; Ord. O2017-11 § 1; Ord. 982 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 13.40 DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR THE SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY MULTI-SPECIES HABITAT CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE PLAN (SJMSCP)
13.40.010 Purpose and intent.
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the San Joaquin County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJMSCP), and to mitigate the cumulative impacts of new development on undeveloped lands within the city and in the county, the establishment of preserve lands will be necessary to compensate for impacts to threatened, endangered, rare and unlisted SJMSCP covered species and other wildlife, and compensation for some non-wildlife related impacts to recreation, agriculture, scenic values and other beneficial open space uses.

In accordance with Sections 7.3, 7.4.1, 7.4.1.1, 7.4.1.3, and 7.4.1.4 of the SJMSCP, new development will pay approximately sixty percent of total SJMSCP costs with the exception of vernal pool conversions that will pay one hundred percent of total SJMSCP costs. While those undertaking new development pursuant to the SIJMSCP may opt to dedicate lands consistent with the SJMSCP preserve designs or to purchase credits from mitigation banks, most of the sixty percent contribution to the SJMSCP costs from new development will be in the form of development fees.

The city council is required to establish a fee ordinance in accordance to Section 5.1.1(b) of the SJMSCP implementation agreement for the purpose of collecting fee monies to finance the SJMSCP. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with the SJMSCP funding plan as provided in Chapter 7 of the SJMSCP. (Ord. 1197 § 1, 2001)

 

13.40.020 SJMSCP development fee.
A.    Establishment of Fees. The SJMSCP development fee (hereinafter “the fee”) is hereby established for new development pursuant to the SJMSCP in the city to pay for preserve lands to mitigate the cumulative impacts related to new development, including but not limited to acquisition, enhancement, restoration, maintenance, and/or operation of habitat/open space conservation lands. The fee shall not be collected until the city, in a council resolution:

1.     Sets forth purpose of the fee;

2.     Identifies the specific use(s) to be financed;

3.     Describes how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development project;

4.     Determines how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for use(s) and type(s) of development project(s);

5.     Determines the amount of the fee and how there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the preserve lands or portion thereof attributable to the development; and

6.     Establishes a separate development fee account into which the fees shall be placed, provides for the appropriation of the fees, and references the proposed transfer of fees to SJCOG, Inc. (a.k.a. JPA as per the SJMSCP).

B.     Annual Adjustment. Any fee established pursuant to a resolution under this chapter shall be adjusted each January by an amount based upon the California Construction Cost Index (CCCI) as calculated by the State of California’s Real Estate Services Division Cost Control Unit and/or in conformance with Section 7.5.2.2. of the SJMSCP, and as approved by SJCOG, Inc.

The proposed fee adjustments shall be adopted by the city council before October 31st of each year. All fee adjustments shall be effective on January 1st of the following year.

C.     Interest. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall earn interest while in possession of the city. The interest earned shall be credited to the account in which the fee was deposited and shall be retained by the city until transferred to SJCOG, Inc. account.

D.    Payment of Fees. All fees to be collected under this Chapter shall be collected in accordance to Chapter 5.3.2.3 of the SJMSCP.

E.     Use of Fee or Refund. The chief financial officer of SJCOG, Inc. shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of any moneys, excluding letters of credit or other security instruments, that is remaining unexpended or uncommitted in the SJCOG, Inc. account for five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put, and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. (Ord. 1197 § 1, 2001)

 

13.40.030 Use of fees.
The fees shall be placed in separate fee account to avoid commingling of the fees with other funds of the city. The fees may be temporarily invested. Such fees, along with any interest earnings, shall be used solely to pay for those use(s) described in the resolution establishing the fee which shall include the following:

A.    To pay for acquisition of preserve lands (and associated transaction costs);

B.     To pay for monitoring and restoration and/or enhancement of preserve lands;

C.     To pay for endowment for long-term management of preserve lands; and

D.    To pay for initial and on-going administration of the SJMSCP.

No less frequently than quarterly, and pursuant to Section 5.1.1(d) of the implementation agreement, the city shall transfer the funds in the city of Manteca SJMSCP Development Fee Account to SJCOG, Inc. All proceeds in the SJCOG, Inc. account not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested in an interest bearing account. (Ord. 1197 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 13.42 AGRICULTURAL MITIGATION FEE
13.42.010 Definition of “Agricultural Mitigation Fee.”
The definition of “Agricultural Mitigation Fee” includes all development impact fees collected to offset the costs associated with the loss of agricultural lands in new development as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.020 Purpose, findings and declaration of intent.
A.    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city’s general plan and to mitigate impacts caused by new development within the city, an agricultural mitigation fee is necessary. This includes mitigating the loss of productive agricultural lands converted for urban uses within the city by permanently protecting agricultural lands planned for agricultural use and by working with farmers who voluntarily wish to place conservation easements on their land with fair compensation for such easements. The city council finds this chapter is necessary for the following reasons: (1) to benefit the local economy and provide jobs; (2) San Joaquin County farmland is of highly productive quality; (3) the city is surrounded by productive farmland on all sides; (4) the continuation of agricultural operations preserves the existing landscape, environmental and aesthetic resources of the area; (5) the Manteca general plan sets forth policies to preserve productive farmland, including the development of a program to secure permanent agriculture on lands designated for agriculture in the city and/or county general plan; (6) California is losing farmland at a rapid rate; (7) loss of agricultural land is consistently determined to be a significant impact under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in development projects; (8) loss of farmland to development is irreparable and agriculture is an important component of the regions economy and rural community character; and (9) losing agricultural land will have a cumulatively negative impact on air quality, traffic, noise, public services demands, and aesthetics in the city and in the county of San Joaquin. It is the policy of the city to work cooperatively with San Joaquin County and its neighboring cities to preserve agricultural land within or adjacent to the Manteca planning area and its adopted sphere of influence, beyond that land deemed necessary for development. It is further the policy of the city to protect and conserve agricultural land in its vicinity.

B.     Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5, Section 66000 et seq., of the California Government Code provides that capital facilities fees may be enacted and imposed on development projects. The city council finds and determines that:

1.     New development projects cause the loss of or conversion of agricultural lands within or adjacent to the city of Manteca.

2.     The health, safety, peace, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the city will be enhanced by the adoption of an agricultural mitigation fee to preserve, enhance, and mitigate for the conversion of productive agricultural lands to urban and municipal uses.

(Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.030 Collection of agricultural mitigation fee.
The agricultural mitigation fee enacted pursuant to this chapter is to be collected by the city before the issuance of building permits, or at approval of any discretionary permit if no building permit is required. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.040 Authority for adoption.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Mitigation Fee Act, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 of the California Government Code, Sections 66000 et seq. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.050 Definitions.
The following words or phrases, when used in this chapter and in resolutions adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the following meanings:

“Agricultural land or farmland” for the purposes of this chapter means those land areas upon which agricultural activities, uses, operations or facilities exist or could exist at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter that contain Class I, II, III or IV soils as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service.

“Agricultural mitigation land” means agricultural land encumbered by a farmland deed restriction, a farmland conservation easement or such other conservation mechanism acceptable to the city.

“Agricultural operation” means normal and customary farming and agricultural activities which may occur during any twenty-four-hour period of the day. Normal and customary farming and agricultural activities include, but are not limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the soil, the productions irrigation, cultivation, growing, harvesting, and processing of any agricultural commodity for wholesale or retail markets, including viticulture, horticulture, the keeping and raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any commercial agricultural practices performed as incident to or in conjunction with such activities including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market.

“Farmland conservation easement” means an easement over agricultural land for the purpose of restricting its use to agriculture. The interest granted pursuant to a farmland conservation easement is an interest in land which is less than fee simple. Farmland conservation easements should be permanent. However, mitigation funds should be available to fund term easements at minimum lengths to be determined by a new local land trust subject to the approval of the city.

“Farmland deed restriction” means a recorded deed restriction, covenant or condition which precludes the use of the agricultural land subject to the restriction for any nonagricultural purposes use, operation or activity. The deed restriction shall provide that the land subject to the restriction will permanently remain agricultural land unless specified as a term easement as mentioned in this section.

“Nexus report” means the agricultural mitigation fee report, as prepared in conformity with the Mitigation Fee Act, as may be amended from time-to-time.

“Qualifying entity” means a nonprofit public benefit 501(c)3 corporation operating in San Joaquin County for the purpose of conserving and protecting land in its natural, rural or agricultural condition. The following entities currently are qualifying entities: Central Valley Farmland Trust. Other entities may be approved by the city council from time-to-time. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.060 Calculation of fee by implementing resolution.
A.    The adoption of the agricultural mitigation fee is a legislative act and shall be enacted by resolution after a noticed public hearing before the city council. Pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act, the city shall calculate the amount of the fee in an implementing resolution. The implementing resolution shall identify the findings required by the Mitigation Fee Act, including:

1.     The purpose and use of the fee, including a description of the specified public facilities to be provided.

2.     The geographical area of the development projects subject to the fee.

3.     The type of development project to be developed within the identified geographical area.

4.     The estimated reasonable cost of providing the specified farmland conservation easement or farmland deed restriction for which the fee is imposed.

5.     The reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

6.     The reasonable relationship between the need for the specified farmland conservation easement or farmland deed restriction and the type of development project within the specified geographical area.

7.     The reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the specified farmland conservation easement or farmland deed restriction attributable to the development project on which the fee is imposed as documented in the nexus report.

B.     Upon receipt of funds from the city derived through this chapter, the city shall deposit, invest, account for, and expend the funds pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.070 Annual report—Fee refunds by county.
A.    The city shall report to the city council once each fiscal year concerning the fees and accounts, including any portions of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years after deposit. The city council shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is put, and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged.

B.     A refund of unexpended or uncommitted fee revenue for which a need cannot be demonstrated, along with accrued interest may be made to the current owner(s) of the development project(s) by the city on a prorated basis. The city may refund unexpended and uncommitted fee revenue that has been found by the city council to be no longer needed, by direct payment or by offsetting other obligations owed to the city by the current owner(s) of the development project(s).

C.     If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended and uncommitted revenues collected pursuant to this chapter exceed the amount to be refunded, city, after a public hearing, for which notice has been published pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 and posted in three prominent places within the area of the development project, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fee is collected subject to this chapter that serves the project on which the fee was originally imposed. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.080 Fee payment.
A.    Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall pay to the city the fee as established by resolution of the city council.

B.     The fee shall be determined by the fee schedule in effect on the date the vesting tentative map or vesting parcel map application is deemed complete, or the date a permit is issued.

C.     If a development contains multiple types of uses, the fee will be collected proportionately on each use.

D.    When application is made for a new building permit following the expiration of a previously issued building permit for which the fee was paid, the fee payment shall not be required, unless the fee schedule has been amended during the interim, and in this event the appropriate increase or decrease shall be imposed.

E.     In the event that subsequent development occurs with respect to property for which the fee has been paid, an additional fee shall be required only for additional square footage of development that was not included in computing the prior fee.

F.     When a fee is paid for a development project and that project is subsequently reduced so that it is entitled to a lower fee, the city shall issue a partial refund of the fee.

G.    When a fee is paid for a development project and the project is subsequently abandoned without any further action beyond the obtaining of a building permit the payor shall be entitled to a refund from the city of the fee paid, less the administrative portion of the fee.

H.    If, following payment of the fee, a development is converted to a more intense use; a fee shall be required which shall be the difference between the fee paid and the current fee for the more intense use. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.090 Agricultural mitigation fee accounts.
A.    The city shall hold fee revenues collected under this ordinance in a separate account.

B.     The city shall account for all fee revenues, including interest accrued, and allocate them for the purposes for which the original fee was imposed. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.100 Natural disaster fee exemption.
No fee may be applied to building permits obtained solely for purposes of reconstruction of any residential, commercial or industrial structure that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster as declared by the governor. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.110 Annual fee updates—Review.
A.    The agricultural mitigation fee schedule established by resolution of the city council shall annually be automatically adjusted by an amount determined by the increase in the Engineering Construction Cost Index for the previous year, as published by the engineering news record.

B.     The agricultural mitigation fee schedule adopted by the city council shall be annually reviewed by the city for consistency with the nexus report, as it may be updated from time-to-time. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.120 Construction.
This chapter and any subsequent amendment to the agricultural mitigation fee shall be read together. With respect to any agricultural mitigation fee enacted by resolution under this chapter, any provision of such fee that is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

 

13.42.130 Fee adjustments.
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the city council for adjustment to that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk either (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim for adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the city council shall be final. If an adjustment is granted, any change in the proposed use of the applicable development project prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall invalidate the adjustment of the fee and payment of the fee shall be made prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 1304 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 13.44 COUNTY FACILITIES FEE PROGRAM
13.44.010 Purpose, findings and declaration of intent.
A.    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan and to mitigate impacts caused by new development within the county of San Joaquin, a county facilities fee program is necessary. The program is needed to finance region-serving capital facilities located throughout the county that are used by the residents and businesses within the city and to assure that new development pays its proportional share for these improvements.

B.     Fee revenue collected pursuant to this chapter shall be remitted to the county of San Joaquin who shall be responsible for administering the fee funds and constructing the capital facilities.

C.     Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5, Section 66000 et seq. of the California Government Code provides that capital facilities fees may be enacted and imposed on development projects. The city council finds and determines that:

1.     New development projects cause the need for construction, expansion or improvement of capital facilities within the county of San Joaquin;

2.     Funds for construction, expansion, or improvement of capital facilities are not available to accommodate demand for service caused by development projects; which results in inadequate capital facilities within San Joaquin County.

D.    The city council finds that the health, safety, peace, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the city will be promoted by the adoption of county facilities fees for construction, expansion, or improvement of region-serving capital facilities. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2005)

 

13.44.020 Collection of capital facility fee.
The capital facility fee enacted pursuant to this chapter are to be collected by the city before the issuance of building permits, or at approval of any discretionary permit if no building permit is required. (Ord. 1295 § 2, 2005)

 

13.44.030 Authority for adoption.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 of the California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. (Ord. 1295 § 3, 2005)

 

13.44.040 Definitions.
Words when used in this chapter, and in resolutions adopted thereto, shall have the following meanings:

“Board of supervisors” means the board of supervisors of the county of San Joaquin.

“Capital facility” means and includes region-serving public improvements and community amenities normally provided by the county of San Joaquin.

“City” means the city of Manteca, a general law [charter] city organized and existing under the constitution and laws of the state of California.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Manteca.

“County” means the county of San Joaquin, a political subdivision of the state of California.

“Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. “Development project” includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

“Fee” means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by a local agency to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of capital facilities related to the development project.

“Nexus report” means the San Joaquin County Facility Fee Nexus Report originally prepared in September 2003, as may be amended from time-to-time. (Ord. 1295 §4, 2005)

 

13.44.050 Conditions for collection.
A.    In establishing and imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a development project, the following shall be done:

1.     Identify the purpose of the fee;

2.     Identify the use to which the fee is to be put;

3.     Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and

4.     Determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the capital facility and the impacts caused by the type of development project on which the fee is imposed.

B.     The city, before establishing a capital facility fee as a condition of approval of development projects, shall determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the capital facility or portion of the capital facility attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed as documented in the nexus report.

C.     Upon receipt of funds from the city, derived through this chapter, the county shall deposit, invest, account for, and expend the funds pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006. (Ord. 1295 §5, 2005)

 

13.44.060 Conditions for reimbursement.
A.    The county shall report to the city council once each fiscal year concerning the fees and accounts, including any portions of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years after deposit. The board of supervisors shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is put, and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged.

B.     A refund of unexpended or uncommitted fee revenue for which a need cannot be demonstrated, along with accrued interest may be made to the current owner(s) of the development project(s) on a prorated basis. The county may refund unexpended and uncommitted fee revenue that have been found by the board of supervisors to be no longer needed, by direct payment or by off-setting other obligations owed to the county by the current owner(s) of the development project(s).

C.     If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended and uncommitted revenues collected pursuant to this section exceed the amount to be refunded, county, after a capital hearing, for which notice has been published pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 and posted in three prominent places within the area of the development project, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fee is collected subject to this title that serves the project on which the fee was originally imposed. (Ord. 1295 § 6, 2005)

 

13.44.070 Fee payment.
A.    Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall pay to the city the fee as established by resolution of the city council.

B.     The fee shall be determined by the fee schedule in effect on the date the vesting tentative map or vesting parcel map is approved, or the date a permit is issued.

C.     If a development has multiple types of uses, the fee will be collected proportionately on each use.

D.    When application is made for a new building permit following the expiration of a previously issued building permit for which the fee was paid, the fee payment shall not be required, unless the fee schedule has been amended during the interim, in this event, the appropriate increase or decrease shall be imposed.

E.     In the event that subsequent development occurs with respect to property for which the fee has been paid, an additional fee shall be required only for additional square footage of development that was not included in computing the prior fee.

F.     When a fee is paid for a development project and that project is subsequently reduced so that it is entitled to a lower fee, the county shall issue a partial refund of the fee.

G.    When a fee is paid for a development project and the project is subsequently abandoned without any further action beyond the obtaining of a building permit the payor shall be entitled to a refund of the fee paid, less the administrative portion of the fee.

H.    If a development is converted to a more intense use, a fee shall be required which shall be the difference between the current fee for the original use and the current fee for the more intense use. (Ord. 1295 §7, 2005)

 

13.44.080 County facilities fee accounts.
A.    The city shall hold fee revenues collected under this chapter in a separate county facility fee account. Fee revenues accruing in this account shall be remitted quarterly to the county of San Joaquin to be expended for the purpose for which they were collected.

B.     The county shall account for all fee revenues, including interest accrued, and allocate them for the purposes for which the original fee was imposed. (Ord. 1295 § 8, 2005)

 

13.44.090 Natural disaster fee exemption.
No fee may be applied by a local agency to the reconstruction of any residential, commercial, or industrial development project that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster as declared by the governor. (Ord. 1295 §9, 2005)

 

13.44.100 County facilities fee program.
A.    The county has adopted a county facilities fee nexus report that indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability, and estimates of costs for region-serving capital facilities or improvements to be financed with county facilities fee funds.

B.     The county shall annually submit a report to the city council regarding the proposed uses of county facilities fee funding.

C.     The county facilities fee schedule established by resolution of the city council shall annually be automatically adjusted by an amount determined by the increase in the engineering construction cost index for the previous year, as published by the engineering news record. The county shall provide the city with notice and documentation of the fee adjustments required, if any.

D.    The county facilities fee schedule adopted by the city council shall be annually reviewed by the city for consistency with the county facilities fee nexus report, as it may be updated from time-to-time. (Ord. 1295 § 10, 2005)

 

13.44.110 Ordinance—Public hearing.
The adoption of county facilities fees is a legislative act and shall be enacted by resolution after a noticed public hearing before the city council. (Ord. 1295 § 11, 2005)

 

13.44.120 Construction.
The chapter and any subsequent amendment to the county facilities fee program shall be read together. With respect to any county facilities fee enacted by resolution under this chapter, any provision of such a county facilities fee which is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. (Ord. 1295 § 12, 2005)

 

13.44.130 Severability clause.
Should any provision of this chapter or a subsequent amendment to the county facilities fee program be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this chapter and the county facilities fee program shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1295 § 13, 2005)

 

13.44.140 Fee adjustments or waiver.
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the city council for reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The city shall prepare a staff report and recommendation for city council consideration. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee. (Ord. 1295 § 14, 2005)

 

13.44.150 Environmental exemption.
Pursuant to Title 14 Code of Regulations Sections 15061 and 15273(4), the ordinance codified in this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1295 § 15, 2005)

 

13.44.160 Effective date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect thirty days from and after the date of its passage and before the expiration of fifteen days after its passage, it shall be published once, with the names of the members voting for and against the same in the Manteca Bulletin, a newspaper published in Manteca, California. (Ord. 1295 § 16, 2005)

Chapter 13.46 REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE PROGRAM
13.46.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the San Joaquin County regional transportation impact fee program ordinance. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

 

13.46.020 Intent and purpose.
Substantial population and employment growth is expected in San Joaquin County through 2025 and beyond. This growth will cause impacts on the regional transportation network (“RTIF network”) including increased congestion and related impacts unless substantial improvements are completed. The regional transportation impact fee program (“RTIF program”) is intended to impose a fee to provide funding for transportation and transit improvements that help mitigate these impacts. New development throughout the county will be subject to the fee which will be proportional to the impact caused on the regional transportation network by such new development. The funding derived from the RTIF program shall be used in combination with other funding available to complete the needed transportation and transit improvements. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

 

13.46.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, and any resolution implementing the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Development project” or “project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development including the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

“Industrial project” means any development project that proposes manufacturing, transportation, logistics or warehousing as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary.

“Measure K” means the “San Joaquin County Transportation Authority Local Transportation Improvement Plan: Air Quality, Mandatory Developer Fees and Growth Management Ordinance” which establishes and implements a retail transactions and use tax, as may be extended from time to time.

“Multifamily residential unit” means a development project that uses a single parcel for two or more dwelling units within one or more buildings, including duplexes, townhouses, condominiums and apartments as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary.

“Office project” means any development project that involves business activities associated with professional or administrative services, and typically consists of corporate offices, financial institutions, legal and medical offices, personal and laundry services, or similar uses, and religious centers as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary.

“Participating agencies” means the county of San Joaquin and each of the cities situated in San Joaquin County if such agencies have (1) adopted the RTIF program fee by ordinance and/or resolution and (2) entered into the operating agreement.

“Regional transportation impact fee program” or “RTIF program” means the regional program established by the operating agreement by the participating agencies and the San Joaquin council of governments (SJCOG) to impose, collect and distribute an RTIF program fee to assist in the funding of transportation improvements to the regional transportation network.

“Regional transportation impact program fee” or “RTIF program fee” or “RTIF fee” means the fee established by each participating agency consistent with the RTIF program and the operating agreement.

“Regional transportation network” means the regional network of highways and arterials as identified in the RTIF technical report and which may be amended from time to time by SJCOG.

“Residential dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof which is designed primarily for residential occupancy by one family including single-family and multifamily dwellings. Residential dwelling unit shall not include hotels or motels.

“Retail project” means any development project retailing merchandise, generally without transformation, and rendering services incidental to the sale of merchandise at a fixed point of sale as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary.

“RTIF capital projects” or “capital projects” or “RTIF project list” means the RTIF program improvements and projects as identified in the RTIF technical report and which may be amended from time to time by SJCOG’s adoption and amendment of an RTIF capital projects report.

“RTIF capital projects report” means the report adopted by SJCOG annually which identifies the RTIF capital projects as amended from time to time by SJCOG.

“RTIF operating agreement” or “operating agreement” means the regional transportation impact fee program operating agreement establishing the administration of the RTIF program as adopted by each participating agency and SJCOG which may be amended from time to time by the parties thereto.

“RTIF technical report” means the San Joaquin County Regional Transportation Impact Fee (RTIF) Technical Report dated October 27, 2005, and prepared pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act.

“Single-family residential unit” means the use of a parcel for only one residential dwelling unit as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

 

13.46.040 Fee rate and calculation.
A.    Establishing the RTIF Program Fee. The amount of the RTIF program fee for development projects shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the RTIF technical report and shall be established by resolution of the city council.

B.     Annual Adjustment. The RTIF program fee shall be automatically adjusted on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year (July 1st) based on the Engineering News Record California Construction Cost Index. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

 

13.46.050 Collection of RTIF program fees.
A.    Authority of the City Manager. The city manager or his or her designee, is authorized to levy and collect the RTIF program fee and make all determinations required by this chapter.

B.     Payment of RTIF Program Fees. Payment of the RTIF program fees shall be as follows:

1.     The RTIF program fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for the development project, or as otherwise required or permitted pursuant to Government Code Section 66007.

2.     The amount of the RTIF program fees shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time of payment.

3.     RTIF program fees shall not be waived.

C.     Payment by All Development Projects. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, the RTIF program fee required in this section shall be payable by (1) all development projects within the city for which building permits or other entitlements for development projects are issued on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and (2) all development projects within the city for which building permits or other entitlements for development projects were issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which permits or entitlements were issued subject to a condition requiring the developer to pay an RTIF program fee to be imposed upon such development project within the city.

D.    Exemptions from the RTIF Program Fee. The following development projects shall not be subject to the RTIF program fee:

1.     The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing legal dwelling unit, including an expansion of an existing dwelling unit that does not create an additional dwelling unit;

2.     The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any nonresidential structure where there is no net increase in square footage. Any increase in square footage shall pay the established applicable fee rate for that portion of square footage that is new;

3.     Development projects for which an application for a vesting tentative map authorized by Government Code Section 66498.1 was deemed complete on or prior to the effective date of the introduction of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

4.     Development projects which are the subject of a development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited by the development agreement, provided, however, that if the term of such a development agreement is extended after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the RTIF program fee shall be imposed.

E.     Future Development Agreements. All future development agreements entered into after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall require the full payment of the RTIF program fee.

F.     Payments for Nonresidential Projects. For nonresidential projects, the amount of the fee imposed on the entire development project shall be determined based upon:

1.     The gross floor area; and

2.     The predominant use of the building or structure as identified in the building permit.

G.    Payment for Mixed Land Use Projects. For mixed land use projects, which are projects that have both residential and nonresidential uses, the amount of the fee imposed on the entire development project shall be proportionally determined based on the following:

1.     The fee associated with the type of residence; and

2.     The predominant use of the nonresidential portion of the project.

H.    Previously Paid RTIF Program Fees. In the event that RTIF program fees have previously been paid for an existing building which is a new development project with a new or different RTIF fee category, the previously paid RTIF program fees for that existing building shall be credited against the amount of the RTIF program fee attributable to the new development project, up to the amount of the previously paid RTIF program fee. A rebate will not be granted if the change in land use represents a lower fee.

I.      Reimbursements and Credits. In the event that RTIF capital projects are constructed by a developer in excess of the development project’s RTIF program fee obligation or in lieu of payment of RTIF program fees by a developer pursuant to an agreement between the developer and the county (city), the developer may be reimbursed or credited for future application for any costs based on the actual costs of construction of the RTIF capital project incurred by the developer in excess of the amount of the RTIF program fees that apply to the development project. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

 

13.46.060 Administration of the RTIF program.
A.    RTIF Account or RTIF Funds. All fees collected pursuant to the RTIF program fee shall be deposited in an RTIF account or RTIF fund and shall not be commingled with other funds. The contents of this RTIF fund shall be designated solely for the purpose of contributing to the financing of the RTIF capital projects included in the RTIF capital projects report and for the funding of incidental administrative costs. Any interest income earned on the RTIF fund shall also be deposited therein and shall only be expended for the purposes set forth in this chapter.

B.     Prohibition on Interfund Transfers or Loans. Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1)(G) of Section 66006 of the Government Code, there shall be no interfund transfer, grant or loan of the RTIF program fees or RTIF fund or RTIF account to other city accounts, funds, programs or fees. However, the city may provide loans, grants or transfers of RTIF program fees to other participating agencies or SJCOG, provided that such funds are consistent with the RTIF program and used for the development or construction of RTIF capital projects. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 13.50 INTERIM URBAN LEVEL OF FLOOD PROTECTION LEVEE IMPACT FEE
13.50.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Interim Urban Level of Flood Protection Levee Impact Fee” regulation of the city of Manteca. The city of Manteca hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.020 Operative date.
“Operative date” of this chapter begins on the sixtieth day following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and continuing for thirty years thereafter at which time, unless operative date is amended prior to that date, the collection of the Impact Fee pursuant to chapter shall cease. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.030 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to impose a levee improvement development impact fee (levee fee) to ensure that new development within the RD 17 portion of the city of Manteca pays its proportionate share of the levee improvement costs needed to provide Urban Level of Flood Protection (ULOP) to the Reclamation District 17 Area. This levee fee, in combination with other sources of funding described within the Interim ULOP Development Impact Fee Nexus Study dated January 19, 2017 (Nexus Study), will fund the project to provide two-hundred-year flood protection to the Reclamation District 17 Area as detailed in the Nexus Study. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.040 Fee rate.
The Interim ULOP Impact Fee for Reclamation District 17 Levee System, based on the acreage of a project, is detailed within the Nexus Study. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.050 Determination of gross developable acreage (GDA).
A project’s GDA, for purposes of the fee calculation, is determined as follows:

A.    For New Development of Vacant Land. In the case where a new structure is being constructed on vacant land or land that has not previously been developed:

1.     Residential Land Uses.

 

a.     For single-family residential projects that consist of residential uses that require a tentative and final subdivision map (i.e., more than four units), the GDA is the gross acreage of the large lot parcel or resulting parcels excluding major dedicated public land uses, such as major arterials, major collectors, drainage, utilities corridors, parks, schools, and other public facilities. An example calculation of GDA for this case is shown in Appendix C to the Nexus Study.

b.     For all other single-family residential projects that have impacts to RD 17 facilities the project acreage is determined as follows:

i.      For parcels up to 0.15 acres, the project acreage is the actual acreage of the parcel.

ii.     For parcels greater than 0.15 of acre but less than five acres, the acreage is based on an assumed coverage ratio of a typical single-family home on a standard residential lot. The project acreage will be calculated by multiplying the square footage* of the residential structure by three and expressing this square footage in terms of acres (dividing by forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet per acre). However, in no case will this resulting amount exceed the actual acreage of the parcel.

*           Square footage can be generally classified as all square footage of the structure excluding the square footage of garages, porches, decks, external entryways, awnings, carports, driveways, breezeways, out-buildings, carriage houses, sheds, and other similar non-habitable portion of the structure.

c.     For all multifamily residential projects, project acreage is determined to be equivalent to the entire gross acreage of the parcel being developed.

2.     Nonresidential Land Uses (Commercial and Industrial). For retail/office/industrial commercial projects, project acreage is determined by the actual acreage of the parcel where a structure is being constructed less the major dedicated public land uses, such as major arterials, major collectors, drainage, utilities corridors, parks, schools, and other public facilities.

B.     For Development of Land with Existing or Pre-Existing Structures. In the case of expansion of an existing structure in excess of three hundred square feet or the construction of a new structure within two years after demolition of a previous structure, GDA will be calculated as follows:

1.     Residential Land Uses.

a.     For a residential expansion project in excess of three hundred new square feet, the GDA will be calculated by multiplying total new square footage of the expansion by three then expressing this square footage in terms of acres (dividing by forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet per acre).

b.     For residential replacement projects, if the project involves development of a new residential structure after the demolition of a pre-existing structure (regardless of the use of the pre-existing structure), and the new structure is larger than the demolished structure by more than three hundred square feet, the GDA will be calculated by multiplying the total net new square footage by three then expressing this square footage in terms of acres (dividing by forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet per acre). (In this case, the use of the previously demolished structure is not a factor. The net new square footage will be determined by subtracting from the new square footage the documented square footage of the previously existing structure.)

2.     Nonresidential Land Uses.

a.     For retail/office/commercial or industrial expansion projects, if the project involves the addition of new square footage in excess of three hundred square feet, the GDA will be calculated by the total net new square footage and expressing this square footage in terms of acres (dividing by forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet per acre).

b.     For retail/office/commercial or industrial replacement projects, if the project involves development of a new nonresidential structure after the demolition of a pre-existing structure (regardless of the use of the pre-existing structure) and the new structure is larger than the demolished structure by more than three hundred square feet, the GDA will be calculated by the total net new square footage and expressing this square footage in terms of acres (dividing by forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet per acre). The net new square footage will be determined by subtracting the documented habitable square footage of the previously existing structure from the new square footage. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.060 Exemptions and exclusions.
The following land uses and/or projects are exempt from the levee fee:

A.    Agricultural Exemption. Agricultural land including development on rural residential parcels greater than five acres in size.

B.     Pre-Existing Structures. Development projects that require a building permit and are not increasing the amount of new structure square footage are exempt from the fee. If the project involves adding no more than three hundred new square feet, the project is exempt from the fee.

C.     Addition/Replacement Damage. If the proposed project is an addition to an existing single-family residential dwelling unit, a replacement in kind because of fire damage or other natural disaster, or located on land owned by a government agency and is to be used solely for public use, the project will be exempt from the fee.

D.    Structure Raised Above the Two-Hundred-Year Floodplain Elevation. Projects with structures raised above the elevation of the two-hundred-year flood as determined by the city or to structures removed from the two-hundred-year floodplain by flood control improvements that meet the design standards applicable to the federal-state flood control system as determined by the city, shall be exempt from payment.

E.     Open space.

F.     Public agency owned land (including federal, state, and local agencies).

G.    “Other” land defined as follows: with written approval from the city manager, any or all portions of the proposed fees may be waived if it can be determined to the city manager that a proposed project will not derive permanent benefit from the improvements for which the fees are collected (i.e., it can be shown that the property does not benefit from the flood protection). Written fee waivers may be available on a case-by-case basis for certain temporary structures, such as a mobile temporary structure used for construction management purposes. Any denial by the city manager of a requested exemption under this section may be appealed to a hearing officer by serving written notice on the city within fifteen calendar days of the city manager’s denial. Upon receipt of timely notice of appeal, the city shall have no more than thirty days to schedule an appeal hearing before a hearing officer. The city shall initially bear the cost of hearing officer but hearing officer shall have the authority to order reimbursement of costs if the appeal is determined by the hearing officer to be frivolous. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.070 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any entity or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other entities or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

 

13.50.080 Fee revenue accounting.
All proceeds of the levee fee imposed under this chapter shall be placed in a separate fund established by the city (the flood protection improvement fund). Separate and special accounts may be established in the flood protection improvement fund and used to account for collected revenues, along with any interest earnings. Except for temporary borrowing from one city fund to another, the revenue (and interest) shall be used only for the purposes for which the flood protection improvement fund was collected. (Ord. O2017-5 § 3)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.06 BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE
Chapter 15.08 HOUSING CODE
Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 15.12 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.16 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.18 ENERGY CODE
Chapter 15.20 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.21 BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
Chapter 15.22 GREEN CODE
Chapter 15.24 FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.25 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.26 PERMIT RELATED FEES
Chapter 15.27 SEWER CONNECTION ALLOCATION SYSTEM
Chapter 15.28 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 15.29 POST DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
Chapter 15.30 POST DISASTER ABATEMENT
Chapter 15.31 DISASTER REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.32 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Chapter 15.36 BUILDING NUMBERING
Chapter 15.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 15.44 NEGLECTED VACANT STRUCTURE
Chapter 15.60 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 15.62 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Building Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, including Appendix Chapters A, F, H, J and K, as published by the International Code Council, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Building Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the building code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.020 Definitions.
A.    Building Department. Whenever the term “building department” or “building safety division” is used in this code it means the city of Manteca building safety division.

B.     Building Official. The individual invested with the responsibility for overseeing and enforcing applicable life safety codes, and building codes, laws, and statutes. The building official is charged with the administration of the building department, interpretation of code requirements, and direction of the code adoption process.

The building official, under the direction of the community development director is the individual who plans, coordinates and directs the operations and activities of the building department; implements city activities assuring compliance with building standards including plan check, inspection, and corrections to hazards; oversees and participates in inspections; oversees the review and approval of building plans and specifications; implements goals, policies, and procedures for the division.

The building official is responsible for the administration and enforcement of California Code of Regulations, Title 24, and other applicable codes in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 18949 and 17920, and California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 202.

Whenever the term “building official” or “building inspector” is used in the code, it means the chief building official in charge of the building safety division.

C.     City. Whenever the term “municipality” or “city” is used in the building code, it means the city of Manteca.

D.    Deputize. The act of the building official authorizing an inspector, plans examiner, technician, officer, or other employee to have certain duties and powers of the building official as specified in California Health and Safety Code, California Code of Regulations Title 24 or other applicable code.

E.     Enforcing Agency. “Enforcing agency” means the community development department, building safety division of the city of Manteca.

F.     Person. Whenever the term “person” is used, it means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate trust, business, trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.030 Enforcement.
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, and all other applicable codes shall be enforced by the building official. The building official may appoint inspectors, plans examiners, technicians, officers and other employees. The building official may deputize such employees of the building department or other employees of the city of Manteca as necessary and these employees shall have the duties and powers as delegated by the building official to carry out the functions of the enforcement agency in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 103. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, regulations, and policies shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. The building official may authorize the San Joaquin County health department as the city designated enforcement authority. See Section 15.04.020 for definitions of “building official” and “deputize.” (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.035 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]105.3.2 Time limitation on application amended.
Section [A]105.3.2 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to be expired 180 days after the date of filing a building permit application, unless a permit has been issued.

 

Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of the application shall expire, and plans, documents and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 90 days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken and the extension has been submitted in writing prior to the expiration date.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.040 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]105.5 Expiration amended.
Section [A]105.5 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

 

A permit issued shall remain valid for a period of twelve months after permit issuance unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after permit issuance or work is commenced. Work is considered suspended or abandoned if substantial approval of one of the required progress inspections as identified in section 110.3 of the California Building Code is not accomplished every 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced a new permit shall first be obtained, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans for such work; and provided such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.

 

The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.050 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]105.8.
Section [A]105 is amended by adding Section [A]105.8 Responsibility of Permittee to read as follows:

 

Section [A]105.8: Building permits shall be presumed to incorporate the provision that the applicant, the applicants agent, employees or contractors shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or regulations applicable thereto, whether specified or not. No approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this code.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.060 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]109.4.
Section [A]109.4 Investigation Fees—Work Without a Permit is amended to read as follows:

 

A.    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

B.     An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with other provisions of this code, nor any penalty prescribed by law.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.070 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]110.3.5.
Section [A]110.3.5 Lath and Gypsum Board Inspection is amended to read as follows:

 

Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.080 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]113.1.
Section [A]113.1 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 113.1: Board of Appeals. Whenever the Building Official shall disapprove an application of refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued and wrongly interpreted, or to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official, the applicant or any person directly and adversely affected thereby, or the authorized agent of either of said parties, may appeal from the decision of the Building Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the city of Manteca within thirty days from the date of said decision, and the said Board of Appeals may, after a hearing, affirm, reverse, or modify said decision of the Building Official.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.090 Division II, Scope and Administration, Section [A]114.4.
Section [A]114.4 Violation Penalties is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 114.4: Violations Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificates or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council, Building Board of Appeals or a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall separately for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the City Jail of the city of Manteca, or the County Jail of the County of San Joaquin for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.100 Section 1907.2 added.
Section 1907 of the California Building Code is amended by adding Section 1907.2 to read as follows:

 

1907.2 Additional Requirements. Slab dowels in all occupancies, slab connection from existing slabs to new construction shall be placed at a minimum twenty-four (24) inches on center with reinforcing steel of one half inch minimum diameter, eighteen (18) inches in length. Embedment into the existing shall be a minimum of six (6) inches.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.110 Section 3304.1.1 amended.
Section 3304.1.1 of the California Building Code is amended by adding Section 3304.1.1.1 to read as follows:

 

3304.1.1 Difference of Elevation Exceeding 18″. On adjacent lots where a difference in elevation of 18 inches or greater exists, a retaining wall of reinforced concrete or reinforced concrete block must be constructed between the lots.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.120 Valuation.
The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the building official and shall be based on the latest building valuation data as printed in the building standards by the International Code Council, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601. The valuation to be used in computing any permit related fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent work or permanent equipment.

Exception: Other fees may be established by the Building Official based on estimated reasonable costs of service. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.130 Building Permit Fees.
Building Permit fees for each permit shall be paid as set forth by city fee schedule or by a determination by the Building Official of the estimated reasonable costs of service. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.140 Plan review fee.
Plan review fees shall be paid as set forth by city fee schedule or by a determination by the building official of the estimated reasonable costs of service. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.04.150 Plan retention.
For the purpose of maintaining copies of plans for residential, commercial, and industrial buildings and covering all associated technological costs associated with such scanning, storage, and maintenance pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 19850, when a building permit is required by the California Building Code, a fee shall be charged based on the adopted fee and estimated reasonable cost to the city for the maintenance of said plans. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.06 BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE
15.06.010 Adoption.
That certain document in book form entitled “Uniform Code for Building Conservation,” 1997 Edition Chapters 1 through 3, and Appendix Chapter 1, as amended by the state of California, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, one copy of which is now on file in the office of the city clerk of the city, is adopted and enacted by the city council. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.06.020 Section 207 amended—Board of appeals.
Section 207 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation is amended to read:

 

Whenever the Building Official shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or any person directly or adversely affected thereby, or the authorized agent of either of said parties, may appeal the decision of the Building Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the city of Manteca within thirty days from the date of said decision of the Building Official. The decision of the said Board shall be final.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.06.030 Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificates or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the City Jail of the city of Manteca, or the County Jail of the county of San Joaquin for not more than six months or by such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.08 HOUSING CODE
15.08.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk being marked and designated as Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition except its definition of “substandard building,” published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, to be cumulated with, and in addition to any other remedy provided by the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished, except as amended, deleted, and/or added to by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.08.020 Section 203 amended—Board of appeals.
Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 203. Building Board of Appeals.

203.1 General. In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this code and to hear appeals, there shall be a Board of Appeals, known as the Building Board of Appeals.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.08.030 Section 204 amended—Violation and penalties.
Section 204.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 204.2. Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the City Jail of the City of Manteca, or the County Jail of the County of San Joaquin for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

 

Section 204.3. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause phrase, or portion of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional by the decision of any court or competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.08.040 Section 302 amended—Fees.
Section 302 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read:

 

Section 302. Fees. When a building permit is required by Section 301 of this code, a fee shall be charged based on the estimated reasonable cost to the City.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.08.050 Substandard building defined.
A substandard building shall be as defined in Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.10.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Residential Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, including Appendix Chapters H, K, and O, as published by the International Code Council, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Residential Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the residential code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.10.020 Definitions.
A.    Building Department. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

B.     Building Official. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

C.     City. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

D.    Deputize. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

E.     Enforcing Agency. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

F.     Person. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.) (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.10.030 Enforcement.
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, and all other applicable codes shall be enforced by the building official.

The building official may appoint inspectors, plans examiners, technicians, officers and other employees. The building official may deputize such employees of the building department or other employees of the city of Manteca as necessary and these employees shall have the duties and powers as delegated by the building official to carry out the functions of the enforcement agency in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 103.

The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, regulations, and policies shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

The building official may authorize the San Joaquin County health department as the city designated enforcement authority.

See Section 15.04.020 for definitions of “building official” and “deputize.” (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.10.040 Section R110.3 amended—Final Inspection—Certificate of Occupancy.
Section R110.3 is amended by adding exception 1 to read as follows:

 

110.2 Exception 1. The final inspection approval on the Inspection Record shall serve as the certificate of occupancy for R-3 and U occupancies.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.10.050 Investigation fees—Work without a permit.
A.    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

B.     An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with other provisions of this code, nor any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.12 PLUMBING CODE
15.12.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Plumbing Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Plumbing Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the plumbing code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.12.020 Enforcement.
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, and all other applicable codes shall be enforced by the building official. The building official may appoint inspectors, plans examiners, technicians, officers and other employees. The building official may deputize such employees of the building department or other employees of the city of Manteca as necessary and these employees shall have the duties and powers as delegated by the building official to carry out the functions of the enforcement agency in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 103. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, regulations, and policies shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code. The building official may authorize the San Joaquin County health department as the city designated enforcement authority. See Section 15.04.020 for definitions of “building official” and “deputize.” (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.12.030 Dangerous and insanitary construction—Nuisance.
A.    Any portion of a plumbing system found by the administrative authority to be insanitary as defined in the California Plumbing Code is declared to be a nuisance.

B.     1.     Whenever brought to the attention of the department having jurisdiction that any insanitary conditions exist or that any construction or work regulated by this code is dangerous, unsafe, insanitary, a nuisance or a menace to life, health or property or otherwise in violation of this code, the department may request an investigation by the administrative authority who, upon determining such information to be fact, shall order any person, firm or corporation using or maintaining any such condition or responsible for the use of maintenance thereof to discontinue the use or maintenance thereof or to repair, alter, change, remove or demolish same for the proper protection of life, health or property and in the case of any gas piping or gas appliance may order any person, firm or corporation supplying gas to such piping or appliance to discontinue supplying gas thereto until such piping or appliance is made safe to life, health or property.

2.     Every such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner, agent or person responsible for the premises in which such condition exists and shall specify the date or time for compliance with such order.

C.     Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this code.

D.    When any plumbing system is maintained in violation of this code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on which a building is situated, the administrative authority may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or nuisance. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.12.040 Appendix Chapter 1, Section 103.4.1 amended—Fees.
Permit fees shall be paid as set forth by city fee schedule or by a determination by the building official of the estimated reasonable costs of service. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.12.050 Appendix Chapter 1, Section 102.4.
Chapter 1, Section 102.4 of the California Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 102.4 Violations and Penalties.

A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificates or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city Council, Building Board of Appeals or a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the City Jail of the city of Manteca, or the County Jail of the County of San Joaquin for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

B.     The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code, or any applicable provision of state law. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as work or use which it authorizes is lawful.

C.     The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the City Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code, or any other applicable provision of state law.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.16 MECHANICAL CODE
15.16.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Mechanical Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Mechanical Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the mechanical code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.16.020 Chapter 1, Section 108.1 amended.
Section 108.1 Organization and Enforcement is amended to read as follows:

 

California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, and all other applicable codes shall be enforced by the building official.

The building official may appoint inspectors, plans examiners, technicians, officers and other employees. The building official may deputize such employees of the building department or other employees of the city of Manteca as necessary and these employees shall have the duties and powers as delegated by the building official to carry out the functions of the enforcement agency in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 103.

The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, regulations, and policies shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

The building official may authorize the San Joaquin County health department as the city designated enforcement authority.

See Section 15.04.020 for definitions of “building official” and “deputize.”

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.16.030 Permit fees.
Permit fees for each permit shall be paid as set forth by city fee schedule or by a determination by the building official of the estimated reasonable costs of service. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.16.040 Chapter 1, Section 110.1 amended.
Chapter 1, Section 110.1 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows:

 

General. Whenever the Building Official shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued and wrongly interpreted, the applicant or any person directly or adversely affected thereby or the authorized agent of either of said parties may appeal from the decision of the Building Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the city of Manteca within thirty days from the date of said decision, and said Board of Appeals may, after a hearing, affirm, reverse, or modify said decision of the Building Official.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.16.050 Chapter 1, Section 111.0 amended.
Chapter 1, Section 111.0 Violations—Penalty is amended to read as follows:

 

A.    Any person violating any of the provision of the California Mechanical Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion thereof during which any violation of the California Mechanical Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in this chapter.

B.     The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of state law. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall be valid, except insofar as work or use which it authorized is lawful.

C.     The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the City Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on there under when in violation of the California Mechanical Code, this code or any other applicable provision of state law.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.18 ENERGY CODE
15.18.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Energy Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, as published by the International Code Council, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Energy Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the energy code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.18.020 Organization and enforcement.
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, and all other applicable codes shall be enforced by the building official.

The building official may appoint inspectors, plans examiners, technicians, officers and other employees. The building official may deputize such employees of the building department or other employees of the city of Manteca as necessary and these employees shall have the duties and powers as delegated by the building official to carry out the functions of the enforcement agency in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 103.

The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules, regulations, and policies shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

The building official may authorize the San Joaquin County health department as the city designated enforcement authority.

See Section 15.04.020 for definitions of “building official” and “deputize.” (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.18.030 Board of appeals.
Whenever the building official disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued and wrongly interpreted, the applicant or any person directly and adversely affected thereby, or the authorized agent of either of said parties, may appeal from the decision of the building official to the building board of appeals of the city of Manteca within thirty days from the date of said decision of the building official. The decision of said board shall be final. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.18.040 Violations—Penalty.
A.    The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of state law. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the California Energy Code shall be valid, except insofar as work or use which it authorized is lawful.

B.     The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on hereunder when in violation of the California Energy Code, this code or any other applicable provision of state law. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.20 ELECTRICAL CODE
15.20.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Electrical Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, including Annex Chapter H, excluding Section 80.15, as published by BNi Publications, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Electrical Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the electrical code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.020 Section 203 amended—Board of appeals.
Section 80.15 of Annex H of the 2019 California Electrical Code is amended to read:

Whenever the Building Official shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant or any person directly or adversely affected thereby, or the authorized agent of either of said parties, may appeal the decision of the Building Official to the Building Board of Appeals of the city of Manteca within thirty days from the date of said decision of the Building Official. The decision of said Board shall be final.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.030 Article 100—Definitions.
Article 100, Definitions, of the NEC is amended by adding definitions to read as follows:

A.    Building Department. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

B.     Building Official. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

C.     City. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

D.    Deputize. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

E.     Enforcing Agency. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

F.     Person. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.040 Connection of wiring to supply.
A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to energize or permit to be energized any electrical wiring coming under the provisions of this chapter until such wiring shall have been inspected and approved by the building official. The building official may give written temporary permission to furnish electric current to, or the use of electric current through, any electric wiring for a reasonable length of time, if it appears to the building official that such electrical wiring may be used safely and that there exists an urgent necessity for such use.

B.     Any utility company furnishing electrical current, under such temporary permit, shall be requested to disconnect such electrical service within five days of written notice from the building official that such electrical wiring cannot be approved.

C.     Unless written approval is obtained from the city building official, all occupied residential buildings shall have an approved, operating connection to the local electrical utility. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.050 Article 230.70(A)(1) amended.
Article 230.70(A)(1) Exterior Means of Disconnection—Location of the California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows:

 

Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location outside of a building or structure or the installation thereof shall be approved by the Chief Building Official and the Fire Chief.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.060 Section 300.24 added.
Article 300, Wiring Methods, General Requirements, of the California Electrical Code is amended by adding Section 300.24 to read as follows:

 

300.24. Raceways and Wireways on Roof Tops. Raceways and wireways on roofs shall have a minimum of one-half inch (1/2″) clearance above the roof surface, and shall be installed in a manner acceptable to the building official. Raceways and Conduits on rooftops shall utilize the ASHRAE Handbook – Fundamentals (Sacramento being the closest City) to determine the Temperature Adjustment in accordance with Section 310.15(B)(3)(c).

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.070 Section 334.12(A)(11) added.
Article 334.12(A)(11) Nonmetallic Sheathed Cable is amended by adding Section 334.12(A)(11) as follows:

 

334.12(A)(11) Commercial and Industrial Uses. Types NM, NMC or NMS cable shall not be installed in buildings used for industrial or commercial purposes.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.080 Section 334.16 added.
Article 334 Exposed Work, Residential Garages is amended by adding Section 334.16 as follows:

 

334.16 Exposed Work, Residential Garages. Exposed work below the plate line in residential garages shall be in an approved raceway. Where a cable or cables pierce a required fire protection wall, the cable or cables shall be protected by enclosing the cable or cables on the garage side with a metal or equivalent raceway extending five (5) feet beyond the protective wall.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.090 Section 204—Violations—Uniform Administrative Code Provisions.
Section 80.23(B) of Annex H is amended by adding paragraph (B)(3) as follows:

 

(B)(3) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the California Electrical Code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificates or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectfully, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonably time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.20.100 Section 80.19(E) of Annex H—Fees.
Section 80.19(E) of Annex H is amended to read as follows:

 

80.19 (E) Fees. Permit fees for each permit shall be paid as set forth by city fee schedule or by a determination by the Building Official of the estimated reasonable costs of service.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.21 BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
15.21.010 Name and purpose.
The board of appeals is created in order to hear appeals by persons aggrieved by any administrative decisions in the city’s application of the Uniform Housing Code, California Building, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Residential, Green Building Standards, Historical Building Code, Energy Code, Existing Building Code and Fire Codes, or regulations adopted under them. It will also serve as the appeal board when determinations are made regarding special conditions for persons with disabilities, under California Building Code Section 1.9.1.5 or California Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.21.020 Definitions.
A.    “Board” means the board of appeals.

B.     “Building official” means the chief building official of the city of Manteca.

C.     “Member” means a member of the board of appeals. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.21.030 Organization and membership.
A.    Time of Appointment—Term. The board will be appointed promptly whenever the city receives an appeal requiring a hearing by the board. The board shall be comprised of five members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. Members shall serve only until the matter appealed has been concluded and the board’s participation is no longer required.

B.     Qualifications. The board will be appointed from a list of potentially interested and qualified candidates maintained by the city clerk. The board shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction (such as licensed contractors, engineers and architects). When the appeal concerns the fire code, at least two of the members shall be qualified by experience with the fire code. When the appeal concerns access for persons with disabilities, at least two members shall be disabled individuals.

A member may not be an employee or elected officer of the city, but may be a member of another city board or commission. A member need not be a resident of the city. A member may not have any interest in property which is the subject of the appeal to the board.

C.     Officers—Procedures. Once appointed, the board shall meet to elect a chair and vice­chair, and to set the time and place of its meetings. The board shall function in accordance with the standard commission bylaws which apply to other city commissions and boards.

D.    Secretary—Ex Officio Members. The chief building official shall be the ex officio secretary of the board but shall not vote. When an appeal is heard regarding the fire code, the fire chief or designee shall sit as an ex officio member. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.21.040 Powers and duties.
A.    Functions. The functions of the board shall be as follows:

1.     To hear appeals of administrative decisions regarding the use of alternative materials, interpretations pertaining to the enforcement of any of the codes and related regulations listed in MMC Title 15; and

2.     To hear appeals of administrative decisions in the application of the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and related sections of this Code in actions declaring certain building structures or conditions therein substandard, unsanitary, or hazardous and requiring their consideration, rehabilitation, reconstruction, correction, or abatement as applicable.

B.     Limitation on Appeals. An application for appeal must be based on a claim that:

1.     The true intent of the applicable code or the related regulations has been incorrectly interpreted;

2.     The provisions of the applicable code do not fully apply;

3.     An equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board does not have the authority to waive requirements of the code. (California Building Code Section 113.2.)

C.     Conduct of Appeals.

1.     The board shall exercise its powers in such a manner that substantial justice is done most nearly in accord with the intent and purpose of this code.

2.     The board shall follow fair procedural rules, including giving adequate notice of hearings to all parties, providing hearings open to the public, assuring that the hearing is commenced within sixty days after the date of the filing of the petition for an appeal, recording minutes of its proceedings, and providing copies of minutes for inspection as a public record.

D.    Procedure of Petitions for Hearing of Appeals. Upon the filing of a petition and appointment of the board under Section 15.21.030, the secretary shall set the matter on the board’s agenda for consideration. The secretary shall give written notice of at least seven days to the applicant or petitioner, specifying the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present any evidence to support the request. If necessary, the hearing may be continued.

E.     Decisions. In rendering its decision, the Board has no authority to waive requirements of any code. (California Building Code Section 113.2.) No later than ten days after the close of the hearing(s) the board shall formally report its decision in writing, including its findings of fact and reasons for the decision. The report shall either approve, approve with modifications or deny the appeal, and shall specify any conditions or limitations imposed. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the petitioner or his or her representative at the address shown on the petition within ten days after the decision. The secretary shall provide a copy of the report to the administrative office whose decision was appealed, and shall maintain a copy in the board’s permanent records. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.22 GREEN CODE
15.22.010 Adoption.
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca, being marked and designated as the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, as now existing, or hereafter amended, regulating and governing the conditions of all properties, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and providing penalties for the violation thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said 2019 California Green Building Standards Code on file in office of the city clerk of the city of Manteca is hereby referred to, adopted as the green code of the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.22.020 Section 4.106.2 #3 amended.
Section 4.106.2 #3 is hereby amended to read:

 

3. Comply with a locally enacted stormwater management ordinance as adopted in Manteca Municipal Code 13.28 Storm Water Management and Discharges and as enforced by the Public Works Director.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.22.030 Section 5.106.1 amended.
Section 5.106.1 is hereby amended to read:

 

5.106.1 Storm water pollution prevention. Newly constructed projects and additions which disturb less than one acre of land shall prevent the pollution of stormwater runoff from construction activities through one or more of the following measures:

5.106.1.1 Local Ordinance. Comply with a locally enacted stormwater management ordinance as adopted in Manteca Municipal Code 13.28 Storm Water Management and Discharges and as enforced by the Public Works Director.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.24 FIRE CODE
15.24.010 Adoption—Copies on file.
This chapter is adopted by the Manteca city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that certain codes, standards, and appendixes known as the 2019 California Fire Code, and Appendix Chapters B, BB,C, CC and D, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento California 95833-2936, and incorporates by adoption the 2018 International Fire Code at the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city of Manteca, in the state of California regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided. Not less than one copy has been filed in the office or the clerk of the city and the same adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect, the provision hereof shall be controlling with the limits of the city. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.24.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A.    Whenever the words “International Fire Code” are used in this chapter it shall mean the California Fire Code, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 9, incorporating the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code.

B.     Whenever the words “chief” or “fire code official” are used in the International Fire Code, it shall mean the fire chief or their designated representatives.

C.     Whenever the words “municipality” or “jurisdiction” are used it shall mean the city of Manteca. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.24.030 Office of the fire marshal—Established—Duties.
A.    The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the office of the fire marshal in the fire department of the city which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department.

B.     The officer in charge of the office of the fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief on the basis of his or her qualifications.

C.     The office of the fire marshal is responsible for community risk reduction, including identifying and prioritizing local risks to reduce the occurrence and impact thereof.

D.    The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city manager of the city the employment of technical inspectors, when deemed necessary. The contract inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate his or her competence to the satisfaction of the fire marshal, for inspection or design review of a particular type of construction, operation, fire extinguishing or detection system or process. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.24.040 Amendments made in the California Fire Code.
The California Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respects:

 

A.    Section 101-Scope and General Requirements added section [A] 101.1 to read:

 

[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the city of Manteca, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.

 

B.     Section 102-Applicability added sections [A] 102.5.1.1 and [A] 102.7.3 to read:

 

[A] 102.5.1.1 The fire code official is granted the authority to enforce reasonable measures to protect the domestic water supply where applicable to the installation of fire protection systems.

 

[A] 102.7.3 Local Standards. The fire code official is granted the authority to develop and enforce local standards as deemed necessary for the effective and consistent enforcement of this code. The fire code official has the authority to amend these standards when necessary to confirm with best practices and changes in local and state law.

 

C.     Section 105-Permits added section [A] 105.1.6.2 and amended Section [A] 105.2 to read:

 

[A] 105.1.6.2 Annual Operational Fire Permits. All fees for annual operational permits under the provision of section 105.6 of this Chapter shall be due and payable at the time of commencement of occupancy and said permit shall expire no later than twelve (12) months after the date of issuance. Fees for renewal of such permits shall be due and payable upon the expiration of the prior permit. No permit fee paid hereunder shall be refundable by reason of cessation of occupancy during the permit period. Every annual permit fee that is not paid within a period of thirty (30) days from the time the same became due is hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 100% or a maximum fine of five-hundred ($500.00) dollars shall be added to said fee.

 

[A] 105.2 Application. Applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount listed in the city of Manteca fee schedule.

 

D.    Section 109-Violations added Sections [A] 109.1, [A] 109.1.2, [A] 109.1.3, [A] 109.1.4, [A] 109.1.5, [A] 109.1.6, [A] 109.1.7 and amends Section [A] 109.4 to read:

 

[A] 109.1.1 Abatement of Fire and Life Safety Hazards by Fire Code Official. If any person fails to comply with the orders of the fire code official, or if the fire code official is unable to locate the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible within a reasonable time, the fire code official or any authorized representative may take such steps as are necessary to abate the hazard for the protection of the public safety. In no event is notice necessary before abatement, when the hazard is a clear and present danger to the public welfare. All costs related to such abatement shall become a lien on the subject property.

 

[A] 109.1.2 Criminal or Civil Penalty for Violation; Payment of Funds To Account. Pursuant to the City’s prosecutorial discretion, the City may enforce violations of the provisions of this code in any manner authorized by this section or by any other law, including but not limited to issuance of criminal citations, referral to the District Attorney, referral to other appropriate agencies, administrative actions and civil actions.

 

[A] 109.1.3 Infractions/Misdemeanors. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code, any of the provisions of any written authority of the City Manager or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code shall be guilty of an infraction/misdemeanor. Each and every day, or any part thereof, during which any such violation is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate offense.

 

[A] 109.1.4 Prosecution. Every violation of this code shall be a misdemeanor; provided, however, that where the City Attorney or his or her duly authorized agents has determined that such action would be in the best interest of justice, the City Attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading, citation or amendment thereto that the violation shall be prosecuted as an infraction.

 

[A] 109.1.5 Penalty for Infraction. Each and every violation of this code, which is deemed an infraction, is punishable by:

1.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars (500.00) for the second violation of the same or similar provision within one year period; or

3.     A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each additional violation, after the second, of the same or similar provision of this Chapter within a one year period of the first violation.

 

[A] 109.1.6 Penalty for Misdemeanor. Each and every violation of this code, which is deemed a misdemeanor, is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or, by both penalty and imprisonment.

 

[A] 109.1.7 Civil Penalties. Any person who intentionally, accidentally or negligently violates any provision of this code, any written authority of the fire code official or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives, or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this code may be civilly liable to the City in the sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day in which such violation occurs or continues. The City may petition the municipal or superior court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. The civil penalty provided in this Section excludes inspection costs and abatement costs, is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to all other remedies available to the City under state and federal law and local ordinances. Funds collected pursuant to this Section shall be paid to the Fire Prevention Fund.

 

[A] 109.4 Violation Penalties-Administrative Enforcement Provision. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or a of a permit or certificate used under provision of this code shall be guilty of violation of this code and fines consistent with Section [A]109.1.5 shall be assessed under the provisions and authority granted by section 1.10. Administrative Enforcement Provisions of the Manteca Municipal Code.

 

E.     Section 111-Stop Work Order amended Section [A] 111.4 to read:

 

[A] 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person, who shall continue any work having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of $1,000 dollars.

 

F.     Section 113-Fees added Section [A] 113.6 to read:

 

[A] 113.6 Re-inspection Fees. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when any portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required corrections have not been completed. This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees upon initial rejection of work for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before work is ready for the inspection or re-inspections or if hazards are not abated in the required timeframe.

 

G.    Section 503-Fire Appartus Access Roads added Sections 503.1.4, 503.3.1, 503.3.2 and 503.6.1 to read:

 

503.1.4 Adjacent access. No source of access from lands adjoining a property to be developed shall be considered unless there shall be obtained in writing, the irrevocable and unobstructed right to use same.

 

503.3.1 No parking—Fire lane identification. When required by the Fire Code Official, one or more of the following methods shall be used to identify fire apparatus access roads and prohibit their obstruction: The entire length of the road shall be marked by approved signs posted at intervals no greater than one hundred feet, which identify the road as a “Fire lane” and state the prohibition of parking therein, “NO PARKING-FIRE LANE.” The sign shall also warn that vehicles in violation are subject to citation or removal. Such signs shall be posted in a permanent manner at a height no greater than nine feet and no less than seven feet. Signs shall be 12″ X 18″ in size with letters not less than one inch in height and meet the State of California specifications for reflectivity, etc.; or

 

Standard curbs bordering fire access roads shall have the words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” painted upon their horizontal and vertical surfaces at intervals of not more than twenty-five feet. Letters shall be of block style, minimum five (5) inches in height with a stroke of not less than 3/4-inch, and shall be white on a red background. The background shall extend at least six inches beyond the first and last letters of the text.

 

Violation of posted “FIRE LANES” as described in California Vehicle Code Section 22500.1 will allow for the immediate removal as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 22651 for any vehicle parked or left standing in an area identified as a fire lane.

 

503.3.2 Fire Lane Established. The fire code official shall have the authority to establish administrative procedures for the establishment of fire lanes; fire lanes shall be properly recorded on the property as determined by the requirements of the county recorder or other jurisdiction having authority..

 

503.3.6.1 Access entrances with locked gates.

Access gates, barricades or barriers across roads to private or gated communities, multi-family residential or single family residential subdivisions with more than 8 units shall provide emergency access by an approved preemption traffic control/gate access system as described in 4 and 5 below. All other access gates shall be locked in a manner which allows for emergency access by one of the following methods:

1.     A lock or chain that is not case hardened and immediately available to cut with Fire Department bolt cutters.

2.     A lock with the key available in a Fire Department approved “lock box” installed as prescribed by the Fire Chief.

3.     An opening device located in an approved “lock box” installed as prescribed by the Fire Chief.

4.     A preemption traffic control/gate access system that will operate upon an optical signal originating from an emergency vehicle.

5.     Automatic gates shall have a battery back-up or manual mechanical disconnect readily accessible to emergency personnel in case of power failure.

 

H.    Section 505 Premises Identification amended Section 505.1 and added Sections 505.1.2 and 505.3 to read:

 

505.1. Address identification. Where a building is set back from the street or road fronting the property and where addresses may not be clearly identifiable due to distance from the street or roadway, landscape and architectural appendages, or other obstructions, address posting shall be required both at the street driveway serving such building and on the building. The approved minimum size dimensions of the numbers shall be as specified by Table 1. The fire code official is authorized to increase the size of address identification where deemed necessary.

 

Table 1

Distance to Building Address Measured From Back of Walk

Size Height

25 Feet

4 inches

26-40 Feet

6 inches

41-55 Feet

9 inches

Over 55 Feet

12 inches

 

505.1.2 Multi unit buildings or facilities. A monument sign shall be placed at the main entrance to the complex listing specific unit numbers, assigned to specific buildings.

1.     Each building shall have a durable, all-weather sign listing the building designator and the units contained within.

2.     Building address numbers shall be plainly visible from the street/emergency vehicle access lanes. Said numbers shall contrast with their background

3.     Individual units shall be numbered consecutively according to their floor. All units on the first floor shall be in the 100 series, second floor in the 200 series and third floor units in the 300 series.

505.3 Annexation or change of address-Where an existing building is annexed into the city of Manteca, or a change of address occurs; no more than 45 days shall pass until the building is identified with the City Address in compliance with section 505..

 

I.      Section 506-Key Boxes added Sections 506.3 and 506.3.1 to read:

 

506.3. Hazardous Materials Management Plan Box. When a business which handles hazardous materials is required to complete a Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP), the Fire Code Official may require the installation of a secured box at the primary facility entrance or the fire control room which contains a copy of the Hazardous Materials Management Plan. This box shall be waterproof and capable of holding the document in a rolled condition without folding. Other characteristics of the box shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.

 

506.3.1 Acute Hazardous Material. Businesses which handle acutely hazardous material as defined in Section 25532 of the Health and Safety Code shall install a Hazardous Material Management Plan Box in accordance with this section.

 

J.      Section 507-Fire Protection Water Supplies added Sections 507.3.1, 507.5.7 and 507.5.8 to read:

 

507.3.1 Required fire flow for buildings other than one and two family dwellings, group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. Table b105.2 shall allow a reduction in fire flow equal to a total of 40% of the value in Table B105.1(2)a; minimum fire flow for all buildings shall not be less than 1,500 gpm.

 

507.5.7 Fire hydrant specification. The fire hydrant specification for the city of Manteca shall be as follows: A.W.W.A. approved wet barrel hydrant with 1″ pentagon control valve heads, one 4 1/2″ outlet and one 2 1/2″ outlet (hydrants with two 2 1/2″ outlets and one 4 1/2″ outlet may be required for a high fire flow demands). Hydrants having a 4 1/2″ outlet shall have that outlet front the street or access way used by fire equipment.

 

507.5.8 Hydrants shall be required on both sides of the street. Whenever one or more of the following conditions exist:

1)     Streets have median center dividers that make access to hydrants difficult, cause time delays, or create undue hazard or both.

2)     Major arterials when there are four lanes or more of traffic, or the width of street is in excess of 60 feet.

3)     The existing street shall be widened or have a raised median center divider in the future, pursuant to the General Plan for the city of Manteca.

 

K.    Section 603-Fuel-Fire Appliances added Section 603.9.1 to read:

 

603.9.1 Gas Service Disconnect. All buildings providing natural gas service through more than one (1) service meter or through multiple service connections shall have individual gas shutoffs identified in a manner approved by the Fire Chief indicating areas or units served.

 

L.     Section 605-Electrical Equipment, Wiring and Hazards added Section 605.13 to read:

 

605.13 Exterior Shut Off. All buildings shall have main electrical shut off accessible on the exterior of the structure. This may be accomplished by placing the shut off on the building exterior, an electrical room with a door leading directly to the exterior or a remote electrical (shunt) switch on the building exterior. Breakaway locks are allowable for security.

 

M.    Section 901-General added Sections 901.4.7 and 901.11 to read:

 

901.4.7 Installer qualifications and responsibilities. All individuals or companies installing, repairing, testing, servicing or maintaining sprinkler systems, fire hydrant systems, standpipes, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, smoke and heat ventilators, smoke-removal systems and other fire protection or extinguishing systems or appliances shall be a fire protection contractor or contractor licensed for said work by the State of California or have the appropriate license required by the California State Fire Marshal’s Office or both.

1.     The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified in writing within 72 hours by the person performing repairs, testing, or maintenance when a fire protection or detection system is not in compliance with applicable codes.

 

901.11 Nuisance Alarms. Alarms caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or lack of proper maintenance shall be considered violations of this code after 3 separate nuisance alarms are received by the Fire Department in a 1 one-year time frame; violations and fines shall be administered by any of the means provided in this code. Fees shall be assessed per the provision listed in [A] 109.1.5 Penalty for Infraction

 

N.    Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems amended Section 903.2 to read:

 

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this Section or in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 whichever is more restrictive. For the purpose of this section, firewalls and fire barriers used to separate building areas shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code and shall be without openings or penetrations. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in an operable condition in the following locations:

1.     Every building hereafter constructed in which the total floor area is 6000 sq. ft. or more, including overhangs.

2.     Every building hereafter constructed that create conditions described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19.

3.     Every building hereafter constructed of three or more stories as defined in the California Building Code.

4.     Any change in the character of occupancy or in use of any building with a building area equal to or greater than 6,000 which in the opinion of the Fire Code Official or Building Code Official place the building into a more hazardous division of the same occupancy group or into a different group of occupancies and constitute a greater degree of life safety or increased fire risk

a.     Life Safety – Increased occupant load, public assembly areas, public meeting areas, churches, indoor amusement attractions, buildings with complex exiting systems due to increased occupant loads, large schools/day-care facilities, large residential care facilities with non-ambulatory.

b.     Fire Risks – High-piled combustible storage, woodworking operations, hazardous operations using hazardous materials, increased fuel loads (storage of moderate to highly combustible materials), increased sources of ignition (welding, automotive repair with the use of flammable liquids and open flames).

5.     This section shall not preclude or alter the intent of the California Building Code for Fire Resistive Substitution.

6.     Every existing building that expands its physical size by 50% or more shall provide automatic fire sprinklers throughout the entire building, if the total square footage of the building after expansion exceeds 6,000 sq. ft or creates a condition described in Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.19.

7.     Every existing building that expands its physical size by less than 50% and does not create a condition described in section 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 shall only be required to provide fire sprinklers for the new addition.

 

O.    Section 906-Portable Fire Extinguishers added Section 906.1.1 to read:

 

906.1.1 Rental units—Fire extinguishers. All rental units including hotels, motels, apartments and rooming houses where the principal function of which is to provide guest rooms, shelter or space at a fixed rental for the accommodation of the public and consisting of at least five rental units shall have portable fire extinguishers installed according to the requirements of the applicable California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, section 3.29 (a) through (d). All nonconforming leased and/or rental units as listed above shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section, or their use shall be discontinued or abated.

Exception: R-1 and R-3 occupancies as defined by the California Building Code shall be exempt from the fire detection requirements of this section.

 

P.     Section 907 Fire Alarm and Detection Systems amended Section 907.2. to read:

 

907.2.       Where required-Automatic fire detection system. A Fire Department approved automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 or:

1.     Every building hereafter constructed in which the total floor area is between 3,000 and 6,000 sq. ft.

2.     Every building hereafter remodeled when the cost of remodeling exceeds $100,000 and the total floor area is between 3,000 and 6,000 sq. ft. The $100,000 valuation shall be based on building valuation data published by the International Conference of Building Officials within a 12 month period.

Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing automatic fire detectors or waterflow detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.

Exceptions:

1.     The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.

2.     The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group R-2 occupancies unless required by the fire code official to provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a sprinkler system impairment event. Where provided, the manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that is open to the public.

 

Q.    Section 3304 Fire Safety During Construction and Demolition amended Section 3304.4 to read:

 

3304.4 Open burning—Construction Sites. No fire shall be permitted to burn on any construction site for any purpose. This section is not to prohibit the use of devices or tools producing a flame when used in an approved manner and necessary for the construction of the building.

 

R.     Section 5003 Hazardous Materials-General Requirements amended Section 5003.3.1.4.1 to read:

 

5003.3.1.4.1 Deposits of hazardous materials; cleanup or abatement; liability for costs. The Fire Department is authorized to cleanup or abate the effects of any hazardous material deposited upon or into property or facilities of the City; and any person or persons who are responsible for such deposit shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the Fire Department as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity. The responsibility is not conditioned upon evidence of willfulness or negligence of the party handling the hazardous materials, whether sudden or gradual. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.

For purposes of this section “hazardous materials” shall be defined as any substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives.

For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the Fire Department shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to the following: actual labor costs of City personnel, including worker’s compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation, cost of materials obtained directly by the City; and cost of any contract labor and materials.

The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the Fire Department.

 

S.     Section 5704 Storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids-General amended Section 5704.1 to read:

 

5704.1 General. The limits referred to in Section 5704 of the California Fire Code in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted is established as follows: within the boundaries of the city of Manteca.

Exception. The fire chief may allow aboveground storage of flammable or combustible liquids, provided adequate clearances have been provided, in any agricultural zoned area, any general commercial zone, any community commercial zone where the use is automotive, farm equipment or recreational vehicle sales and service, any light or heavy industrial zoned area, and for any facility, irrespective of zone, which requires as part of its licensing or certification that they have a secondary power supply and the storage is:

1.     An aboveground flammable/combustible liquid storage vault, designed as a special enclosure as specified in Section 2306.2.6 of the California Fire Code, with a maximum one thousand one hundred gallon individual or three thousand three hundred gallon aggregate capacity. They shall be prohibited within ten feet of a property line or building wall;

2.     Class II combustible liquids in vessels exceeding one hundred fifty gallons, with a maximum capacity of five hundred gallons individual or five hundred gallons aggregate total capacity. Tanks are prohibited within one hundred fifty feet of all A, E, or R occupancies, as determined by the California Building Code. Tanks shall be enclosed on at least three sides by four-hour fire resistive construction, as determined by the California Building Code. The height of the enclosure shall be eight feet or one-half the height of the tank whichever is greater. The remaining side is to be fenced to a height of at least eight feet. Openings on exterior walls of adjacent buildings shall not be within twenty feet of the enclosure;

3.     Class III combustible liquids in vessels exceeding one hundred fifty gallons, with a maximum capacity of five hundred gallons individual or five hundred gallons aggregate total capacity. Tanks are prohibited within one hundred fifty feet of all A, E, or R occupancies as determined by the California Building Code;

4.     The fire chief may allow a maximum aggregate capacity of twenty thousand gallons of aboveground flammable or combustible liquid storage for any use conducted in an area zoned manufacturing or industrial (M-1, M-2, or B.I.P.), or institutional occupancies mandated by the state of California to provide emergency power, provided that:

a.     Capacity of any single storage tank shall not exceed ten thousand gallons,

b.     Tanks shall be prohibited within one hundred fifty feet of all A, E, or R occupancies as determined by the California Building Code,

c.     All tanks permitted by this section shall be designed and constructed in conformance with requirements set forth of the California Fire Code Section 5704.2.7, and

d.     All tanks in excess of one thousand one hundred gallons shall be suitably protected;

5.     All tanks shall be installed in conformance with all provisions of the California Fire Code. All nonconforming aboveground flammable or combustible liquid tanks shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or their use shall be discontinued or abated.

 

T.     Section 6104 Location Of Lp-Gas Containers amended Section 6104.2.1 to read:

 

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of the California Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are established as follows, in the boundaries of the city of Manteca.

Exception. The fire chief may allow the storage of liquefied petroleum gas, provided that proper distances to exposures and on-site fire protection is provided and the storage is:

1.     A maximum five-hundred-gallon individual or five-hundred-gallon aggregate capacity for facilities requiring a secondary power supply;

2.     A maximum five-hundred-gallon individual or five-hundred-gallon aggregate capacity in a low density populated area where normal underground natural gas services are not available;

3.     A maximum five-hundred-gallon individual or five-hundred-gallon aggregate capacity at any business or commercial establishment;

4.     Service Stations. A maximum one thousand two hundred gallon individual or one thousand two hundred aggregate capacity for automotive service stations;

5.     Industrial. A maximum one thousand two hundred gallon individual or one thousand two hundred gallon aggregate capacity in heavy and light industrial area.

6      Distribution Center. A maximum of thirty thousand gallon individual or ninety thousand gallon aggregate capacity of stationary storage. Storage shall be prohibited within five hundred feet of a residence, apartment or hotel complex, educational facility, hospital or care facility.

7.     A maximum of three hundred thousand gallons aggregate storage on any site. Storage shall be prohibited within five hundred feet of any residence, apartment or hotel complex, educational facility, hospital or care facility.8. All storage listed in subsections (B)(4)(a) and (4)(b) shall be limited to areas classified as distribution centers within heavy industrial zones as listed in this code.

Nonconforming Use. All nonconforming storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or their use shall be discontinued or abated.

 

U.    Section 5601 Explosives and Fireworks-General amended Section 5601.2 to read:

 

5601.2 Permit Required, Explosive and Blasting Agents The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the City limits, except in areas zoned M-2 as such zone is defined in the zoning regulations of the city.

(Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.24.050 Appeals.
Whenever the fire code official disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief to the city council within thirty days from the date of the decision. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

 

15.24.060 New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
The city manager, the fire chief and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire prevention officer shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his or her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Ord. O2019-15 § 1)

Chapter 15.25 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
15.25.010 Adoption.
That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as “Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,” 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, to be cumulative with, and in addition to any other remedy provided by the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, or the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structure which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished, except as amended, deleted and/or added to by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.25.020 Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.
Section 205 of Chapter 2 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 205. In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this code and to hear appeals, there shall be a Board of Appeals, known as the Building Board of Appeals.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.25.030 Section 203 amended—Violations and penalties.
Section 203 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 203.1. No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sub lessee, or occupant, shall erect construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of this code or any order issued by the Building Official hereunder.

 

Section 203.2. Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant violating any provisions of this code shall be deemed a guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

Section 203.3. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

 

15.25.040 Section 301 amended—Definitions.
Section 203 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

A.    Building Department. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

B.     Building Official. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

C.     City. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

D.    Deputize. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

E.     Enforcing Agency. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

F.     Person. (See Section 15.04.020 for definition.)

G.    Building Code is the California Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted by the City of Manteca.

(Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.26 PERMIT RELATED FEES
15.26.010 Permit related fees.
A.    In the case of permits for the erection or construction of a new dwelling unit, commercial structures or industrial structures, the following fees shall be assessed. “Dwelling unit, commercial structures or industrial structures,” for purposes of permit fees and fire facility fees, means all that area covered by a common roof and, in the case of permitted detached structure, all the area covered by roofs.

Permit

Fees (Effective Jan. 1, 2019)

Government Building Facilities Use

 

Very Low-Density Residential

$4,737.81 per unit

Low-Density Residential

$4,737.81 per unit

Medium-Density Residential

$3,951.08 per unit

High-Density Residential

$3,555.85 per unit

Commercial Mixed-Use

$3,555.85 per unit

Major equipment purchase

$350.00 per unit

Fire Facility Fee

(Effective Feb. 4, 2017)

Residential

 

Single-Family

$0.28 per square foot

Multifamily

$0.34 per square foot

Non-Residential

 

Commercial

$0.21 per square foot

Office

$0.27 per square foot

Industrial

$0.09 per square foot

Assisted Living

$2,072.99 per bed

Mobile Home Parks/Modular/Campsites

$688.71 per unit

 

B.     For all mobile home parks, modular buildings and campsites where building square footage of a structure is not available, the fire facility fee shall be six hundred dollars per unit. “Unit,” as used in this subsection, means that space designed to be occupied by one self­contained (i.e., one mobile home, one modular building use or one campsite).

C.     All fire facility fees are due and payable at the time the property which is subject to a building permit has been determined by the building official or designee as ready for occupancy.

D.    The fire facility fee set forth in this section shall not apply to projects that hold valid vested tentative maps as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 1173 or persons who possess building permits issued prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 1173; for these projects and permit holders, the fee in existence prior to this amendment shall remain in effect.

E.     The government building facilities fee will remain at the above-noted fee through December 31, 2011. Effective January 1, 2012, the government building facilities fee will be adjusted to reflect the previous two years’ changes of the Twenty-City U.S. Average Engineering News-Record (ENR) Official Construction Cost Index. Thus, the government building facilities fee that will become effective January 1, 2012 shall be the amount assessed effective January 1, 2007, plus the ENR increase from January 1, 2010 to January 1, 2011, and the ENR increase from January 1, 2011 to January 1, 2012. In each subsequent year thereafter, the adjustment shall reflect the change in the Construction Cost Index from January one year to January the following year, and developer shall pay those fees in place at time payment is due. In no event shall the fees be less than in any previous year.

F.     The government building facilities major equipment purchase fees required by this section for a residential development shall be paid upon final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the required fee is not fully paid prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of any portion of the residential development encumbered thereby, the property owner, or lessee if the lessee’s interest appears of record, as a condition of issuance of the building permit, shall execute a “Development Fee Deferral Agreement and Notice of Lien with Power of Sale” to pay the fee or charge, or applicable portion thereof, within the time specified above. The contract shall be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fee. No certificate of occupancy for a dwelling unit within a residential development subject to this section will be issued unless and until the fees are paid in full. For purposes of this section, “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” shall be defined as those terms are defined in Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Memo dated 12/18/18; Ord. O2017-14 § 3; Ord. O2017-11 § 3; Memo dated 1/9/17; Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.27 SEWER CONNECTION ALLOCATION SYSTEM
15.27.010 Sewer connection allocation system.
No building permits shall be issued by the city which necessitate sewer connections or which, in the judgment of the director of public works, would customarily require or necessitate a sewer connection except in accordance with the allocation guidelines set by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.28 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
15.28.010 Street improvement required.
A.    The street area adjacent to all premises shall be improved at the expense of the property owner with curbs, gutters, sidewalk and street paving from gutter to existing paving or center of street, according to standards established by the city council, before the building permit for new construction or remodeling is issued. Engineering improvement plans shall be submitted to the public works department by the property owner and are subject to the approval by the city engineer.

B.     Completion of the improvements required by subsection A of this section may be deferred to coincide with the new construction or remodeling if, prior to the issuance of the building permit, the property owner enters into an agreement with the city requiring completion of said improvement prior to final inspection of the new construction or remodeling. Said agreement shall require the property owner to provide a performance bond in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the estimated cost of constructing such improvements. In lieu of such agreement, in the discretion of the city engineer, the property owner may enter into an agreement requiring the property owner to immediately pay the city the estimated cost of design and installation of street improvement.

C.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no property owner shall be required to install street improvement nor be required to enter into any agreement described where the city engineer certifies in writing that such street improvements will be the subject of a city­funded public improvement project within twelve months of the issuance of the building permit. The exception created by this subsection shall be deemed applicable to any new construction or remodeling commenced after December 1, 1990.

In the event that the city engineer determines that the installation of the improvements set forth in subsection A of this section should be deferred, then the following shall occur: prior to the issuance of a building permit, the city and the property owner shall enter into an agreement. The agreement shall provide, at the option of the city, that the property owner shall deposit cash with the city equal to the amount set by the city engineer as his or her estimate of the cost of design and installation of the deferred improvements, or the property owner shall grant a lien, in a form approved by the city, on the land subject to the property owner’s development in an amount equal to the cost of design and installation of the deferred improvements. The lien granted by the property owner shall be in addition to any other lien provided by law. The agreement required by this section shall further provide that it shall be binding on the property owner’s successors, heirs, beneficiaries, survivors and assigns.

D.    Driveways shall be removed and curb and sidewalk installed at the expense of the property owner when buildings or other obstructions are constructed, demolished or removed causing abandonment of those driveways.

E.     As used in this section, “new construction or remodeling” means laying of paving, sidewalk, construction of new structures, or renovation of existing structures where the cost thereof exceeds an amount equal to four times the cost of the required street improvements. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 15.29 POST DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
15.29.010 Scope.
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or man-made disaster. It further authorizes the public works department, building inspection division as well as authorized representatives, to post appropriate placards at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 1066 § 1, 1997)

 

15.29.020 Application of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures, of all occupancies, regulated by the city following any natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1066 § 1, 1997)

 

15.29.030 Definitions.
A.    Building Official. The individual invested with the responsibility for overseeing and enforcing applicable life safety codes, and building codes, laws, and statutes. The building official is charged with the administration of the building department, interpretation of code requirements, and direction of the code adoption process.

The building official, under the direction of the community development director is the individual who plans, coordinates and directs the operations and activities of the building department; implements city activities assuring compliance with building standards including plan check, inspection, and corrections to hazards; oversees and participates in inspections; oversees the review and approval of building plans and specifications; implements goals, policies, and procedures for the division.

The building official is responsible for the administration and enforcement of California Code of Regulations, Title 24, and other applicable codes in accordance with Health and Safety Code 18949, 17920, and California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 202.

Whenever the term “building official” or “building inspector” is used in the code, it means the chief building official in charge of the building safety division.

B.     Safety Assessment. A visual examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued occupancy is safe following a natural or man-made disaster. (Ord. 1516 § 9, 2013; Ord. 1066 § 1, 1997)

 

15.29.040 Placards.
A.    The following official placards shall be used to designate the condition of buildings or structures following a disaster:

1.     INSPECTED—LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED may be posted on any building or structure where no apparent hazard has been found. Placement of this placard does not mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

2.     RESTRICTED OR LIMITED ENTRY may be posted on each damaged building or structure where the damage has created a hazardous condition which justifies restricted occupancy. The building inspector who posts this placard will note in general terms the hazard created and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on occupancy.

3.     UNSAFE—DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY may be posted on each damaged building or structure such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life or health. Buildings or structures posted with this placard may be entered only after authorization in writing by a building inspector. Safety assessment teams are authorized to these buildings at any time. This placard shall not be used or considered as a demolition order. The inspector who posts this placard shall note in general terms damage encountered.

B.     Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, it shall not be removed, altered or covered until authorized by a building inspector. (Ord. 1066 § 1, 1997)

 

15.29.050 Violations.
Any violation of Article 15, Chapter 29 of this code is a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment to the provisions of Section 15.04.050. (Ord. 1066 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 15.30 POST DISASTER ABATEMENT
15.30.010 Intent.
This chapter establishes abatement criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the city council. (Ord. 1067 § 1, 1997)

 

15.30.020 Application of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city. (Ord. 1067 § 1, 1997)

 

15.30.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Event” means any occurrence which results in the declaration of a disaster by the city council, including but not limited to, wind storms, earthquakes, floods, and fire.

“Historic building or structure” means any building or structure registered with a federal, state, county, or city government, or the register of points of interest. Historic buildings and structures shall also include those buildings and structures within a recognized historic district.

“State Historic Preservation Officer (SHOP)” means the person appointed by the Governor, pursuant to Section 101(b)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, to administer the State Historic Preservation Program. (Ord. 1067 § 1, 1997)

 

15.30.040 Abatement criteria.
A.    Notice of Determination. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the building official shall serve a written notice of determination to each property owner as found on the latest available copy of the county assessor’s role. Said notice of determination shall be delivered by hand-delivery, telephone, telegram, facsimile or other reasonable means, and shall clearly indicate that the structure is a hazard and dangerous and that, as such, it constitutes a public nuisance. The notice shall set forth those factors which, in the opinion of the building official, make the structure a hazard and dangerous, and shall also include a directive from the building official of the specific action or actions to be taken by the property owner. The notice shall specify that within forty-eight hours from the time of issuance of the notice of determination, the owner or other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in said property shall abate the nuisance in accordance with the directives written in the notice of determination by the building official.

B.     Notice of Determination Exception. No prior notice shall be required, when the building official, after considering all the facts, determines, in writing, that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous, and that it must be abated immediately and that time and circumstances do not permit the giving of prior notice to the owner. In those cases where time and circumstances do not permit the city to give the owner notice prior to abatement, the building official may cause the nuisance to be abated by the city with city resources or city contractees.

C.     Appeal of Notice of Determination. A notice of determination delivered by the building official, that a building or structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and therefore must be abated, may be appealed by the property owner or any other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in said property. Such appeal must be made to the building official within forty-eight hours of delivery of such notice of determination by the building official. Such appeal shall be accompanied by a written hazard abatement plan signed by a state of California licensed engineer or architect stating why the engineer or architect feels the building or structure is not an imminent hazard or dangerous at this time. Such report shall include a recommendation by the engineer or architect as to what should and/or should not be done at this time. If the building official accepts the proposed hazard abatement plan in lieu of the notice of determination, the hazard abatement plan must be implemented within twenty-four hours of acceptance by the building official. If the building official accepts an engineer’s report and agrees there is no imminent hazard, the building official shall rescind in writing his or her former notice of determination.

Should the building official disagree with hazard abatement plan, or should the building official disagree with the engineer’s or architect’s report, a hearing shall be conducted within twenty-four hours by the city board of appeals.

D.    City Board of Building Appeals Hearing. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the right to call witnesses, submit evidence and to cross-examine the witnesses of the city. All witnesses shall be sworn.

A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording. Any relevant evidence may be submitted regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in the courts of this state.

At the close of this hearing, the board of appeals shall act to either uphold, overrule or modify the determination and order of the building official. The determination and order of the building official shall be upheld, unless the board of appeals finds, based upon the evidence in the record, that the building official erred in determining that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous. The decision of the board of appeals, with the reasons therefor, may be given orally on the record. If given orally, the decision shall be memorialized in writing and served upon the applicant within twenty-four hours of the time the oral decision is rendered.

If the board of appeals upholds the decision of the building official, the property owners of record shall be ordered to abate the public nuisance within the time set forth in the order. If the structure is determined not to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, the building official’s determination and order shall be vacated. The decision of the board of appeals shall be final on the date it is rendered.

E.     Hazard Abatement Plan. If a hazard abatement plan is approved by the building official, the owner or other interested party of record shall execute such plan within twenty-four hours of obtaining approval of the plan from the building official or designee. Within twenty-four hours of completion of the abatement work, the owner or other interested party of record shall provide the building official with a written certification that the public nuisance, as described in the building official’s notice of hazard, has been abated.

If the work performed pursuant to the hazard abatement plan amounts to temporary abatement, the owner or other party of record, prior to proceeding with permanent repairs, shall obtain required permits and file a damage assessment report with the building official. The damage assessment report shall be reviewed and approved by the building official before permanent repairs are performed.

F.     Failure to Perform. In those instances where the property owner or other interested party of record either does not respond to the building official’s notice of hazard or approved hazard abatement plan, responds untimely, or responds timely but fails to abate the public nuisance within the required time period, the imminent hazard and dangerous structure shall be subject to immediate abatement by the building official.

G.    Public Nuisance. All structures or portions thereof which, after inspection by an authorized city official, are determined to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, either to the public, occupants of the subject structure, or to any adjacent structures, are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by the owner in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 15.30.040.

H.    Suspension of Abatement Work. Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the building official is authorized to suspend abatement work by the city, or the city’s contractees, and to allow the property owner or other party of legal interest to complete the abatement work.

I.      Change of Status. When the conditions making a structure an imminent hazard and dangerous have been abated, the structure shall no longer be considered an imminent hazard and dangerous. However, if the abatement work is temporary in nature, as determined by the building official, the structure shall remain subject to the provisions of this chapter.

J.      If the owner of any building or structure has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or the owner’s representative, shall obtain a demolition permit. (Ord. 1067 § 1, 1997)

 

15.30.050 Hazard abatement of historic buildings or structures.
A.    Within ten days after the event, the building official shall notify the State Historic Preservation Officer that one of the following actions will be taken regarding any historic building or structure determined by the building official to represent an imminent hazard to the health or safety of the public, or to pose an imminent threat to the public right-of-way:

1.     Whenever possible, as determined by the building official, the building or structure may be braced or shored in such a manner as to mitigate the hazard to public health or safety or the hazard to the public right-of-way.

2.     Whenever bracing or shoring is determined to be an unreasonable alternative, the building official may cause the building or structure to be condemned and immediately demolished. Such condemnation and demolition may be performed in the interest of public health or safety without a condemnation hearing as required by Chapter 15.30 of this code.

B.     If, ten days after the event and less than thirty days after the event, an historic building or structure is determined by the building official to represent a hazard to the health or safety of the public or to pose a threat to the public right-of-way, the building official may initiate condemnation proceedings in accordance with Chapter 15.28, Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, of this code. The building official may also notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, of its intent to hold a condemnation hearing.

C.     If the building official and the owner of any historic building or structure agree that such a building or structure should be demolished, the building official shall submit a request to demolish to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. Said request shall include all substantiating data. (Ord. 1067 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 15.31 DISASTER REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
15.31.010 Intent.
This chapter establishes standards and regulations for the expeditious reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the city council. The chapter does not allow exemptions from the building, fire, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, other codes, or city ordinances. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.020 Application of provisions.
A.    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city following each disaster after a local emergency has been declared by the city council.

B.     The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the building official subject to an engineering evaluation as defined in Section 15.31.030. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Architect” means a person licensed by the state of California to practice architecture as prescribed by the state of California Business and Professions Code.

“Building official” is the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or duly authorized representative.

“Civil engineer” means a person registered by the state of California to practice civil engineering as prescribed by the state of California Business and Professions Code.

“Current code” means the edition of the California Building Code as published by the International Code Council as adopted by the city in accordance with operation of law pursuant to Section 18941.5 of the state of California Health and Safety Code. The edition to be applied shall be that edition in effect at the time of the declaration of a local emergency by the city council.

“Engineering evaluation” is an evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect retained by the owner of the building or structure. Engineering evaluations shall, at a minimum, contain recommendations for repair with appropriate opinion of construction cost for those repairs. All engineering evaluations shall include the engineer’s or architect’s stamp, wet-signature and license expiration date.

“Substantial structural damage” is a condition where:

1.     In any story, the vertical elements of the lateral-force-resisting system, have suffered damage such that the lateral load-carrying capacity of the structure in any direction has been reduced by more than twenty percent from its pre-damaged condition, or

2.     The capacity of any vertical gravity load-carrying component, or any group of such components, that supports more than thirty percent of the total area of the structure’s floor(s) and roof(s) has been reduced more than twenty percent from its pre-damaged condition, and the remaining capacity of such affected elements with respect to all dead and live loads is less than seventy-five percent of that required by the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.040 Repair criteria.
A.    Buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as the result of a disaster, except as otherwise noted, shall be repaired in accordance with the following criteria:

1.     When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion may be restored to the pre-disaster condition; except that when the damaged elements include suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling system shall be repaired with all bracing required by current code.

2.     When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent the replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements shall be repaired and/or brought into conformance with structural requirements of the current codes.

B.     For the purposes of this chapter, the following repair requirements are hereby added as a new Subsection 3403.5 to Section 3403 Additions, Alterations or Repair in the 2013 California Building Code (CBC):

 

3403.5.1 Repairs. Repairs of structural elements shall comply with this section.

3403.5.1.1 Seismic Evaluation and Design. Seismic evaluation and design of an existing building and its components shall be based on the following criteria:

3403.5.1.1.1 Evaluation and Design Procedures. The seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the building code, ASCE 31 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings (for evaluation only) or ASCE 41 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. The procedures contained in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code shall be permitted to be used as specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.3.

3403.5.1.1.2 CBC Level Seismic Forces. When seismic forces are required to meet the building code level, they shall be one of the following:

1.     100 percent of the values in the building code. The R factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the building code shall be the R factor specified for structural systems classified as “Ordinary” unless it can be demonstrated that the structural system satisfies the proportioning and detailing requirements for systems classified as “Intermediate” or “Special.”

2.     Forces corresponding to BSE-1 and BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Levels defined in ASCE 41. Where ASCE 41 is used, the corresponding performance levels shall be those shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2.

TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2

ASCE 41 and ASCE 31 PERFORMANCE LEVELS

OCCUPANCY CATEGORY (BASED ON IBC TABLE 1604.5)

PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 31 AND WITH ASCE 41 BSE-1 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL

PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 41 BSE-2 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL

I

Life Safety (LS)

Collapse Prevention (CP)

II

Life Safety (LS)

Collapse Prevention (CP)

III

Note (a)

Note (a)

IV

Immediate Occupancy (IO)

Life Safety (LS)

 

a.     Performance Levels for Occupancy Category III shall be taken as halfway between the performance levels specified for Occupancy Category II and Occupancy Category IV.

3403.5.1.1.3 Reduced CBC Level Seismic Forces. When seismic forces are permitted to meet reduced building code levels, they shall be one of the following:

1.     75 percent of the forces prescribed in the building code. The R factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the building code shall be the R factor as specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.2.

2.     In accordance with the applicable chapters in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code as specified in Items 2.1 through 2.5 below. Structures or portions of structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in Appendix A shall be deemed to comply with the requirements for reduced building code force levels.

2.1.  The seismic evaluation and design of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A1.

2.2.  Seismic evaluation and design of the wall anchorage system in reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A2.

2.3.  Seismic evaluation and design of cripple walls and sill plate anchorage in residential buildings of light-frame wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A3.

2.4.  Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-front wall conditions in multiunit residential buildings of wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A4.

2.5.  Seismic evaluation and design of concrete buildings and concrete with masonry infill buildings in all Occupancy Categories are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A5.

3.     In accordance with ASCE 31 based on the applicable performance level as shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2.

4.     Those associated with the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level defined in ASCE 41 and the performance level as shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2. Where ASCE 41 is used, the design spectral response acceleration parameters Sxs and Sx1 shall not be taken less than 75 percent of the respective design spectral response acceleration parameters SDS and SD1 defined by the California Building Code and its reference standards.

3403.5.1.2 Wind Design. Wind design of existing buildings shall be based on the procedures specified in the building code.

3403.5.2 Repairs to Damaged Buildings. Repairs to damaged buildings shall comply with this section.

3403.5.2.1 Unsafe Conditions. Regardless of the extent of structural damage, unsafe conditions shall be eliminated.

3403.5.2.2 Substantial Structural Damage to Vertical Elements of the Lateral-Force-Resisting System. A building that has sustained substantial structural damage to the vertical elements of its lateral-force-resisting system shall be evaluated and repaired in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 3403.5.2.2.1 through 3403.5.2.2.3.

3403.5.2.2.1 Evaluation. The building shall be evaluated by a registered design professional, and the evaluation findings shall be submitted to the code official. The evaluation shall establish whether the damaged building, if repaired to its pre-damage state, would comply with the provisions of the building code. Wind forces for this evaluation shall be those prescribed in the building code. Seismic forces for this evaluation are permitted to be the reduced level seismic forces specified in Code Section 3403.5.1.1.3.

3403.5.2.2.2 Extent of Repair for Compliant Buildings. If the evaluation establishes compliance of the pre-damage building in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1, then repairs shall be permitted that restore the building to its pre-damage state, using materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage.

3403.5.2.2.3 Extent of Repair for Non-Compliant Buildings. If the evaluation does not establish compliance of the pre-damage building in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1, then the building shall be rehabilitated to comply with applicable provisions of the building code for load combinations including wind or seismic forces. The wind design level for the repair shall be as required by the building code in effect at the time of original construction unless the damage was caused by wind, in which case the design level shall be as required by the code in effect at the time of original construction or as required by the building code, whichever is greater. Seismic forces for this rehabilitation design shall be those required for the design of the pre-damaged building, but not less than the reduced level seismic forces specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.3. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

3403.5.2.3 Substantial Structural Damage to Vertical Load-Carrying Components. Vertical load-carrying components that have sustained substantial structural damage shall be rehabilitated to comply with the applicable provisions for dead and live loads in the building code. Undamaged vertical load-carrying components that receive dead or live loads from rehabilitated components shall also be rehabilitated to carry the design loads of the rehabilitation design. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

3403.5.2.3.1 Lateral Force-Resisting Elements. Regardless of the level of damage to vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system, if substantial structural damage to vertical load-carrying components was caused primarily by wind or seismic effects, then the building shall be evaluated in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.1 and, if non-compliant, rehabilitated in accordance with Section 3403.5.2.2.3.

3403.5.2.4 Less than Substantial Structural Damage. For damage less than substantial structural damage, repairs shall be allowed that restore the building to its pre-damage state, using materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage. New structural members and connections used for this repair shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

3403.5.3 Referenced Standards.

ASCE 31-03, Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings, California Building Code 3403.5.1.1.1, TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2, 3403.5.1.1.3.

ASCE 41-06, Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings, California Building Code, 3403.5.1.1.1, 3403.5.1.1.2, TABLE 3403.5.1.1.2, 3403.5.1.1.3.

(Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.050 Repair criteria for chimneys.
A.    All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 21 of the California Building Code. Damaged portions of chimneys shall be removed in accordance with the following criteria:

1.     When the damaged portion of the chimney is located between the roof line and the top of the chimney, the damaged portion may be removed to the roof line provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition. The reconstruction portion of the chimney shall be braced to the roof structure using an approved method.

2.     Of a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the chimney is below the roof line or the damaged portion extends from above the roof line to below the roof line, the chimney may be removed to the top of the firebox.

 

3.     For a multistory structure, the damaged portion of the chimney shall be removed from the top to a floor line where anchorage is found.

4.     In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire chimney and firebox shall be removed to the foundation. If the foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney may be reconstructed using the existing foundation. If the foundation has been damaged, the foundation shall be removed and replaced.

B.     Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all anchorage required by Chapter 21 of the California Building Code, alternate systems may be used in accordance with the alternate methods and materials provisions of the California Building Code when approved by the Building Official.

C.     Where the portion of the chimney extending above the roof line exceeds two times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the roof line shall be braced to the roof structure using an approved method. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.060 Repair criteria for historic buildings or structures.
A.    Buildings or structures which are included on a national, state, or local register for historic places or which are qualifying structures within a recognized historic district, which have been damaged as a result of a disaster, shall have an engineering evaluation performed.

B.     The minimum criteria for repair shall be as included in Section 15.31.040, Repair criteria, with due consideration given to the historical rating and nature of the structures. Additional standards and criteria, as noted in Part 8, Title 24, California Code shall apply.

C.     Where conflicts exists between the standards contained herein and the state of California Historic Building Code, the Historic Building Code shall govern. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

 

15.31.070 Repair criteria for unreinforced masonry buildings and structures.
All damaged buildings determined to be bearing wall buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry shall be repaired and strengthened to fully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1532 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 15.32 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
15.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and establishing criteria for conversion of multiple-family rental housing or condominiums, community apartments or stock cooperatives. The chapter is also intended to:

A.    Implement the housing element of the Manteca general plan by providing a complete range of housing opportunities for all economic segments of the population; and providing that balance in neighborhoods whereby housing supplies do differ;

B.     Reduce and avoid the impact of such conversions on long-term residents, senior citizens, and families with school-age children who, in some instances, may be required to relocate during a condominium conversion process, by providing an appropriate notification procedure for such relocation;

C.     Assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to physical condition of a housing unit being offered for purchase;

D.    Insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety within the community, and is consistent with overall housing goals of Manteca;

E.     Insure a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing in Manteca and a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing;

F.     Maintain the supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons and families. (Prior code §7B-1)

 

15.32.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

 

A.    “Apartment” means a room or group of rooms in a building rented or leased to a tenant and constituting five or more dwelling units. For the purpose of this definition, “building” means one or more buildings on one or more contiguous lots or parcels under common ownership, and the total contiguous number of dwelling units in all of such buildings shall be used to determine the number of dwelling units subject to the requirements of this chapter.

B.     “Community apartment project” means a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon.

C.     “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in a space in a residential building on such real property, such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

D.    “Condominium project” means the division of real property to create five or more condominiums.

E.     “Conversion” means a change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing attached structures to that defined as a community housing or apartment project; all regardless of the present or prior use of such land and structures, and whether substantial improvements have been made to such structures. Conversion shall not include a structure for which a condominium plan has been recorded in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Civil Code.

F.     “Fixed income” means any person or family that is limited to a fixed income level through a disability, handicap, retirement, or some other means which restricts a person(s) from gainful employment.

G.    “Stock cooperative” means a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right to occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. (Prior code §7B-2)

 

15.32.030 Conversion—Notice.
Prior to filing a final map or parcel map for a conversion, the subdivider shall have notified all tenants of the building to be converted, individually and in writing, all in accord with Government Code Section(s) 66427.1 et seq., or, as amended, which specifically states the following:

A.    Tenant notification shall have taken place at least sixty days prior to filing of the tentative map or parcel map;

B.     All tenants shall be given one hundred and eighty days written notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion proposal; and

C.     Each tenant shall be given an exclusive right of unit purchase pursuant to the same or more favorable terms and conditions offered to the general public, such purchase right to run for a period of not less than ninety days from the issuance date of the subdivision public report. (Prior code §7B-3)

 

15.32.040 Physical facilities report.
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map, and conditional use permit application (See Section 15.32.050). The report shall be prepared by a licensed California architect or registered civil or structural engineer. It shall detail the condition and estimate the useful life of all elements of the existing buildings and other structures involved in the project including, but not limited to, the following:

A.    The structural condition of roofs, foundations, exterior and interior paint, floor coverings, built-in appliances, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, fire protection, and heating and air conditioning systems; also, swimming pools, parking lots, driveways, walks and other paved areas;

B.     The physical elements plan shall also include costs and a schedule for replacement of any elements which so not meet current city standards or have useful life of less than five years;

C.     A project site unit development plan shall be included which depicts exterior boundaries and dimensions of the site; adjacent street names and location; typical building evaluations of residential and other structures; paved area, landscaped areas, open spaces, walls or fences, and recreational facilities; and utilities, exterior lighting, directional signs and other common facilities;

D.    A structural pest report from an approved licensed operator on each structure and unit;

E.     A building history report which includes the date of all project construction elements; a statement describing the project use or uses since construction; and a date and description of each structural repair or renovation requiring an expenditure of one thousand dollars or more;

F.     A statement regarding the current ownership of all improvements and underlying property. (Prior code §7B-4)

 

15.32.050 Permit requirements.
No condominium conversion project shall be permitted until a conditional use permit has been applied for and approved by the planning commission and city council pursuant to the zoning ordinance. Additionally, the following use permit application requirements shall be administered:

A.    The physical facilities element report shall remain on file with the planning department for review by any interested person prior to transmittal to the planning commission;

B.     A copy of the proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions to be applied to the project and homeowner association by-laws shall be on file;

C.     A report on existing tenancy in the rental apartment units to be converted which includes tenant name and address; size and rental rate of each unit as well as number of units occupied under any federal or state assistance program (Section 8, etc.) shall be submitted;

D.    The number of families, by category, who occupy units on a fixed income, have full-time college students or children, or handicapped individuals (as further defined in government Code Section 22511.5) residing in the home shall be shown. (Prior code §7B-5)

 

15.32.060 Conversion standards.
To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission shall not approve a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 15.32.050 which does not comply with the following physical standards, unless the standards cannot be reasonably complied with by the applicant and the planning commission has waived or modified the standards:

A.    The project shall conform to the applicable and adopted building and fire related codes and standards found in Chapters 15.04 and 15.24, respectively of this code. Exception may be made if discrepancies are specifically listed together with mitigation measures satisfactory to the Manteca building inspection department.

B.     Each living unit shall be provided with approved smoke detectors conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards.

C.     All drainage shall be provided to city standards and approved by the city engineer.

D.    Sound transmission shall meet standards established in Article 4 of Title 25, California Administrative Code. The developer shall provide a detailed report prepared by certified acoustical experts stating the existing conditions and whether each unit meets current sound transmission standards.

E.     Separate meters for gas and electricity shall be provided for each unit.

F.     City water and sanitary sewers shall be provided to the property of each project and individual shut-off valves and necessary on-site water lines under private ownership shall be provided. The project shall be responsible for payment for sewer and water charges to the city.

G.    Exterior and interior construction shall be refurbished to high degree of quality and safety.

H.    Declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include a statement requiring each individual owner and the owner’s association to comply with all building, fire, and safety codes enforced by the city building and fire department.

I.      A one-year unconditional consumer or buyer protection warranty guaranteeing the repair or replacement of structural deficiencies and all fixed appliances.

J.      All improvements identified and determined as necessary in the engineering report shall be replaced or repaired within two years prior to sale of any unit.

K.    A sinking fund shall be established by the developer to cover all projected maintenance, utilities or replacements projected for the first year. This sinking fund shall be renewed annually in the Homeowners Association budget under such requirements as specified in the Homeowners Association documents. (Prior code §7B-6)

 

15.32.070 Interior private streets.
A.    Streets and drives shall be kept in a maintained condition with an equivalent of two-inch type a.c. paving over compacted native soil.

B.     Minimum clear height and width of interior streets and drives shall be as required by the U.F.C.

C.     Minimum curb radii shall meet the requirements of the fire department.

D.    Streets shall be identified as private streets and drives and posted for no parking when necessary.

E.     Dead-end streets shall provide turn-around space as required by the fire chief and city engineer. (Prior code §7B-7)

 

15.32.080 Parking spaces—Lot area.
A.    Parking lots shall be paved with an equivalent of two inches type a.c. paving over compacted native soil.

B.     Parking shall be provided at a minimum of one and one-half spaces per unit.

C.     Parking spaces and maneuvering area shall be designed in accordance with city regulations. (Prior code §7B-8)

 

15.32.090 Physical requirements.
A.    Screened garbage and rubbish collection facilities shall be provided sufficient to serve all units and located for convenience to users and the city refuse vehicles.

B.     Pedestrian pathways shall interconnect parking areas to individual units.

C.     Lighting shall be provided in accordance with city codes.

D.    Sewer collection system as designed or redesigned shall be in accordance with city codes.

E.     Landscaping and recreation facilities, including private patios, shall be provided at a minimum of thirty percent of total project lot coverage.

F.     A laundry area shall be provided for each unit; or if common laundry facilities are provided, such facilities shall consist of an adequate number of automatic washers and dryers.

G.    Unit numbers and/or master directories shall be provided in accordance with city house-numbering requirements. (Prior code §7B-9)

 

15.32.100 Public hearing.
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to review all conditional use permit applications for conversions pursuant to this chapter. As well, the city council shall hold a subsequent public hearing on all conversion applications approved by the planning commission, and all denied applications appealed to the city council. Notice of the hearings shall be provided by the city pursuant to Section 26.500 of the zoning ordinance and to all tenants of the project at least ten days prior to the public hearing date. (Prior code §7B-10)

 

15.32.110 Findings.
The planning commission or the city council shall not approve any application for conversion of units unless the planning commission and city council find that:

A.    The conditional use permit application is complete and all provisions of this chapter are met.

B.     The project is not detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.

C.     The project is consistent with the general plan housing element.

D.    Any special fee and bond requirements pursuant to this chapter are paid for and furnished to the city of Manteca respectively.

E.     Overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion project shall achieve a high degree of appearance, safety, and quality.

F.     A minimum of twelve units is being considered for conversion.

G.    The rental vacancy rate has been evaluated as well as the need for available residential ownership.

H.    Converted units have been compared with the annual number of apartment units constructed.

I.      Conversion shall not adversely affect the supply of adequate low-moderate income housing.

J.      Any opposition by project tenants to the conversion proposal has been given fair consideration.

K.    A relocation program will not force the displacement of families with children, at home; senior tenants on fixed income; handicapped tenants; full-time students; or other similar described family groups; but, provide for an optional lifelong rental lease program, whereby, rental rates can only be adjusted in accord with annual changes in the consumer price index.

L.     Only at the developer’s discretion can a tenant’s rental rights to be protected after the issuance of the sixty-day notice to file a tentative map, if the rental rate agreement was consummated after the notice. This would apply to rent increases, purchase priority, and relocation benefits that do not exceed state law.

M.    Each nonpurchasing tent, not in default under the obligations of the unit occupancy rental agreement or lease, shall be given one hundred eighty days written notice of intention to convert, by the developer, prior to termination of tenancy to locate suitable replacement housing.

N.    Diverse forms of finance acquisition for unit purchase shall be made available.

O.    The covenant, conditions, and restrictions are reviewed by the city attorney, and approved by the city council.

P.     Relocation payment to displaced tenants shall be provided at a rate of not less than one month’s rental reimbursement; only, if such tenant(s) rental rate history is in good standing at time of sixty-day notice and tenant is still renting when final subdivision map is filed. A displaced tenant is one who is given a notice to vacate his or her unit due to the conversion program. (Prior code §7B-11)

 

15.32.120 Additional requirements.
The planning commission or city council may impose any additional requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, and the owner and applicant shall comply with all such conditions imposed. (Prior code §7B-12)

 

15.32.130 Report requirement.
Following conditional use permit action by the planning commission, a report on the project conversion shall be transmitted to the city council in writing by the community development director. (Prior code §7B-13)

 

15.32.140 Fees.
The city council by resolution shall establish fees for processing applications for conversion. (Prior code §7B-14)

 

15.32.150 Requirements modification.
The requirements of this chapter may be modified by the planning commission or the city council when the following findings can be made based on evidence presented at the hearing:

A.    There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property; or

B.     The unique nature of the particular project requires design innovations or carry out the intent of this chapter; and

C.     The city determines in its sole discretion, that the benefits to the community from the conversion outweigh the detriments; and

D.    The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, welfare or safety or be injurious to other property in the surrounding area. (Prior code §7B-15)

Chapter 15.36 BUILDING NUMBERING
15.36.010 Required.
All erections or other property abutting on any street or avenue shall be numbered. (Prior code § 17-9)

 

15.36.020 Base lines.
Yosemite Avenue shall constitute the base line for all numbering on the streets running north and south, and Main Street shall constitute the base line for all numbering on the streets running east and west. (Prior code § 17-10)

 

15.36.030 Numbering system.
Erections fronting streets from the east and fronting streets from the south shall bear even numbers in their last figure. Erections fronting streets from the west and from the north shall bear off numbers in their last figure. Erections fronting streets running north and south shall be numbered from the base line, such numbers shall be “100” at the base line and not to exceed the number “199” at the end of the first block either north or south of the base line, “200” at the beginning and not to exceed the number “299” at the end of the second block, either north or south of the base line. Such system shall be followed in numbering all of the streets running north and south in the city. Erections fronting streets running east and west shall be numbered from the base line, such numbers shall be “100” at the base line and not to exceed the number “199” at the end of the first block either east or west of the base line, “200” at the beginning and not to exceed the number “299” at the end of the second block, either east or west of the base line. Such system shall be followed in numbering all of the streets running east and west in the city. Where streets intersect but do not cross, the building official shall determine whether or not the numbers shall run in each such case to a street intersecting on both sides of the street being numbered. Any blocks located upon streets which do not intersect the base lines shall bear the hundred number of the corresponding block nearest the same location, which does intersect the base line. In each block each twenty-five feet of frontage shall be deemed the unit for determining the last figure of the number to be used. From the corner of each block nearest its respective base line each twenty-five feet of frontage shall be given a number except where lots vary from twenty-five feet in width, such lots shall be numbered to conform to the size of the lot. Fractions may be used if necessary to designate a building located on a fractional part of a twenty-five foot frontage. (Prior code § 17-11)

 

15.36.040 Street designation.
All lots or parts of lots, houses, buildings and erections located on those portions of any street extending north and south and being north of the Yosemite Avenue base line shall be known and designated as “North” and all south of the Yosemite Avenue base line shall be known and designated as “South,” and all located on those portions of any street extending east and west, and being east of the Main Street base line shall be known and designated as “East” and all west of the Main Street base line shall be known and designated as “West.” The prefixes shall be placed before the proper name of the street as “West __________ Street,” or “North __________ Street.” (Prior code § 17-12)

 

15.36.050 Number determination.
In case of doubt or where a question arises as to the proper number to be assigned to any lot or building, the building official shall decide the question and fix the number of such lot or building. (Prior code § 17-13)

 

15.36.060 Affixing numbers.
On buildings now or hereafter erected and fronting on any street or alley shall be conspicuously placed the number as provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 17-14)

 

15.36.070 Number style.
The number plate, placed upon any building shall be metal or wood, or the number may be painted on the front of the building, door, post, transom, or other place, or the number plate may be an electrically lighted fixture approved by the building official. The numbers shall be at least three inches in height and in such form and style as may be easily seen from the street. (Prior code § 17-15)

 

15.36.080 Number assignment.
In the case of a building or structure, the construction of which is commenced hereafter, the building official at the time he or she issues a building permit therefor shall assign to such building or structure the proper number for the same. (Prior code § 17-16)

 

15.36.090 Duty to affix number.
If the owner or lessee of any building shall fail, refuse or neglect to place the number or replace it when necessary the building official may cause a notice to be personally served on such owner or lessee or mailed by registered mail to his or her last known address, ordering him to place or replace the number. Such owner or lessee shall comply with such notice within ten days from the date of the service. (Prior code § 17-17)

Chapter 15.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
15.40.010 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application:

A.    “Areas of special flood hazard” means the land within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This land is identified as Zone A on the official map.

B.     “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

C.     “Flood” means a temporary rise in stream’s flow or stage which results in water overflowing its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the channel or an unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff or surface waters from any source.

D.    “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.

E.     “Habitable floor” means any floor used for living which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.

F.     “Mobile home” means as structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.

G.    “Mobile home park (subdivision)” or “mobile home subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land which has been divided into two or more lots for rent or sale and the placement of mobile homes.

H.    “Regulatory flood elevation” means the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.

I.      “Structure” means a walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground, including but with limitation to buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile homes and other similar uses.

J.      “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations as well as structures listed in National or State Registers of Historic Places.

K.    “One-hundred-year flood” means the condition of flooding having one percent chance of annual occurrence. (Prior code §9A-1)

 

15.40.020 Community development director—Responsibilities.
The community development director has these added responsibilities and is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this floodplain management chapter and all other ordinances of the city now in force or hereafter adopted, relating to zoning, subdivision or building codes. (Prior code §9A-2)

 

15.40.030 Community development director—Appointment.
The community development director shall be appointed to these additional responsibilities by resolution of the city council and his or her appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. During temporary absences or disability of the community development director, the governing body of the city shall designate an acting community development director. (Prior code §9A-3)

 

15.40.040 Development permit—Application.
A.    Permits Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge or improve any building or structure in the city or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate development permit for each such building or structure.

B.     Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:

1.     Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

2.     Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;

3.     Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;

4.     Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction;

5.     Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;

6.     Within designated flood-prone areas, be accompanied by elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) or in the case of floodproofed nonresidential structures, the elevation to which it has been floodproofed. Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the building section of the public works department;

7.     Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the public works, planning or fire departments.

(Prior code §9A-4)

 

15.40.050 Development permit—Review.
The community development director or his or her appointee shall review all development permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by federal or state law. (Prior code §9A-5)

 

15.40.060 Site requirements.
The community development director or his or her appointee, in reviewing all applications for new construction, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of mobile homes and other development(s), as defined in Section 15.40.010, will:

A.    Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory flood elevation data from federal, state or other sources, until such other data is provided by the Federal Insurance Administration in a flood insurance study, and require the following performance standards be met:

1.     The first-floor elevation (to include basement) of new residential structures, be elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation,

2.     The first-floor elevation (to include basement) of nonresidential structures be elevated or floodproofed to or above the regulatory flood elevation;

B.     Require the use of construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage;

C.     Require the use of construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage;

D.    Be designed or anchored to prevent the flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure or portions of the structure due to flooding;

E.     Assure that in regard to mobile homes, specific anchoring requirements are:

1.     Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home with two additional ties per side at the intermediate locations and mobile homes less than fifty feet long requiring one additional tie per side,

2.     Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than fifty feet long requiring four additional ties per side,

3.     All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred pounds,

4.     Any additions to mobile homes be similarly anchored.

(Prior code §9A-6)

 

15.40.070 Subdivision application—Review by governing body.
The governing body of the city shall review all subdivision applications and shall make findings of fact and assure that:

A.    All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

B.     Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

C.     All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage. (Prior code §9A7)

 

15.40.080 New water and sewer requirements.
New and replacement water and sewer systems shall be constructed to eliminate or minimize infiltration by, or discharged into, floodwaters. Moreover, on-site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding. (Prior code §9A-8)

 

15.40.090 Flood-carrying capacity—Maintenance.
The governing body of the city will insure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. The city will notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the administrator. Moreover, the city will work with appropriate state and federal agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. (Prior code §9A-9)

 

15.40.100 Conflicting provisions.
This chapter shall take precedence over conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances. The city council may, from time to time, amend this chapter to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation as published in the Federal Register, Volume 41, Number 207, dated October 26, 1986. (Prior code §9A-10)

Chapter 15.44 NEGLECTED VACANT STRUCTURE
15.44.010 Neglected vacant structure.
A neglected vacant structure is a structure which is vacant and is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.020 Vacant structure.
A.    “Vacant structure” means a residential or commercial building which has remained unoccupied for a period of more than thirty days. The definition includes manufactured housing or mobile homes located in a mobile home park.

B.     A structure not deemed to be vacant for purposes of this chapter if any of the following circumstances exist:

1.     Any unit or portion of the structure is occupied;

2.     Any other structure on the same lot is occupied;

3.     Construction or alteration is in progress pursuant to a valid, unexpired building permit.

(Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.030 Director.
For purposes of this chapter, “director” means the director of public works or the police chief. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.040 Compliance required.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person who owns, controls, or is the responsible agent of a vacant structure to maintain, or cause or permit the maintenance of the vacant structure in a neglected condition. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.050 Public nuisance.
A neglected vacant structure shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.060 Structural and building standards.
A.    All vacant structures shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition.

B.     All electrical, natural gas, sanitary and plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a condition which does not create a hazard to public health or safety. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.070 Fire safety.
A.    All vacant structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds which may constitute a fire hazard.

B.     No vacant structure or portion thereof shall be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard.

C.     Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant structures shall either be removed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes or ordinances. If heating equipment is removed, any fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.080 Security standards.
A.    All vacant structures shall be maintained in a way which secures it from any unauthorized entry.

B.     The owner or responsible agent of a vacant structure which has suffered and unauthorized entry must provide security which meets the following minimum standards:

1.     All windows and sliding doors shall provide either intact glazing or boarded as set forth in the specifications on file with the Manteca police department;

2.     Doors and service openings with thresholds located ten feet or less above the grade, stairway, landing, ramp, porch, roof or similarly accessible area shall provide resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a closed single panel or hollow core door one and three-eighths inches thick equipped with a half-inch throw deadbolt or boarded as set forth in the specifications on file with the Manteca police department;

3.     Exterior doors, if openable, may be closed from the interior of the structure by toe nailing them to the door frame using 10D or 16D galvanized nails;

4.     There shall be at least one operable door into each structure and into each housing unit. If an existing door is operable, it may be used and secured with a suitable lock such as a hasp and padlock or a one-half inch deadbolt or deadlatch;

 

5.     All locks shall be kept locked. When a door cannot be made operable, a door shall be constructed of three-quarter inch CDX plywood and shall be equipped with a lock as described above.

(Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.090 Debris removal.
All vacant structures including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.100 Appearance.
A.    All vacant structures must be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti.

B.     All exterior surfaces, including any boarded windows or doors shall be applied with sufficient paint, siding, stucco or other finishes, in the same color or similar color as the adjoining areas, to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation.

C.     The exterior of the vacant structure property, including all landscaping, shall be kept in such condition as not to create the appearance of an unsecured, unoccupied structure or other hazard to public safety. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.110 Summary abatement (immediate or emergency need).
A.    Summary abatement shall be executed when the enforcement official determines that the public nuisance constitutes an immediate and/or imminent peril to public health, safety or general welfare.

B.     Summary abatement is the abatement of the nuisance by the city, or a contractor of the city, by removal, demolition, repair or other acts with or without notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property. The abatement shall be at the expense of the person causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance or the owner of the property on which it is occurring and shall constitute a lien against the property. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

 

15.44.120 Abatement (nonemergency).
If the nuisance is of a nonemergency nature, and the majority of the city council concurs during open session of a noticed public meeting that the nuisance violates this chapter the nuisance may be abated as set forth in Section 17.53.030 et seq. of this code. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 15.60 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
15.60.010 Definitions.
A.    Building Department. Whenever the term “building department” or “building safety division” is used in this code it means the city of Manteca building safety division.

B.     Building Official. The individual invested with the responsibility for overseeing and enforcing applicable life safety codes, and building codes, laws, and statutes. The building official is charged with the administration of the building department, interpretation of code requirements, and direction of the code adoption process.

The building official, under the direction of the community development director is the individual who plans, coordinates and directs the operations and activities of the building department; implements city activities assuring compliance with building standards including plan check, inspection, and corrections to hazards; oversees and participates in inspections; oversees the review and approval of building plans and specifications; implements goals, policies, and procedures for the division.

The building official is responsible for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of California Code of Regulations, Title 24, and other applicable codes in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 18949 and 17920, and California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Section 202.

Whenever the term “building official” or “building inspector” is used in the code, it means the chief building official in charge of the building safety division.

C.     City. Whenever the term “municipality” or “city” is used, it means the city of Manteca.

D.    Electronic Submittal. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.     E-mail;

2.     Facsimile;

3.     The Internet.

E.     Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System. “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

F.     “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

 

15.60.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The city through this chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing barriers and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

 

15.60.030 Applicability.
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

 

15.60.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards, regulations, codes, and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

 

15.60.050 Duties of the building department and building official.
A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

C.     The electronic signature of an applicant, engineer, architect, or contractor shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D.    Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The checklist shall be published on the city’s Internet website. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

 

15.60.060 Application, permit, and inspection requirements.
A.    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

1.     Verify satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

2.     At the applicant’s cost, use standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

B.     For a project complying with the checklist for a small residential rooftop solar energy system the applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building division by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together with the required permit processing and inspection fees.

C.     An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

D.    Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits and/or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop solar energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider after requesting and obtaining a final inspection and receiving final approval on the inspection record.

E.     For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. Also, subsequent inspections, after the first, shall be charged a reasonable inspection fee as determined by the building official in accordance with the currently adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 15.62 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING
15.62.010 Permitting procedures.
Electric vehicle charging stations, which qualify for expedited permit processing pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.7, shall be subject to the administrative permitting procedures set forth in the city’s Electric Vehicle Charging Station Permit Expediting Ordinance. (O2017-16 § 2)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Part I. Authority and Purpose
Part II. Standards and Procedures for Division of Real Property
Part III. Dedications, Reservations, and Improvements
Part IV. Enforcement and Penalties
Part V. Definitions

Part I. Authority and Purpose
Chapter 16.01 AUTHORITY, PURPOSES AND EFFECT
16.01.010 Citation.
This title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the “Land Division Ordinance of the City of Manteca.” (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.020 Authority.
Authority for this title is found in Title 7, Division 2 of the California Government Code commencing with Section 66410, hereinafter referred to as the “Subdivision Map Act.” The Subdivision Map Act is hereby incorporated by reference into this title. The design, improvement and survey data for land divisions, the form and content of tentative parcel, parcel, tentative subdivision and final maps, and the procedures to be followed in securing official approval shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the additional provisions of this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.030 Purposes of this title.
The land division ordinance of the city is adopted to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare through the orderly regulation of the division of real property in the city. Further, the purposes of the ordinance codified in this title are to:

A.    Provide the economic and social advantages resulting from orderly land division;

B.     Encourage and guide development consistent with the city general plan;

C.     Provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design so as to be usable for their intended purposes;

D.    Provide for the preservation of environmental assets and natural resources, including land, water, air, minerals, vegetation, wildlife, silence, historic or aesthetic sites and open space; and

E.     Insure provision of adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.040 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all divisions of real property, including the initial design and improvement of common interest developments, whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations or organizations; by the state or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any county or city including the City of Manteca; or by any authority or public entity organized under the laws of the state. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this title only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the city.

B.     The provisions of this title as it may be subsequently amended, shall not apply to any division of real property, the tentative map for which was submitted prior to the effective date of this title, provided that the submitted application and tentative map for such land division was complete prior to such effective date of this title. With respect to those tentative maps to which this title does not apply, the affected provisions of the chapter prior to its amendment shall continue to apply, including but not limited to those cases where an extension of time for recordation of such land division map was granted.

C.     The provisions of this title shall not apply to those actions specifically exempted or excluded by any provision of the subdivision map act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.050 Development review committee.
A.    Establishment and Membership Committee. There is established a development review committee. The development review committee shall be composed of the director of planning, the fire chief, the city engineer and the police chief, or their designated representatives. The city council may also appoint the head of any other city department or agency to membership on such committee. The director of planning or his or her designee shall act as chair of the committee. In the absence of both, the committee shall elect a temporary chairperson. By acting as chairperson, a member shall not be disqualified to vote.

B.     Powers and Duties of the Committee. The development review committee shall have the following powers and duties:

1.     Adopt rules for its proceedings;

2.     Conduct meetings scheduled as needed and conduct special meetings at such times and in accordance with such procedures as the committee may determine;

3.     Review, discuss and make recommendations on all matters which pertain to study maps, tentative parcel maps and tentative subdivision maps;

4.     Provide the subdivider and the head of any city department or other public agency a reasonable opportunity to present any relevant matter to the committee;

5.     As permitted by law, require the subdivider to furnish additional information and documents and make recommendations with respect to the form of the map deemed necessary for proper consideration of the tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map and any action or recommendation which may appear necessary with respect thereto; and

6.     Forward its recommendations to the city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, in a timely manner after review by the committee has been completed. Such recommendations shall be accompanied by any written dissenting or minority report of any city official presented to the committee, if the responsible official requests such report be forwarded. Preparation of a minority report shall be the sole responsibility of the dissenting committee member.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.060 Compliance with this title.
A.    It is unlawful to subdivide or develop any parcel of land in a manner that does not strictly conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), this title, the City of Manteca Municipal Code, the City of Manteca General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

B.     No department, official, or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits subject to the requirements of this title shall issue a permit in conflict with the provisions of this title; any permit issued in conflict with any provision of this title shall be null and void. Further, no permit shall be issued by any department, official or employee of the city for any lot or use subject to the requirements of this title on a parcel of land where the department, official or employee is aware that a violation of this title exists. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.070 Violations of this title.
Any person violating any provision of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.) or of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law under Chapter 16.25 of this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.080 Relationship to other regulations and requirements.
The provisions of this title and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this title shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the city council, the fire department, the county health department, the regional water quality control council, the county air pollution control district the city public works department, the city water agency or any other local, state or federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development regulated by this title. All uses and development regulated by this title shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.01.090 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council declares that it would have passed this title, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any or one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

Part II. Standards and Procedures for Division of Real Property
Chapter 16.03 MAPS REQUIRED
16.03.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to set forth basic requirements for tentative, final and parcel maps. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex A (part), 1992)

 

16.03.020 Divisions of land—Five or more parcels.
Except as otherwise provided in the Subdivision Map Act, a tentative subdivision map and final map shall be required or divisions of land into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more unit. The preparation, review and approval of these maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.03.030 Divisions of land—Four or fewer parcels.
A tentative parcel map and a parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or fewer parcels for which the Subdivision Map Act requires a parcel map, and for all other land divisions for which the Subdivision Map Act requires a parcel map, unless the requirement for a parcel map is waived pursuant to this title, in which case neither a tentative parcel map nor a parcel map shall be required. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.04 IMPROVEMENT DEDICATIONS
16.04.010 Improvement requirement authority.
The city may, by resolution, require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of a subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, length or number for the benefit of the property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. (Ord. 824 § 2(part), 1989)

 

16.04.020 Reimbursement agreement.
In the event of the installation of improvements required by the city pursuant to Section 16.04.010, the city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvement equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost such divider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. (Ord. 824 § 2(part), 1989)

 

16.04.030 Method of reimbursement.
In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the city may:

A.    Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use;

B.     Contribute to the subdivider that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and levy a charge upon the real property benefitted to reimburse itself for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider;

C.     Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charges or costs from the property benefitted. (Ord. 824 § 2(part), 1989)

 

16.04.040 Identification of benefitted property.
The city council may adopt, by resolution, the subdivision’s plan and map and further identify the property within the area which is benefitted by the improvements required pursuant to Section 16.04.010 (the “benefit district”). The city may impose a reasonable charge on the benefitted property, as set forth in the resolution, to be paid to the city and used as required by the reimbursement agreement between the city and the subdivider.

The benefit district may include areas not yet annexed to the city or developed. These properties will be subject to the charge set forth in the resolution if and when the property owners file a subdivision map or annexation application; the payment of the charge will be a condition of such subdivision or annexation. (Ord. 824 § 2(part), 1989)

 

Chapter 16.05 MAP WAIVERS
16.05.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for map waivers consistent with provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.020 Map waivers.
A.    The planning commission may, at its discretion, waiver all or part of the requirements for a tentative parcel map for the following:

1.     Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees for which a parcel map may be required;

2.     Division of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities and drainage; and

3.     Division of real property which has merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the city.

B.     The planning commission shall waive all or part of the requirements for a tentative parcel map and parcel map or a tentative subdivision map and final map for conversion of a mobile home park to a tenant-owned, condominium ownership interest initiated by a petition signed by at least two-thirds of the owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park as provided in Section 66428(b), unless findings pursuant to Section 66428(b) of the Subdivision Map Act are made. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.030 Matters to be considered and findings.
The planning commission shall make a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriately improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.040 Certificate of compliance required.
Upon the waiver of tentative parcel map and parcel map requirements, or tentative subdivision map and final map requirements, pursuant to this chapter, the city engineer shall file with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, in accordance with Sections 66499.35 and 66499.52 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.050 Conditions.
A waiver by the planning commission may be conditionally provided for, among other things, payment by the subdivider of fees (including drainage, parkland dedication in lieu and other fees) and dedications that are permitted by law. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.060 Submittal of request for map waiver.
A.    An applicant for map waiver shall submit an application and map to the community development director in the format and number of copies specified by the community development director. The application shall contain all the information specified by the community development director. The application shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

B.     The community development director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.070 Review and approval of request for map waiver.
A.    Review and Approval by the Planning Commission. Upon a determination that the application is complete, the planning commission shall act to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the waiver request within fifty calendar days, unless a public hearing is requested in accordance with subsection B of this section. The time limits for acting on certain matters specified in this section may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the community development director evidenced in writing.

B.     Right to a Public Hearing.

1.     No later than twenty days prior to expiration of the time for action, the community development director shall give notice that the applicant or any interested person may, within ten days request a hearing on the waiver request and other matters required to be considered by the planning commission in connection with its action thereon.

a.     Such notice shall state that if no person files a request for hearing within the time provided in this section, the planning commission will promptly consider the matter and make its decision thereon.

b.     Such notice shall also state that any interested person may examine the request for waiver, as well as any variance request, advance report, lot use feasibility study or environmental documents pertaining thereto, at the office of the community development director during regular business hours.

c.     Such notice shall be given in the manner provided in subsection D of this section.

2.     The applicant or any interested person may, not later than ten days after the date of such notice is given, file with the community development director a written request for a hearing.

3.     If a request for hearing is filed within the time provided in subsection B2 of this section the planning commission shall set the application(s) for a public hearing. Public notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

4.     A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. The applicant or his or her authorized representative and any other interested person may appear at such hearing and shall be heard with respect to the request for waiver, the design and proposed improvements, the proposed conditions of approval, and other matters required to be considered by the planning commission in connection with its action on the request for waiver. Evidence shall be offered or presented, and the name and address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the planning commission shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

5.     If no request for hearing is filed within the time provided in subsection B2 of this section, no hearing shall be required and the planning commission shall promptly consider the request for waiver, render its decision, and give notice thereof in the manner provided in this section.

C.     Reports and Recommendations. A copy of any report or recommendation on the map waiver prepared by the community development director shall be mailed to the applicant or his or her authorized agent at least fifteen days prior to the proposed date of action and/or scheduled public hearing by the planning commission.

D.    Decision.

1.     The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny any application following the close of the public hearing on the matter. Such decision shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The decision shall be final, subject to appeal in accordance with subsection F of this section.

2.     Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. Notice of decision shall be deemed given when placed in the United States mails with postage prepaid, using the address set forth on the application or using an envelope provided by the applicant for such purpose, as the case may be. Such notice may also be given, at the discretion of the planning commission, by personal delivery with the same effect as if mailed.

3.     The decision of the planning commission shall be final upon expiration of fourteen calendar days from and including the date of decision, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the planning commission within such time.

4.     All conditions of approval shall be final, and a subsequent request to delete or to modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 16.05.080 of this chapter, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to subsection E of this section.

E.     Appeal.

1.     Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council.

2.     The applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal from such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning commission prior to the time the decision becomes final. The community development director shall furnish forms for notice of appeal. The appeal shall be ac-companied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

3.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in subsection D of this section.

4.     The city council may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify or attach other or additional conditions to the decision appealed from.

5.     The decision of the city council on any such appeal shall be final upon adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination. Notice of such decision shall be given to the appellant, the subdivider (if not the appellant), and any other party who has requested such notice.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.05.080 Minor revisions.
A.    Minor revisions to an approved waiver of parcel map may be approved by the planning commission upon application by the subdivider or his or her authorized agent, provided that:

1.     Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original map approval;

2.     The original conditions need not be modified; and

3.     There are no resulting violations of this code.

B.     Approved revisions shall be denoted on the approved map and/or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate.

C.     No revision shall affect the expiration date of the approved map.

D.    The planning commission may require a new application in lieu of the above procedure when, in its opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refiling and reprocessing. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.07 STUDY MAPS
16.07.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a subdivider with informal city review of a proposed subdivision. The community development director and the development review committee will provide informal review and comments to assist the subdivider in preparing a technically adequate tentative subdivision map. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.07.020 Study maps.
A.    Prior to filing a tentative map, a subdivider may at his or her option submit to the community development director a study map for review pursuant to this section. All information necessary to properly evaluate the proposal shall be shown on the study map.

B.     The community development director shall distribute copies of the study map to the members of the development review committee, the South San Joaquin Irrigation District, and to other such public agencies as the community development director deems to be interested in the proposed subdivision or to have information relating thereto. The development review committee shall consider the study map within thirty calendar days of submittal.

C.     A development review committee report shall be prepared after the committee has met to review the study map, and a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the subdivider or his or her authorized representative and to each committee member.

D.    The report, as well as comments and recommendations, on a study map shall not be deemed to restrict the discretion of any city official or agency or the planning commission or city council and shall be without prejudice to a different recommendation or decision in a subsequent proceeding The subdivider is free to submit a tentative subdivision map which differs from the study map or the report thereon. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.09 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
16.09.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for the submittal, review, and approval of tentative subdivision maps consistent with provisions of the Subdivision Map Act governing tentative maps. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.020 Submittal of tentative subdivision map.
A.    An applicant for a tentative subdivision map shall submit an application and map to the community development director in the format and number of copies specified by the community development director. The application shall contain all the information specified for the application by the community development director, unless the community development director waives any of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

B.     The community development director shall submit the application to the development review committee which shall review the application and advise the community development director as to the completeness of the application and of any special factors that should be considered as the application is processed. The community development director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt of the application that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.030 Review and approval of tentative subdivision map.
A.    School District Review. Review of tentative maps by school districts shall comply with Section 66455.7 of the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Review and Recommendation by the Planning Commission.

1.     Upon acceptance of the tentative subdivision map as complete, the community development director shall process the completed application.

2.     At least five days prior to the planning commission meeting to consider a tentative subdivision map, the community development director shall, based on comments from the development review committee and analysis by the community development director’s staff, issue a staff report which may include the following information:

a.     Any requirement or condition with respect to the tentative subdivision map which in the opinion of the community development director, the planning commission should recommend to the city council; or

b.     Recommended action on the tentative subdivision map.

3.     Notice and Hearing.

a.     When an application has been submitted and processed in accordance with Section 16.09.020 of this chapter, the community development director shall set the application for a public hearing.

b.     Public notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

c.     A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. The applicant or his or her authorized representative and any other interested person may appear at such hearing and shall be heard with respect to the tentative subdivision map, the design and proposed improvements, the proposed conditions of approval and other matters required to be considered by the planning commission in connection with its action on the tentative subdivision map. Evidence shall be offered or presented, and the name and address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the planning commission shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

4.     The planning commission shall consider whether the tentative subdivision map is consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan. Upon that basis, the planning commission shall, by resolution, forward to the city council a favorable or unfavorable recommendation on the proposed tentative subdivision map. An unfavorable recommendation shall contain a statement of the reasons therefor. Such review shall be made within the time limits set forth in Section 66452.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, provided that the time period allows for timely review by the city council within the time limit requirements of Government Code Section 65950 et seq. (Permit Streamlining Act).

5.     If no action is taken by the planning commission within these time limits, the tentative subdivision map as filed shall be deemed to have received a favorable recommendation.

C.     Notice and Hearing.

1.     When an application has been submitted in accordance with Section 16.09.020 of this chapter, the cit clerk shall set the application for a public hearing.

2.     Public notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

3.     A public hearing shall be held before the city council at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The city council may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. The applicant or his or her authorized representative and any other interested person may appear at such hearing and shall be heard with respect to the tentative subdivision map, the design and proposed improvements, the proposed conditions of approval, and other matters required to be considered by the city council in connection with its action on the tentative subdivision map. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the presiding officer shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

D.    Decision by City Council.

1.     The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission and may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the planning commission’s report. The city council may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval.

2.     The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application following the close of the public hearing on the matter. Such decision shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

3.     The decision of the city council shall be final upon adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination.

4.     Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. Notice of decision shall be deemed given when placed in the United States mails with postage prepaid, using the address set forth on the application or using an envelope provided by the applicant for such purpose, as the case may be. At the discretion of the community development director, said notice may also be given by personal delivery with the same effect as if mailed.

E.     Time Limits for Action.

1.     The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative subdivision map within the time period specified in Section 66452.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. An applicant may, before a final vote is taken, request a continuance until such time that all council members are present to vote on the matter.

2.     Except as provided by Government Code Section 65920 et seq., the time limit for action by the city council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative subdivision map for which a negative declaration has been prepared or that is exempt from Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code, shall not exceed six months from the time the application for the tentative subdivision map is accepted as complete by the community development director, or is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65940 et seq.

3.     Except as provided by Government Code Section 65920 et seq., the time limit for action by the city council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative subdivision map for which an environmental impact report has been prepared, shall not exceed one year from the time the application for the tentative subdivision map is accepted as complete by the community development director, or is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65940 et seq.

4.     If no action is taken by the city council to approve or disapprove the tentative subdivision map within the time limits specified in this chapter or in the Subdivision Map Act, or any authorized extension thereof either, and all required notices have been given, the tentative subdivision map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code and the general plan.

F.     Appeal. There shall be no appeal from a decision by the city council under this chapter. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.040 Matters to be considered and findings.
In addition to the requirements governing approval of the tentative map set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, the following considerations and findings shall be made:

A.    Subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, the State CEQA Guidelines, the city council shall review and consider any applicable environmental documents.

B.     In reaching a decision upon the tentative subdivision map, the city council shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residences and available fiscal and environmental resources.

C.     In reaching a decision upon the tentative subdivision map, the city council shall consider the design of the subdivision as it provides for future passive and natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, as required by Government Code Section 66473.1.

D.    The tentative subdivision map may be approved or conditionally approved by the city council if it finds that the proposed land division, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.050 Modification of requirements.
Whenever, in the opinion of the community development or public works director, planning commission or the city council, the land involved in any subdivision is of a size or shape, or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to fully conform to the regulations contained in this title, the public works director, community development director, planning commission or the city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.060 Conditions of approval.
In approving the tentative subdivision map, the city council may impose as conditions of filing a final map any requirements consistent with the purposes of this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.09.070 Expiration and extensions.
A.    Expiration.

1.     The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of its approval. If, however, the subdivider files multiple final maps in accordance with Government Code Section 66456.1 and is required to expend ne hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of that property, or if the tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement authorized by City Resolution Number 1990-258, then the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6(a). An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in subsection B of this section.

2.     The period of time specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. Within ten calendar days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall request in writing to the community development director a stay in the time period of the tentative subdivision map. Within forty calendar days after receiving such request the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be approved or denied only after a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the plaintiff. The city council shall declare its findings within ten calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.

B.     Extensions.

1.     The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the planning department.

2.     The planning department shall review the request and submit the application for extension to the city council for approval, conditional approval or denial at the next scheduled city council meeting. In approving, conditionally approving or denying the request for extension, the city council shall make findings supporting its decision, including findings with respect to the potential impact of any increases in applicable development fees which have occurred since the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.

3.     The time at which the tentative map expires may be extended by the city council for a period not exceeding a total of three years. The period of extension shall be in addition to the period of time provided for by Government Code Section 66452.6(a).

C.     Extensions of time shall be subject to the original conditions of approval and any additional conditions imposed by the city council and concurred with by the subdivider. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.11 VESTING TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
16.11.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures for vesting tentative subdivision maps consistent with Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act. The regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative subdivision map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.11.020 Processing of vesting tentative subdivision maps.
A vesting tentative subdivision map shall be processed and filed in the same manner as a tentative subdivision map as provided in Chapter 16.09 of this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.11.030 Additional information required.
At the time a vesting tentative subdivision map is filed, a subdivider shall supply the following information in addition to that information required for a tentative map pursuant to Section 16.09.030 of this title.

A.    Comprehensive listing of ordinances and regulations currently affecting the property;

B.     Setback and yard requirements;

C.     Details of streets, sewer, water and storm drainage;

D.    Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put; and

E.     Any other detailed information required by the community development director provided that such requirements for information are consistent with Section 66498.8 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.13 FINAL MAPS
16.13.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act governing final maps. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.13.020 Form and content of final map.
The form and final content of the final map shall conform to the requirements of Section 66433 et seq. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.13.030 Statements on final maps.
In addition to the statements and acknowledgments required by the Subdivision Map Act, the following statements are required to appear on the title sheet, or on other sheets as may be required:

A.    A statement for execution by the community development director (statement of community development director);

B.     A statement for execution by the city engineer (statement of city engineer);

C.     A statement for execution by the city council (statement of city council);

D.    A statement for execution by the city clerk stating the city council approved the map and accepted, accepted subject to improvement, or rejected, on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication;

E.     A statement for execution by the county recorder on all sheets (statement of county recorder);

F.     A statement for execution by the public entity for which a dedication is made, where applicable (statement of district);

G.    A statement for execution by the California Department of Transportation, where applicable;

H.    A statement for execution by all parties having record title interest (owners statement);

I.      A statement for execution by the county surveyor (county surveyor’s statement);

J.      A statement for execution by the South San Joaquin Irrigation District Engineer (statement of the SSJID engineer).

Forms for statements required by the Subdivision Map Act and by this title shall be provided by the public works department. Such statements may be combined when appropriate. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.13.040 Other data and documents to be filed with final map.
At or before the time of filing the final map, all of the data, documents, plans, specifications, agreements, improvement securities, insurance policies, bonds, money and other matters required by this title, including the following, shall be filed with the city engineer.

A.    Sewage Disposal and Domestic Water Supply. Statement by the city engineer that the proposed sewerage or sewage disposal and domestic water supply conform to the city standard plans and specifications and is otherwise adequate, and that it can be accomplished without creating any nuisance and without hazard to, or deterioration of, public health or water quality.

B.     Improvement Plans, Drainage Plans, Specifications and Data. The improvement plans, drainage plans and specifications thereof, if required, and supporting data shall comply with and carry out the purposes of this title, the city standard plans and specifications, and the conditions of approval of the tentative subdivision map. Such plans and specifications shall be in sufficient detail and shall be accompanied by sufficient data as may be necessary for the approval thereof. The city engineer shall act upon such plans within sixty working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty working day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by other than the local agency or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction.

The time limits specified in this section for acting on improvement plans may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city council. The city council, however, shall not require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the improvement plan.

C.     Other Improvement Plans. Plans for the construction or installation of other improvements as required by and in conformity with the conditions of approval on the tentative subdivision map, this title, and the city standard plans and specifications.

D.    Water Supply Statement. A statement from the water supplier or purveyor, if any, that it can and will serve the residents of the subdivision with water and will maintain such water supply, mains, valves, hydrants and fire flows as required by this title and the city plans and specifications, and any other applicable law or regulations.

E.     Guarantee of Title.

1.     A guarantee of the title by a title company authorized to do business in California, showing all parties having any record title interest in the land proposed to be subdivided, or any part thereof, including but not confined to leaseholders, lienholders, owners of rights-of-way, easements, reversions and interests in or rights to minerals, showing the nature of each respective interest and the reference thereto in the official records, by book and page, as of the date the final map is filed with the city engineer.

2.     Such guarantee of title shall also show all taxes which are a lien against the proposed subdivision or any part thereof.

3.     Such guarantee of title shall be issued for the benefit and protection of the city and any political subdivision or municipal corporation which may have an interest in any right-of-way or easement offered for dedication in connection with the final map.

4.     The liability on such guarantee of title shall be not less than five thousand dollars.

5.     Concurrently with the recordation of the final map, the said title company shall issue a supplementary guarantee of title showing that, at the time of such recordation, the parties consenting to the recordation of the ma are all parties having a record title interest in the land subdivided whose signatures are required by the provisions of Chapter 7 of the Subdivision Map Act, and which shall be filed with the city clerk.

F.     Off-Site Easements. All off-site easements for drainage, flowage, slope, construction, access roads or other purposes required for design and development of the subdivision map under the provisions of this chapter, the city standard plans and specifications, and the conditions of approval on the tentative subdivision map. Such easements shall be subject to approval of the city attorney as to form. A guarantee of title shall be provided with respect to such easements, with liability in such amount as the city engineer determines to be in the public interest.

G.    Taxes and Assessments. The statements and bonds or other security relating to taxes, assessments and liens therefor as specified by Government Code Section 66492 et seq.

H.    Completion Agreement and Improvement Security. The completion agreement, improvement securities, insurance policies and other matters specified by Sections 16.23.070 and 16.23.080.

I.      Monument and Lot Staking Bond. The agreement for completion of setting of monuments and lot staking and security for its performance.

J.      Other Matters. All other data, documents and other matters required to be filed with the city engineer in conjunction with the final map, as may be required by law from time to time. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.13.050 Review and approval of final map.
A.    Final Map Checking.

1.     Prior to the filing of the original of the final map, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer copies thereof, in the number required by the city engineer, together with traverse sheets, for checking as to surveying and mathematical correctness, and as to the forms of the statements. The subdivider shall file also with the city engineer fees payable to the county recorder for the recording of the final map, and fees payable to the city for the checking of the map and checking of the improvement plans in the amounts required by resolution of the city council.

2.     Copies of final maps shall be checked in the order in which they are received. A copy shall be returned to the surveyor or engineer who prepared the map with notations as to error or omissions. Rechecking plans previously submitted which contained errors or omissions will result in additional plan checking fees.

3.     The traverse sheet shall include coordinates based on one point of origin for the subdivision, the mathematical closure of the exterior boundary of the subdivision and of each block, and if the lots are irregular in shape, a traverse of all lots, together with such detail maps as may be required for accurate checking. The city engineer shall clarify all maps as to clarity of expression, accuracy, completeness and legibility and shall verify the correctness of all mathematical data, the location and nature of all permanent monuments.

4.     After the copies of the final map have been checked, and when the original final map is correct in all respects, it may be filed with the engineer with the data, documents, bonds, money and other matters required. The city engineer shall certify that the subdivision on the final map is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative map, and any approved alterations or amendments thereto, including but not limited to additional conditions included by reason of any extension of time.

B.     Action on Final Map by the City Council.

1.     The city council shall consider the final map and the data, documents, bonds and other matters required by this title and shall also consider such other matters as to which approval of the council is required. The city council shall also consider required findings in connection with approval of a final map under the provisions of this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, or other statute.

2.     The city council shall act on the final map at its next meeting after the filing of the final map with the council, or within such additional time as may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the council.

3.     The city council shall approve the final map by resolution when it has made the findings required to be made under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or other statute in connection with approval of a final map and when the council has also determined that all of the following requirements have been satisfied:

a.     All of the data, documents, agreements, improvement securities, insurance policies, bonds, money and other matters required by this title have been filed with the council or with the proper city official;

b.     All such data is complete and in proper form and has been approved by the appropriate public official where so required;

c.     All such documents, agreements, improvement securities and insurance policies have been signed and acknowledged by the subdivider where so required; that any corporate surety bond so filed has been signed and acknowledged by the surety; and that the improvement agreement bears the consent of any such corporate surety;

d.     All such documents, agreements, improvement securities and insurance policies are in accordance with the provisions of this title;

e.     All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title applicable at the time of approval of the original tentative subdivision map;

f.      All other provisions of law have been satisfied as may be required in connection with approval of a final map;

g.     All of the statements which are required to appear on the final map have been signed by the proper persons or officials and have been properly acknowledged, where so required, excepting the statement of the city engineer, the city council, the city clerk and the county recorder;

h.     All required dedications or offers of dedications and easements have been provided, are in proper form, and have been properly executed by such persons so as to give clear title.

4.     If the final map is disapproved by reason of the subdivider’s failure to meet or perform any requirement or condition imposed by the Subdivision Map Act or by this title, the city council shall make a finding identifying each such requirement or condition.

5.     In conjunction with approval of the final map, the city council shall accept or reject any or all offers of dedication, dedications and easements, or accept the same subject to improvement which are contained in or accompany the final map.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.13.060 Grading and improvements prior to final map.
A.    No grading shall occur on and no grading permit shall be issued for any land in a subdivision nor in connection with any improvement for a subdivision prior to approval and recordation of the final map unless all of the provisions and conditions specified in this section are satisfied.

B.     No improvement work shall occur and no permit shall be issued for any improvement work on any land in a subdivision or on any improvement for a subdivision prior to approval and recordation of the final map, unless all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The subdivider has made written application to the public works department and has obtained approval from the city council for such work;

2.     The tentative subdivision map has been approved or conditionally approved;

3.     Any rezoning to make the lots conform to the city zoning ordinance has been approved;

4.     All improvement plans and grading plans have been approved and appropriately signed pursuant to this chapter; and

5.     The city council has by resolution determined that the approved work is not likely to cause substantial environmental damage, is not likely substantially and avoidable injure fish or wildlife or their habitat, is not likely to cause serious public health problems and is not likely to injure any nearby property, whether the subdivision is completed or abandoned.

C.     The city council may limit the areas to be improved, the kind of improvement work to be done, and may impose conditions upon the work as it deems necessary.

D.    Approval by the city council shall not be deemed a substitute for any permit to do such work required by this title or any other city ordinance. No condition imposed by the council shall be deemed to modify any more stringent provisions of this title or the city standard plans or specifications or as contained in any condition appended to the tentative subdivision map. Approval by the council shall not be deemed to be an approval of the final map in any respect, nor any representation that the council will approve the final map. Neither the approval by the council nor the performance of any such work shall be deemed to bind the council to approve the final map. All such work shall be carried out at the sole risk of the subdivider, and any expense which the subdivider may incur in doing such work shall not be grounds to compel approval of the final map.

E.     Such improvement work shall be subject to inspection and approval by the public works department, provided that the city council may designate another city department or public entity to inspect and approve such work.

F.     Reasonable rules may be established for the filing of plans and specifications for required improvement work suitable for its proper inspection and for procedures and forms relating to inspections and approvals. Such rules may be established by order of the city council, and supplemental rules may be adopted by the department or entity designated to inspect and approve such work by filing the same with the council.

G.    At no time prior to approval and recordation of the final map shall any easement or license be granted to any public utility company or water company with respect to any land within a proposed subdivision for the purposes of public utility facilities or water lines (including but not limited to poles, towers, lines, mains, conduit, tanks or pipes), nor shall any facility be constructed or installed upon any land within a proposed subdivision, except as expressly authorized by this section.

H.    The city council may deny approval of a final map if it finds that any such facility has been installed or easement therefor has been granted contrary to any of the provisions of this section.

I.      If any facility is of a temporary nature and is not designed or intended to be continued in existence or operation following the approval of the final map, the city council may authorize its installation upon written application of the subdivider and submission of the plans showing the location thereof and the specifications therefor, provided the council determines that such installation is not likely to cause substantial and avoidable injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat, is not likely to cause serious public health problems, and is not likely to injure any nearby property, whether the subdivision is completed or abandoned. As a condition of approval of such a temporary facility, the public utility company or water company shall covenant with the city that such facility shall be completely removed from the land within the proposed subdivision prior to approval of the final map and that any easement or license therefor shall terminate upon such removal or upon approval of the final map, whichever is sooner.

Temporary facilities approved under the provisions of this subsection shall not be subject to subsections B, E and F of this section.

J.      If any such facility mentioned in subsection G of this section is designed or intended to be continued in existence or operation following the approval of the final map, the same shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section as in the case of other improvement work prior to approval of the final map, except that subsection I of this section shall not apply to any public utility company under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission with respect to facilities for the supply of gas or electricity.

K.    As a condition of approval of any facility mentioned in this section, the public utility company or water company shall covenant with the city that any easement or license which it has or may acquire for such facilities shall terminate immediately upon approval of the final map, insofar as such easement or license or such facility may be within the boundaries of any street, highway, alley or way which is or will be offered for dedication for public use, and that from and after approval of the final map such facility shall be subject to any franchise which such company may then hold applicable to such area. If such company does not then hold a franchise granted by the city, it shall apply for, bid upon, and do everything necessary to perfect such franchise upon the terms most favorable to the city under any statute as may be in effect at the time of such application.

L.     The city council may refuse to give any approval under the provisions of this title to any public utility company or water company which does not hold a franchise granted by the city which is applicable to the area within the proposed subdivision.

M.    The provisions of subsection I of this section shall not be deemed applicable to any public utility facility or easement therefor which was in existence prior to the time of submission of such tentative map and which was not designed or constructed to be used in conjunction with the proposed subdivision.

N.    The provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting application of Section 16.23.030 of this title relating to removal of obstructions.

O.    The provisions of subsections I through N of this section inclusive, shall be deemed applicable to any water lines and related facilities or other facilities of public utility services proposed to be furnished by the subdivider.

P.     The provisions of subsections I through O inclusive, shall be construed broadly for the purposes of bringing under city franchises, public utility facilities and water lines designed or installed for use in conjunction with the proposed subdivision, which may be located within the boundaries of any street, highway, alley or way which is or will be offered for dedication for public use. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.15 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
16.15.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for the submittal, review and approval of tentative parcel maps consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.020 Submittal of tentative parcel map.
A.    An applicant for a tentative parcel map shall submit an application and map to the community development director in the format and number of copies specified by the community development director. The application shall contain all the information specified for the application by the community development director, unless the community development director waives any information requirements. The application shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

B.     The community development director shall, upon recommendation by the development review committee, inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.030 Review and approval of tentative parcel map by the planning commission.
A.    Reports and Recommendations.

1.     Upon acceptance of the tentative parcel map as complete, the community development director shall distribute the map, data, and documents to the various city departments and public agencies concerned in such matters, with a request for submission of written recommendations thereon to the planning commission.

2.     At least five days prior to the planning commission meeting to consider a tentative parcel map, each city department and public agency concerned with the matter shall issue a staff report or written recommendations which may include the following information:

a.     Any requirement or condition with respect to the tentative parcel map which in the opinion of the reviewing city department or public agency, the planning commission should attach to approval of the project;

b.     Any grounds for disapproval of the tentative parcel map.

B.     Notice and Hearing.

1.     When an application has been submitted in accordance with Section 16.15.020 of this chapter, the secretary of the planning commission shall set the application for a public hearing.

2.     Public notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

3.     A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The planning commission may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. The applicant or his or her authorized representative and any other interested person may appear at such hearing and shall be heard with respect to the tentative parcel map, the design and proposed improvements, the proposed conditions of approval, and other matters required to be considered by the planning commission in connection with its action on the tentative parcel map. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the presiding officer shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

C.     Decision by Planning Commission.

1.     The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny any application following the close of the public hearing on the matter. Such decision shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2.     The decision of the planning commission shall be final upon approval of the motion containing its determination unless an appeal is filed pursuant to subsection E of this section.

3.     Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. Notice of the decision shall be deemed given when placed in the United States mail with postage prepaid, using the address set forth on the application or using an envelope provided by the applicant for such purpose, as the case may be. At the discretion of the community development director, said notice may also be given by personal delivery with the same effect as if mailed.

D.    Time Limits for Action.

1.     The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map within the same period applicable to tentative subdivision maps. An applicant, before a final vote is taken, may request a continuance until such time that all commission members are present to vote on the matter.

2.     In no case shall the time limit for action by the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map for which a negative declaration is being prepared or that is categorically exempt from Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources code, exceed one hundred eighty days from the time the application for the tentative parcel map is accepted as complete by the community development director, or is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65940 et seq.

3.     In no case shall the time limit for action by the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative parcel map for which an environmental impact report is being prepared, exceed one year from the time the application for the tentative parcel map is accepted as complete by the community development director, or is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65940 et seq.

4.     If no action is taken by the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map within the time limits specified in this chapter or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative parcel map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code, and the general plan.

E.     Appeal.

1.     Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council.

2.     The applicant or any other person may appeal from such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the action by the planning commission from which the appeal is being taken. The community development director shall furnish forms for notice of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

3.     Upon filing of an appeal, the city council shall set the matter for hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date of filing the appeal. Within ten days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision on the appeal.

4.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

5.     The city council may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify or attach other or additional conditions to the decision appealed from.

6.     The decision of the city council on any such appeal shall be final upon adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.040 Matters to be considered and findings.
In addition to the requirements governing approval of the tentative map set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, the following considerations and findings shall be made:

A.    Subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, the state CEQA guidelines, and the city CEQA guidelines, the decision-making body shall review and consider any applicable environmental documents.

B.     In reaching a decision on the tentative parcel map, the decision-making body shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.050 Modification of requirements.
Whenever, in the opinion of the community development director, planning commission, or the city council, the land involved in any land division is of a size or shape, or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to fully conform to the regulations contained in this chapter, the community development director, planning commission or the city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.060 Conditions of approval.
In approving the tentative parcel map, the planning commission and city council may impose as conditions of filing a parcel map any requirements consistent with the purposes of this title. (Ord. 972 § 1, 1993; Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.15.070 Expiration and extensions.
A.    The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of its approval unless otherwise provided by the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     The period of time specified in subsection A of this section, shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. Within ten calendar days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall request in writing to the community development director, a stay in the time period of the tentative subdivision map. Within forty calendar days after receiving such request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be approved or denied only after a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the plaintiff. The city council shall declare its findings within ten calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.

C.     Extensions of time shall be subject to the original conditions of approval and any additional conditions imposed by the planning commission or city council, on appeal, and concurred upon by the subdivider. (Ord. 972 § 1, 1993; Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.17 PARCEL MAPS
16.17.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for the submittal, review and approval of parcel maps consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.17.020 Survey required.
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerline of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the land division shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion or the parcel map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.17.030 Form and contents.
The form and contents of the parcel map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, and the accompanying data and reports shall conform to the requirements of Section 16.13.040. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.17.040 Review and approval of parcel map.
A.    Map Checking.

1.     Prior to the filing of the parcel map, the subdivider shall submit copies of the parcel map to the city engineer, in the number required by the city engineer, together with traverse sheets. The subdivider shall file also with the city engineer fees payable to the county recorder for the recording of the parcel map and fees pay-able to the city for the checking of the map and checking of the improvement plans, if required, in the amounts required by resolution of the city council.

2.     Copies of parcel maps shall be checked in the order in which they are received. A copy shall be returned to the surveyor or engineer who prepared the map with notations as to errors or omissions.

3.     The traverse sheet shall include coordinates based on one point of origin for the land division, the mathematical closure of the exterior boundary of the parcel map and of each block, and if the parcels are irregular in shape, a traverse of all lots, together with such detail maps as may be required for accurate checking. The city engineer shall certify all maps as to clarity of expression, accuracy, completeness and legibility and shall verify the correctness of all mathematical data, the location and nature of all permanent monuments, if any.

4.     After the copies of the parcel map have been checked, and when the original parcel map is correct in all respects, it may be filed with the city engineer with the data, documents, bonds, money and other matters required. The city engineer shall submit the parcel map to the community development director for certification that the parcel map is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative parcel map, and any approved alterations or amendments thereto, including but not limited to additional conditions included by reason of any extension of time.

B.     Certification of the Parcel Map by the City Engineer.

1.     The city engineer shall certify the parcel map in accordance with Section 66442 of the Subdivision Map Act when he or she finds that all the following requirements have been satisfied:

a.     All of the data, documents, agreements, improvement securities, insurance policies, bonds, money and other matters specified by Chapter 16.23 of this title have been filed with the city engineer or with the proper city official;

b.     All such data is complete and in proper form and has been approved by the appropriate public official where so required;

c.     All such documents, agreements, improvement securities and insurance policies have been signed and acknowledged by the subdivider where so required, that any corporate surety bond so filed has been signed and acknowledged by the surety, and that the improvement agreement bears the consent of any such corporate surety;

d.     The parcel map is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative map and is in conformity with any conditions thereof and any approved alterations or amendments thereto, including but not limited to additional conditions included by reason of any extension of time in accordance with Section 16.15.060 of this title;

e.     All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title applicable at the time of approval of the original tentative parcel map;

f.      The parcel map is technically correct;

g.     All of the statements which appear, or are required to appear on the parcel map, have been signed by the proper persons or officials and properly acknowledged, where so required, excepting the statement of the city engineer and the county recorder;

h.     All dedications or offers of dedications and easements deemed necessary by the city engineer have been provided, are in proper form and have been properly executed by such persons so as to give clear title.

2.     When the city engineer has signed the statement specified in Section 66442 of the Subdivision Map Act, he or she shall file the parcel map and the documents with the county recorder.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

Chapter 16.19 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
16.19.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the standards and procedures for lot line adjustments consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.19.020 Submittal of lot line adjustment application.
A.    Submittal of Application.

1.     An applicant for a lot line adjustment shall submit an application and map to the community development director in the format and number of copies specified by the community development director. The application shall contain all the information specified by the community development director, unless the community development director waives any of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

2.     The community development director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.19.030 Review and approval procedures.
A.    Decision.

1.     Upon a determination that the application is complete, the community development director may approve, conditionally approve or deny any application for lot line adjustment. Such decision shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the decision shall be final, subject to appeal in accordance with subsection D of this section.

2.     Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. Notice of decision shall be deemed given when placed in the United States mails with postage prepaid, using the address set forth on the application or using an envelope provided by the applicant for such purpose, as the case may be. At the discretion of the community development director, said notice may also be given by personal delivery with the same effect as if mailed.

3.     The decision of the community development director shall be final upon expiration of fourteen calendar days from and including the date of decision, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the community development director within such time.

4.     All conditions of approval shall be final, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to subsection D of this section.

5.     The community development director shall certify that he or she approves, conditionally approves or denies an application for lot line adjustment by affixing his or her signature to the statement of approval provided on the lot line adjustment plan in the case of approval or conditional approval of the application, or by withholding his or her signature in the case of denial of application.

B.     Findings.

1.     The community development director shall approve a lot line adjustment application if he or she finds:

a.     The parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment conform to the zoning ordinance and applicable building ordinances of the city.

b.     No conditions or exactions are required to bring project into conformance with the zoning ordinance and applicable building ordinances of the city, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements.

2.     Conditional Approval by the Community development director. Pursuant to Section 66412(d) of the State Map Act, the community development director shall conditionally approve a lot line adjustment where the conditions or exactions on its approval are needed to conform the lot line adjustment to local zoning or building ordinances, or to facilitate relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. Any dedications required as a condition of approval shall be made in accordance with Chapter 16.21 of this title; any improvements required as a condition of approval shall be made in accordance with Chapter 16.23 of this title.

3.     The community development director shall deny a lot line adjustment if he or she finds:

a.     The parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment do not conform to the zoning ordinance or applicable building ordinances of the city.

b.     Conformity to the zoning ordinance or applicable building ordinances of the city cannot be achieved through any reasonable set of conditions or exactions.

C.     Appeal.

1.     Any decision of the community development director made pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the planning commission.

2.     The applicant or any other person may appeal from such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director prior to the time the decision becomes final. The community development director shall furnish forms of notice of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the city council.

3.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in subsection B of this section.

4.     The planning commission may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, modify or attach other or additional conditions to the decision appealed from.

5.     The decision of the planning commission on any such appeal shall be final upon adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given.

D.    Time Limits for Actions. The community development director shall act to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the lot line adjustment within fifty calendar days. The time limits for acting on certain matters specified in this section may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the community development director evidenced in writing. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.19.040 Recordation of deed.
Upon approval of the request for lot line adjustment and expiration of the appeal period specified in Section 16.19.030 D of this chapter or final decision of the planning commission upon appeal, the city engineer shall cause to be recorded with the county recorder a grant deed or deeds reflecting the approved lot line adjustment, provided the following criteria have been met:

A.    The community development director has determined that any conditions placed on the approved lot line adjustment have been satisfied.

B.     The applicant, or the applicant’s title company or agent, has submitted copies of the grant deed or deeds for the land proposed to be conveyed for the lot line adjustment in recordable form, the community development director has determined that the grant deed or deeds are in substantial compliance with the approved lot line adjustment map, and that said grant deed or deeds contain the words “FOR PURPOSES OF LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.” A plat that accurately describes the lot line adjustment shall also be required as an exhibit to the deed.

C.     In cases where deeds of trust are affected by the adjustment, the applicant or the applicant’s title company or agent has submitted copies of the partial reconveyances and supplemental deeds of trust, in recordable form, to the community development director, and the community development director has determined that said documents are in substantial compliance with the approved lot line adjustment, the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

D.    All applicable fees have been paid.

E.     The grant deed or deeds, partial reconveyances and supplementary deeds of trust, if applicable, shall be recorded concurrently and shall constitute constructive notice of the adjustment.

F.     A record of survey shall be required as specified in Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

Part III. Dedications, Reservations, and Improvements
Chapter 16.21 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
16.21.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for dedications and reservations related to the division of land. This chapter sets forth actions required of a subdivider as conditions of approval for tentative parcel maps, tentative subdivision maps, or waiver of parcel map. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.020 Dedications for land divisions of four or fewer parcels.
Dedications for divisions of land which are not a land division of five or more lots shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements for the construction of off-site and on-site improvements shall be noticed by a statement on the parcel map, on the instrument evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, or on a separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrent with, or prior to the parcel map or instrument of waiver of a parcel map being filed for record. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.030 Fees.
A.    In any action establishing, increasing or imposing a fee as a condition of approval for a subdivision, the city shall do all of the following:

1.     Identify the purpose of the fee.

2.     Identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put. If the use is financing public facilities, the facilities shall be identified.

3.     Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development project planned for the subdivision on which the fee is imposed.

4.     Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project planned for the subdivision on which the fee is imposed.

B.     In any action imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a subdivision by the city, the city shall determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the public facility or portion of the public facility attributable to the subdivision on which the fee is imposed.

C.     Upon receipt of a fee subject to this section, the city shall deposit, invest, account for, and expend the fees pursuant to Government Code Section 66006.

D.    The local agency shall make findings once each year with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. The findings required by this subdivision shall be required for moneys in the possession of the city only and are not required with respect to letters of credit, bonds, or other instruments taken to secure payment of the fee at a future date.

E.     The city shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of lots or units of the subdivision(s) on a prorated basis the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fees, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. Such refunds shall be made pursuant to Government Code Section 66001 (e) and (f). (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.040 Dedication of highways, streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way or easements.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative subdivision or tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the land division that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutter’s rights, drainage, scenic easements, public utility easements and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. Improvements shall be in accordance with Chapter 16.23 of this title and the city standard plans and specifications.

B.     The city may require as a condition of approval of any land division the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any property within or abutting the land division. The waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions and shall be contained in the owners certificate of the final map. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.050 Bridges and major thoroughfares.
A.    If a land division or any portion thereof lies within an area of benefit established in accordance with this section or any other ordinance of the city adopted pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall pay to the city the apportioned fees applicable to that portion of the land division lying within such area of benefit, in accordance with the requirements of subsection 6.21.060(F)(8) of this chapter. This subsection shall not apply unless the circulation element of the general plan has been adopted at least thirty days prior to the filing of the tentative map for such land division.

B.     The city council may allow any subdivider to furnish a consideration in lieu of payment of the fees mentioned in the preceding paragraph, if the council finds that such consideration has a value not less than the fees that would otherwise be payable.

C.     The form of consideration in lieu of fees may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following or a combination thereof:

1.     Construction of all or part of a bridge project or major thoroughfare project, as the case may be, for which the area of benefit was established.

2.     Dedication or conveyance of all or part of the site or right-of-way required for major construction of a bridge project or major thoroughfare project, as the case may be, for which the area of benefit was established.

D.    If the city council finds that the consideration in lieu of fees has a value in excess of the amount of fees that would otherwise be payable, the council may enter into an agreement with the party furnishing such consideration for reimbursement of the amount of such excess from moneys, then in or which may later accrue to, the fund into which such party would have been required to pay fees but for such consideration in lieu of fees, and to reimburse such party from such fund in accordance with such agreement.

E.     A subdivider shall be required to construct any necessary bridge facilities, major thoroughfares, parts thereof, or contribute to bridge facility or major thoroughfare costs if the city council finds that:

1.     The subdivider’s cost or contribution would not exceed the cost of a local facility in lieu of such bridges or major thoroughfares; or

2.     A proceeding has been commenced for establishment of an area of benefit for such bridge project or major thoroughfare project and has been abandoned by reason of majority protest, and that there is a reasonable probability that use of a local facility in lieu of such bridge would by reason of traffic, including but not limited to traffic which may be generated by such land division, constitute a hazard to public safety.

F.     An area of benefit as referred to in this section shall be established in the manner following:

1.     A public hearing shall be held by the city council for each area of benefit to be established. Notice of such hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 65091 of the California Government Code. Such notice shall contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the proposed area of benefit, the estimated cost of the bridge project or major thoroughfare project, as the case may be, the proposed allocation to the area of benefit, and the proposed method of fee appointment. Such notice shall also state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and that written protests may be filed as provided in this section.

2.     Written protests may be filed with the city clerk by owners of property within the proposed area of benefit at any time prior to the date and time fixed for such public hearing. Any protest may be withdrawn by the owner of the land making the protest by a request in writing filed with the city clerk at any time prior to conclusions of such public hearing.

3.     If there is a written protest by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, not withdrawn prior to the conclusion of the hearing, against establishment of such area of benefit or against the proposed improvements or acquisitions, then the proceedings shall be abandoned, and the city council shall not, for at least one year from the date of such hearing, commence or carry on any proceedings for establishment of an area of benefit for the same improvements or acquisitions.

4.     If there is a written protest by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, not withdrawn prior to the conclusion of the hearing, against only a portion of the proposed improvement or acquisition, then the proceedings shall be abandoned with respect to the proposed improvement or acquisition protested against, and the city council shall not, for at least one year from the date of such hearing, commence or carry on any proceedings for the establishment of an area of benefit for the improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the council, within such one year period, from commencing or carrying on new proceedings for the establishment of an area of benefit for the part of the improvement or acquisition protested, if it finds by the affirmative vote of at least four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition.

5.     At such public hearing, the city council shall determine whether to establish such area of benefit, and if so, shall adopt a resolution prescribing the boundaries of the area of benefit, stating the cost, whether actual or estimated, a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit, and a fair apportionment of fees. A certified copy of such resolution shall be filed for record with the county recorder.

6.     In case of a requirement for any bridge, the city council shall find that, prior to said public hearing, the city has adopted at least thirty days prior to the filing of any tentative map, a circulation element as part of the general plan, which identifies railways, freeways, streams or canyons for which bridge crossings are required, and that the bridge or each bridge for which such area of benefit is established is one necessary to satisfy such bridge crossing requirement in such element or provisions of the general plan.

7.     In case of a requirement for any major thoroughfare, the city council shall find that, prior to said public hearing, the city has adopted at least thirty days prior to the filing of any tentative map, a circulation element as part of the general plan which identifies those major thoroughfares whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system, and that the major thoroughfare or section thereof for which such area of benefit is established is one so identified in such circulation element.

8.     The resolution adopted by the council shall require that the apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of any final map or any parcel map or a condition to issuing a building permit thereon, consistent with the provisions of Section 53077.5 of the California Government Code.

9.     The area of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements which are the subject of any map or building permit application considered at such hearing.

10.   Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the city council shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such lands from other sources.

11.   In the case of major thoroughfares, the method of fee apportionment shall not provide for higher fees on land which abuts the proposed improvement, except where the abutting property is provided direct usable access to the major thoroughfare.

12.   In case of major thoroughfares, the payment of fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfare is in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit.

13.   In the case of a planned bridge facility, the payment of fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area of benefit or is an addition to an existing bridge facility serving such area at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit. No fees contributed shall be expended to reimburse the cost of construction of any bridge existing at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit.

G.    A planned bridge facility fund shall be established for a bridge project within an area of benefit, or if the area of benefit is one in which more than one bridge is required to be constructed, a fund shall be established covering all such bridge projects. Fees paid pursuant to this section on account of a bridge or bridges within an area of benefit shall be deposited into the fund for such area.

H.    A planned major thoroughfare fund shall be established for each planned major thoroughfare project and each particular area of benefit which it benefits. Fees paid pursuant to this section on account of a major thoroughfare project within an area of benefit shall be deposited into the fund for such area.

I.      Moneys in each such fund shall be expended therefrom solely for the construction of the improvement project serving the area to be benefitted as follows:

1.     To reimburse the city for costs advanced or incurred by it for construction of such improvement project or any portion thereof; and

2.     To reimburse any subdivider for the agreed portion of his or her costs of construction of such improvement project, or portion thereof, in accordance with a reimbursement agreement entered into with the city, as mentioned in subsection D of this section.

In case there are insufficient moneys in such fund for all of the purposes mentioned in this section, such moneys in the fund shall be apportioned pro rata to each such purpose.

J.      After completion of all bridge facility projects for which a planned bridge facility fund has been established or all major thoroughfare projects for which a planned major thoroughfare fund has been established, or in the event of abandonment of any such project, and after reimbursement of the city and each subdivider entitled thereto under a reimbursement agreement, as mentioned in subsection D of this section, the city council shall determine by resolution the amount of the surplus, if any, remaining in any such funds or as may accumulate in such funds from time to time. The council shall order any such surplus refunded as follows:

1.     There shall be refunded to the current owners of property for which a fee was previously collected the balance of such moneys in the same proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular area of benefit For the purposes of this paragraph the term “property for which a fee was previously collected” shall be deemed to include land within any land division with respect to which such fees were paid as a condition to its approval and any building with respect to which such fees were paid as a condition to issuing a building permit therefor. For purposes of this paragraph the term “fee collected” shall include, in the case of a subdivider who has entered into a reimbursement agreement with the city, the aggregate amount of cash fees and the value of the consideration in lieu of fees furnished by such subdivider.

2.     Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been subdivided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected.

3.     There shall be transferred to the city general fund any remaining portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons entitled thereto within two years from the date of adoption of the resolution declaring a surplus.

For the purposes of this paragraph, the term “fee collected” or any variation thereof, shall also be deemed to include the amount of fees that would have been payable by a subdivider but for furnishing consideration in lieu of fees.

K.    The city council may authorize advancement of money from the city general fund or from the road fund to pay the cost of constructing any bridge project or major thoroughfare project and may reimburse such fund or funds for such advances from the planned bridge facility fund or the planned major thoroughfare fund established to finance the construction of such improvements.

L.     Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares to defray costs not allocated to an area of benefit.

M.    Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the subdivider from volunteering to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare or part thereof, or to contribute to the cost thereof, in excess of the cost of a local facility, nor to preclude the city from participating in such construction or carrying out such construction using money so contributed. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.060 Planned drainage facilities.
In accordance with Government Code Section 66483, the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate and as permitted by law, shall require payment of fees for purposes of defraying the costs of constructing planned drainage facilities if any part of the land division is located within a planned drainage area. If the subdivider installs planned drainage facilities, fees shall be reduced accordingly. Fees required pursuant to this section and associated with residential development shall be paid consistent with the provisions of Section 66007 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.070 Railroad and grade crossing.
If the question of railway crossings is involved, the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate, shall consider the plan of the land division in its relation to the probability of grade separation or other treatment of such crossings, and shall require as permitted by law such provisions in the design of the land division as will prevent interference with future grade separation or such other treatment. If a grade separation is identified in the circulation element of the general plan, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer for dedication the rights-of-way required for this improvement. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.080 Local transit facilities.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, in accordance with Government Code Section 66475.2, and as permitted by law, the subdivider may be required to dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the land division for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, landing pads, park-and-ride facilities and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the land division, if:

A.    The land division as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwellings or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the general plan or contains one hundred acres or more; and

B.     If the city finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable period of time, be made available to the land division.

The provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the land division airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old where no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.090 Solar access easements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 66475.3 of the Subdivision Map Act, a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the land division shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the land division for any solar energy system, as defined in Section 801.5 of the California Civil Code. In establishing such easements, considerations shall be given to feasibility, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time such tentative map is filed.

At the time of tentative map approval, the planning commission or city council, as the case may be, shall specify the following:

A.    The standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of such easements;

B.     Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects that would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement;

C.     The terms for conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or terminated.

The foregoing provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the land division of airspace in an existing apartment building where no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.100 School site dedications.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, or a tentative parcel map, and in accordance with Government Code Section 66478, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more land division which the Manteca Unified School District shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the city shall deem necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon elementary schools necessary to assure the residents of the land division adequate public school service.

A.    The requirement for dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall automatically be terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the land division.

B.     The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1.     The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2.     The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3.     Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative map. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.110 Telephone and cable television system requirements.
Whenever the city imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, the subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding, or relocation. All these costs shall be billed to the subdivider directly by the telephone corporation or cable television system after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. In no event shall the city be obligated for reimbursement of any costs for the replacement, undergrounding or relocation of telephone corporation or cable television system facilities. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.120 Reservations.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, and in accordance with Government Code Section 66479 et seq., the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B.     Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan, the general plan, or a recreation district’s master park and recreation plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as determined by the city in accordance with the goals, policies and standards contained in the specific plan, general plan, and master park and recreation plan, as applicable. The reserved area must be of such size and shape to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan, general plan, and master park and recreation plan, as applicable, and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.     The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of recordation of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

E.     If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.21.130 Amendments to recorded final maps.
A.    Recorded final maps may be amended; provided, that after a public hearing conducted before the city council, the city council finds all of the following:

1.     That there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such map no longer appropriate or necessary; and

2.     That the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; and

3.     That the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and

4.     That the map as modified conforms to the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.

B.     The public hearing required hereunder shall be held in compliance with Government Code Section 66451.3 and shall be confined to consideration of and action on the proposed modification. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 1997)

 

Chapter 16.23 LAND DIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
16.23.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for improvements, improvement plans, agreements, security, construction and inspection related to the division of land. This chapter sets forth actions required of a subdivider prior to the recordation of a final or parcel map. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.020 General policy.
A.    The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on and off-site according to the city standard plans and specifications.

B.     No final map shall be presented to the council for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such work.

C.     Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for land divisions of four or fewer parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or the land division improvement agreement shall be executed prior to or concurrent with the recordation of the parcel map.

D.    Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with Section 16.23.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.030 Improvements required.
A.    Street and Highway Improvements.

1.     The subdivider shall improve all streets, highways, alleys, public ways and easements as follows:

a.     All street improvements shall be made in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications.

b.     The location, type, character and dimensions of all structures and grades of work shall be subject to approval by the public works department.

c.     All required road improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer or appropriate public entity.

d.     Except as otherwise expressly provided, the alignment criteria for all roads shall be in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications.

e.     In those cases where approved plans and profiles are required, the same shall be filed with and approved by the public works department.

f.      All required road improvements shall be located within road rights-of-way which conform to the requirements of this chapter.

g.     Street and highway improvements shall conform to the standards set forth in the city’s standard plans and specifications.

2.     Dead End Streets.

a.     Wherever a dead end street more than one hundred and fifty feet long, as measured from the centerline of the nearest intersection, is permitted, a “turn around” shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications. If the “turn around” is outside the land division boundary, an easement therefor shall be offered for dedication to the city.

b.     When an existing dead end street with an existing “turn around” is extended, the developer constructing the new street shall perform all work necessary to eliminate the “turn around.”

3.     Street Adjacent Railroad. Where the land division is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way and topography permits, highways in the same direction as the railroad shall be adjacent to and as nearly parallel to such railroad right-of-way as practicable.

4.     Street Railroad Crossing. If a street crosses railroad tracks, the subdivider shall pay all costs of construction and costs of protection devices as may be required by the city and/or the California Public Utilities Commission, except for any portion required by the California Public Utilities Commission to be paid by the railroad company.

5.     Access Roads.

a.     Each parcel created by any land division subject to this title shall be connected by means of an approved access road or roads to a public highway which is maintained by the city or other public entity or government agency.

b.     The city may require such additional access roads as may be needed for emergency purposes and for safe and adequate circulation within the land division.

c.     Access roads shall be topographically feasible for travel by standard passenger cars and shall be made and kept open, clear and free from obstructions, buildings or structures of any kind as determined by the city.

d.     Access roads shall be improved in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications.

e.     Required access shall be over public roads, provided that the planning commission or the city council, as appropriate, may grant a variance authorizing access over a private road or over a road dedicated to a semipublic use by way of a dedication made for the exclusive use and benefit of all properties located within the land division or within a public district.

f.      Except where access can be provided over an existing public road, access roads shall be dedicated or offered for dedication.

g.     On-site access roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty feet, except that in case the road is along the boundary, it shall be a minimum width of forty feet.

h.     For parcel maps, off-site access roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty feet, except where a previously approved access road exists at a lesser width.

i.      For subdivision maps, off-site access shall have a minimum width of fifty feet, except where located along a major or secondary highway alignment where the appropriate minimum half-width easement shall be required.

6.     Removal of Obstructions.

a.     All obstructions shall be removed from the streets, roadways, or rights-of-way dedicated in the final map of a subdivision or which are deeded to the city in connection therewith which in the determination of the public works department interfere with the use thereof or constitute a dangerous or hazardous condition to the traveling public.

b.     All obstructions shall be removed which are located within existing city, state or county streets or roadways lying immediately adjacent to streets, roadways or rights-of-way which are dedicated in the final map or which are deeded by the subdivider to the city in connection therewith and which obstructions, in the determination of the public works department, interfere with the use of such existing city, state or county streets or roadways, or constitute a dangerous or hazardous condition to the traveling public.

c.     Such obstructions shall be relocated without expense to the city to such locations as specified by the public works department or in the plans and profiles for the land division.

d.     It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to contact the utility companies or other owners of said obstructions to advise them of proposed improvement, and make direct arrangements for the relocation of and compensation for the cost of relocating any conflicting obstructions. Evidence of such completed arrangements shall be presented by the subdivider to the public works department prior to the final approval of the improvement plans by the city.

e.     All easements which affect the intended and/ or permitted use of a lot or parcel shall be quitclaimed, abandoned or relocated prior to recordation of any final map.

B.     Water Supply.

1.     The subdivider shall install a water system for the land division, together with such equipment, pipelines and facilities as may be necessary to insure the land division with an adequate supply of water for domestic and fire protection purposes.

2.     The water distribution system shall be designed in accordance with standards for the design and construction of water systems adopted by the city council.

3.     The minimum supply of water which shall be required for the land division under subsection (B)(1) of this section, shall be in accordance with the standards adopted by the city council.

4.     If any part of the land division is located in a designated urban area, and if any parcel created by the land division is less than five acres gross area, a domestic water supply and distribution system shall be furnished and constructed, subject to the city standard plans and specifications, to serve all lots in the land division.

5.     The provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section, shall only be operative while there are in effect regulations in the city building codes requiring as a condition to issuance of a building permit for a dwelling the construction of specified water storage facilities, pipes and valves and the assurance of a specified fire flow requirement for purposes of fighting fire on the dwelling site, or while there shall be in effect a specific plan applicable to such lot requiring such matters as a condition to issuance of a building permit for a dwelling thereon.

6.     With respect to any parcel created by parcel map with an area of two and one-half acres or more and zoned for single-family dwelling purposes, a limited exception dispensing with the requirements of such water distribution system and community fire protection facilities may be granted by the city engineer and fire chief.

7.     Construction plans for such water supply and distribution system shall be supplied by the subdivider and shall be approved by the public works department and the fire department consistent with the city standard plans and specifications.

C.     Sanitary Sewers.

1.     Where a proposed land division creates parcels of less than two and one-half acres and is located within three hundred feet of a sanitary sewer system or where required by an adopted general or specific plan, all of the lots within the land division shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system upon the following conditions:

a.     The existing or proposed wastewater treatment plant for the system has or will provide the capacity to serve the land division;

b.     The legal entity in charge of the sanitary sewer system has agreed to furnish its sewerage facilities to the land division;

c.     Connection to the sanitary sewer system is technically and economically feasible, as determined by the public works department.

2.     In any case, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer facilities for the land division under such circumstances as they are necessary in the opinion of the city engineer. The sewage collection and treatment system shall be designed by the subdivider’s civil engineer and shall be approved by the city engineer.

D.    Grading, Drainage, and Erosion Control.

1.     The subdivider shall be required to make those improvements deemed necessary by the city engineer for proper grading of the land within the land division, drainage and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or other damage to property or improvements within or outside the land division.

2.     The subdivider shall be required to obtain or provide land dedication or easements on land within or outside the land division as deemed necessary by the city engineer for protection against flooding, sedimentation or other damage to property or improvements within or outside the land division.

3.     Grading shall be subject to the city standard plans and specifications.

4.     All drainage improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the public works department.

E.     Underground Utility Distribution Facilities.

1.     All utility distribution facilities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service, installed to serve a residential land division shall be placed underground.

2.     The installation of Street lights shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. The street lights shall be placed in locations as approved by the city engineer.

3.     The subdivider is responsible for making all the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved with the installation of the facilities required by subsections (E)(l) and (E)(2) of this section.

4.     When underground utility distribution facilities are to be installed, they shall be located in a public right-of-way, public utility easement or private right-of-way.

F.     Street Trees. Street trees are the responsibility of the subdivider as provided in the “Street tree ordinance” (No. 169). They shall be planted as approved in the tentative subdivision or tentative parcel map and be of an approved type and size. Proper care and maintenance is the subdivider’s responsibility until this responsibility is assumed by the purchaser of the lot. The subdivider may arrange with the city for purchasing and planting of street trees, if he or she elects to do so, as provided by Ordinance No. 169. Street trees may be included in the improvement completion agreement pursuant to Section 16.23.080 A, to ensure proper planting and maintenance of the trees. An alternative procedure acceptable to the city council or city engineer, as appropriate, makes a finding that the alternate procedure will assure the installation and maintenance of street trees.

G.    Fire Protection Facilities Requirement. Fire protection facilities shall be installed in all land divisions in accordance with the standards for fire protection facilities in the city adopted by the city council.

H.    Solid Waste. For those land divisions not located within the vicinity of an adequate existing solid waste disposal site, the subdivider shall provide a means satisfactory to the city engineer for the disposal of solid waste from the land division. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.040 Oversizing of improvements.
A.    In accordance with Government Code Section 66485 et seq., the city may by resolution, require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of a land division shall contain supplemental size, capacity, length or number for the benefit of property not located within the land division, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public.

B.     In the event of the installation of improvements required by the city pursuant to subsection A of this section, the city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements, including an amount attributable to interest, equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the land division only and the actual cost of such improvements.

C.     In order the pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the city may:

1.     Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the land division, a reasonable charge for such use;

2.     Contribute to the subdivider that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of the real property outside the land division and levy a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse itself for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider.

3.     Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charges or costs from the property benefited.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.050 Deferred improvements.
Improvements required for the recordation of a parcel map may be deferred upon approval by the city engineer, upon a finding that the following conditions exist:

A.    The property to be subdivided has no established use; and

B.     The Zoning District which is applicable to the property requires similar improvements or improvements of a higher standard at such time that a use is established. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.060 Design.
A.    General Design Criteria. The design and layout of each land division shall conform the Subdivision Map Act, to all of the elements of the city general plan and any applicable specific plan or official and specific plan lines.

B.     Streets and Highways.

1.     The following standards, together with the provisions of the city standard plans and specifications, are minimum requirements of this chapter. All roads shall be designed to allow for safe traffic movement, and higher standards may be required where reasonably necessary for such purpose.

a.     Arterial rights-of-way shall be not less than eighty-four feet in width.

b.     Collector rights-of-way shall be not less than sixty feet in width.

c.     Local street rights-of-way shall be not less than fifty feet in width.

d.     Specific or official plan lines shall be the minimum width as specified by the applicable plan.

e.     State highways shall be the minimum width as specified by the California Department of Transportation and/or the circulation element of the general plan.

f.      Full-width street improvements including curb, gutter, matching paving, parking lane and curbs and gutters on far side shall be required.

g.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the city council, by four-fifths vote, as provided in Section 1805 of the California Streets and Highways Code, may approve a part-width street along the boundary of a land division that consists of full improvements to the subdivision side of centerline, plus one twelve-foot paved traffic lane and one and two-foot paved shoulder beyond centerline.

h.     The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be three hundred feet.

i.      Frontage road right-of-way widths shall be a minimum of fifty feet.

j.      Minimum centerline radius shall be two hundred fifty feet for fifty-foot rights-of-way, four hundred feet for sixty-foot rights-of-way, seven hundred feet for seventy-foot rights-of-way and one thousand feet for arterials.

2.     Modified Public Streets. Modified public streets are allowed in the following situations:

a.     The project site is two acres in gross size or less and has a general plan designation and a zoning classification of residential;

b.     The project site is constrained from access by development on at least two sides;

c.     Where it can be determined that the modification will provide for adequate public safety access, safety and solid waste collection;

d.     Where it can be determined that the modification will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the property or residents in the vicinity.

i.      The following modifications to the public street standards are allowed:

(A)   The overall street width may be reduced. At no time shall the minimum curb to curb width be reduced beyond twenty-eight feet (assuming parking on one side) or thirty-six feet (assuming parking on two sides);

(B)   On-street parking may be eliminated on one side. At any time parking is eliminated from one side of the street that side shall be marked no parking per city standards;

(C)   The length of a cul-de-sac may be increased to a maximum of six hundred feet;

(D)   Sidewalks may be eliminated from one side of the street. If homes are only on one side of the street, the sidewalk shall be on that side. The elimination of a sidewalk shall not create a safety hazard or be in conflict with the American Disability Act;

(E)   Modifications to the vehicle turn-around may be allowed if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the public works director that they meet the public safety access and solid waste collection criteria.

C.     Street Access.

1.     Access to Lots.

a.     Each lot shall have frontage on a public street or public access easement, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(i) of this section.

b.     The primary means of vehicular access to each lot shall be by means of direct physical connection to the street which fronts upon the lot. The feasibility of such primary means of access must be demonstrated as provided in this section.

c.     If access to the street which fronts upon the lot is prevented by a legal limitation imposed or approved by the city or state, such primary means of access may be a connection to any street adjacent to the lot, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section.

d.     In conjunction with the design and approval of any tentative subdivision map, the subdivider shall demonstrate, by means of a lot use feasibility study, that prospective building sites and driveway locations are both feasible and probable and in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, including, but not limited to, the Uniform Fire Code.

e.     The subdivider may elect, at his or her option, to improve driveways in conjunction with the land division work; and if he or she so elects, that portion of any driveway not located within a public right-of-way shall not be subject to the improvement agreement or security required by this chapter. If the subdivider improves any driveway prior to the completion of the land division improvement work, it shall be constructed in a location on the lot(s) satisfactorily demonstrated to the city engineer to be feasible.

f.      Driveway improvements located on a lot, and not within a public right-of-way, shall be subject to the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Building Code and the zoning ordinance.

g.     Driveway improvements located within a public right-of-way shall be subject to the city standard plans and specifications, standard plans and specifications, and the reasonable requirements of the public works department.

h.     This section shall not be construed as requiring that a driveway constructed subsequent to the improvement work of the land division must be located in the manner demonstrated by the subdivider under subsection (C)(1)(d) of this section; provided, however, that it shall be subject to the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Building Code provisions relating to driveways.

i.      Upon approval of a variance, lots within a land division may have frontage on a private street which is an integral part of the overall design and use of the improvements, which shall be designed and improved according to the standards in this chapter, unless otherwise allowed by variance.

j.      Land divisions shall not be designed with single-family residential lots or parcels fronting on an arterial except as follows:

i.      The land division is designed so that all lots or parcels will obtain access from a local street, access rights to the arterial or collector are relinquished, and a vehicular access control wall or fence, as approved by the city engineer, is constructed; or

ii.     A frontage road is provided.

D.    Blocks. The following standards apply to all land division types:

1.     Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet, provided that a limited exception may be granted by the community development director and the city engineer where such lengths are precluded by existing adjacent development, canals, drainage channels, railroad rights-of-way, topographic features or other similar obstructions.

2.     The width of each block shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots except where through or double front lots are permitted.

3.     Pedestrian easements shall be provided when required by the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate, where such easements are necessary to provide access to schools, parks, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation facilities or other public use facilities. The city council or the planning commission, as appropriate, may require such easements to be approximately landscaped and lighted, and the design of each pedestrian easement shall be approved by the planning commission and the city engineer.

E.     Block Corner Treatment. All property line corner radii at intersections for divisions of land shall be a minimum of twenty feet, unless a limited exception is approved by the city engineer.

F.     Lots and Parcels.

1.     Every interior and key lot shall have a minimum width of sixty feet and a minimum depth of one hundred feet; every corner lot shall have a minimum width of sixty-six feet and a minimum depth of one hundred feet. Lot widths shall be measured at the building setback line except as noted in subsection (F)(2) of this section.

2.     Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac or knuckle shall have a minimum frontage of forty-five feet measured at the street right-of-way line, except in the case of a flag lot where frontage may be reduced to a minimum of twenty-five feet.

3.     Lot depths shall not exceed three times the proposed lot width except where existing topography makes such dimensions infeasible.

4.     No lot shall have double frontage except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, the city zoning ordinance, or necessitated by topography. When double frontage lots are necessitated by topography, the dedications of vehicular access restrictions along one of the streets shall be required.

5.     The side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street upon which the lots face whenever possible.

6.     Flag lots may be approved, subject to the following requirements:

a.     The maximum depth of the flag lot shall be one hundred fifty feet, provided that by joint approval the planning commission and the fire chief may grant a limited exception allowing a maximum depth of not more than two hundred feet.

b.     Each flag lot shall be not less than twenty-five feet wide or the minimum width required for vehicular access under the Uniform Fire Code, whichever is greater.

c.     The grade along the flag lot shall not exceed the maximum grade provided for vehicular access under the Uniform Fire Code.

d.     In conjunction with the design and approval of the tentative map, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that such flag lot can provide a primary means of vehicular access in the manner provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this section.

e.     Additional fire hydrants may be required on or near such lots by the fire chief.

G.    Lot Sizes and Related Design and Improvement Requirements.

1.     Minimum lot sizes shall conform to the general plan, including but not limited to the open space element, and any applicable specific plan.

2.     Minimum lot sizes shall conform to the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of approval of the final map.

3.     Minimum lot sizes shall, in any case, be subject to any more stringent requirements of the city standard plans and specifications.

4.     The pole portion of a flag lot shall not be counted in determining the net area of a lot under the provisions of this section.

H.    Watercourses.

1.     In accordance with Sections 66478.1 through 66478.10 inclusive of the Subdivision Map Act, if the land division is to front upon a public waterway, river, or stream, as defined in Section 66478.4(c) of the Subdivision Map Act, access routes and easements along the bank shall be provided as follows:

a.     The land division shall provide, or have available, reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to that portion of the bank of such river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed land division, as determined by the planning commission in accordance with Section 66478.5 of the California Government Code;

b.     The land division shall provide for a dedication of a public easement along a portion of the bank of such river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed land division, as determined by the city council in accordance with Section 66478.5 of the California Government Code; and

c.     The planning commission shall determine the governmental entity to which such access route or easement shall be dedicated, and all dedications shall be in accordance with Section 66478.6 of the California Government Code.

2.     In accordance with Section 66478.12 of the California Government Code, if the land division is to front upon any lake or reservoir which is owned in part or entirely by any public agency, including but not limited to the United States, state or the city, the land divisions shall be provided with or have available reasonable access by fee or easement from public highways to the water of the lake or reservoir upon which the land division borders either within the land division or a reasonable distance from the land division, as determined by the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate, in accordance with said statute. The planning commission shall determine the governmental entity to which such dedication shall be made.

3.     In the event a land division is traversed by a river, stream or creek, the subdivider shall leave such river, stream or creek in its natural condition whenever practical. Sufficient right-of-way shall be dedicated to the city or other public entity and improved for flood control purposes as necessary to accommodate flows of water that would be generated by a flood of one hundred year frequency. In the event a land division is to front upon a river, stream or creek, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to that portion of the bank thereof bordering or lying within the proposed land division. The planning commission shall determine the governmental entity to which such dedication shall be made.

I.      Land Division Design.

1.     Where the keeping of equine animals is proposed as a use within a development, the subdivider shall provide adequate equestrian trails as an integral part of the development, and prior to approval of the final map a means shall be provided for maintenance of any such ways and trails, as approved by the planning commission; provided that a limited exception may be granted by the planning commission for the establishment of equestrian trails where such trails are precluded by location and design of the proposed land division.

2.     Within a development of urban density, as defined by the general plan, the subdivider is encouraged to provide pedestrian ways and shall provide bikeways as required by the general plan as an integral part of the development, and in such cases, prior to approval of the final map, a means shall be provided for the maintenance of any such ways, as approved by the planning commission or city council.

3.     The subdivider shall provide public utility easements as may be required for the various concerned utility companies or districts, as determined by the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate.

4.     The planning commission, the city engineer, or the city council may require dedication of non-access strips and/or waiver of vehicular access rights, wherever necessary to regulate access and control future development.

5.     Solid masonry walls, measured from the adjacent higher surface, shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications for land divisions in the following instances:

a.     A six-foot high wall on all rear and side property lines of land divisions zoned for single-family residential purposes that are contiguous to a major collector or arterial roadway, as deemed necessary by the city engineer;

b.     An eight-foot high wall on all rear and side property lines of land divisions zoned for single-family residential purposes that are contiguous to property zoned for multifamily, commercial or industrial purposes;

c.     A seven-foot high wall on all property lines abutting a city park;

d.     As recommended by the development review committee and approved by the city council or the planning commission, as appropriate.

6.     Street lighting shall be installed by the developer as a condition of approval of all land divisions. The lighting must meet the minimum maintained levels as recommended by the city engineer, and the lighting design must be based upon the city standard plans and specifications.

J.      Street Names and Signs.

1.     Street Definitions.

a.     Streets. City approved vehicle paths of travel serving three or more properties, street-facing residences, or businesses shall be named to aid in public safety related matters. All street names submitted through the building and planning process require city staff approval prior to submission for recordation. Addresses shall be issued to all structures along a street deemed necessary by the city building official.

b.     City Service Roads. City approved vehicle paths that connect one street with another, containing less than three parcels, shall be named to aid in public safety related matters, as outlined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

c.     South San Joaquin Region. Encompasses the city of Manteca, city of Tracy, city of Ripon, city of Escalon, city of Stockton (south of Highway 4), and the communities of Mountain House and Salida (Stanislaus County). This includes the rural areas within San Joaquin County, south of Highway 4.

d.     Reviewing Agencies. The Public Safety Review Group shall include at least one representative from Geographic Information Systems staff, the city of Manteca fire department, the city of Manteca police department, and the county sherriff’s office. Additional agencies may be included in the review process as needed.

2.     Street Prefixes.

a.     New streets shall have a prefix compass designation (N, S, E or W) only if the streets cross the following designated major streets:

i.      YOSEMITE AV or MAIN ST

b.     The prefix compass designation shall be determined by the location of the street relative to YOSEMITE AV or MAIN ST (MC 15.36.040):

i.      The northern portion of a street that crosses YOSEMITE AV shall have an N prefix compass designation.

ii.     The southern portion of a street that crosses YOSEMITE AV shall have an S prefix compass designation.

iii.    The western portion of a street that crosses MAIN ST shall have a W prefix compass designation.

iv.    The eastern portion of a street that crosses MAIN ST shall have an E prefix compass designation.

3.     Street Suffixes.

a.     All new streets shall have one of the following street type designations:

i.      ALLEY  AL

ii.     AVENUE  AV

iii.    BOULEVARD  BL

iv.    CIRCLE  CI

v.     COURT  CT

vi.    CRESCENT  CR

vii.   CROSSING  XG

viii.  DRIVE  DR

ix.    EXPRESSWAY  EY

x.     FREEWAY  FY

xi.    GLEN  GL

xii.   HIGHWAY  HY

xiii.  LANE  LN

xiv.  LOOP  LP

xv.   PARKWAY  PK

xvi.  PLACE  PL

xvii. PLAZA  PZ

xviii. POINT  PT

xix.  ROAD  RD

xx.   RUN  RN

xxi.  SQUARE  SQ

xxii. STREET  ST

xxiii. TERRACE  TE

xxiv. TRAIL  TR

xxv. WALK  WK

xxvi. WAY  WY

b.     Street suffixes are subject to approval by city staff and may be declined for any reason. Acceptable replacements shall be provided in the event a suffix is declined.

c.     All suffix designations shall be spelled out in full on the final map.

4.     Street Names.

a.     All streets on the same alignment shall bear the same name, where practical.

b.     Street signs shall be provided for all land divisions in accordance with city standard plans and specifications.

c.     New street names shall not exceed fifteen letters (excluding prefix and type designations) to accommodate Emergency 911 databases and city street signs.

d.     No street name shall consist of more than two words (excluding prefix and type designations).

e.     Prefix and type designations, or homonyms thereof, shall not be permitted as part of the root street name (example: E SOUTH ST, COUNTRY ROAD DR).

f.      Abbreviations, symbols, single alphabetical letters, punctuation, numeric characters, and numbers spelled out shall be prohibited.

g.     Conjunctions may not be used as part of a street name (example: SILVER AND GOLD DR).

h.     All street names shall be of the commonly accepted spelling, according to a standard dictionary.

i.      All street names shall be appropriate, easy to read, and easy to pronounce (so that children can use the name in an emergency or otherwise stressful situation).

j.      There shall be no duplication of existing street names within the South San Joaquin Region, unless the new street is a continuation of an existing street. Street segments may be considered continuous only where there is less than a two hundred fifty-foot centerline alignment offset.

k.     The use of offensive words or language is prohibited. City staff shall determine whether the word(s) or language is offensive.

l.      There shall be no duplicating any part of an existing name; no new street names shall include existing names within the South San Joaquin Region (example: PINE STREET and PINE CONE STREET). Exceptions may be considered on a case-by-case basis.

 

m.    Variations of the same name with a different street type designation shall be prohibited within the South San Joaquin Region (example: MONROE LN, MONROE DR). Exceptions to this would be a court or place off of a street (example: SEQUOIA ST, SEQUIOA PL).

n.     Names of similar pronunciation and/or spelling within the South San Joaquin Region shall be prohibited to prevent confusion for emergency services and the general public. If the reviewing agencies cannot agree on whether a street name sounds too similar to another, the block range shall be used to determine whether to approve a street name. If both streets fall within the city limits, the street name shall not be approved regardless of block range (example: NOT ALLOWED: 2400-2500 MICKEY ST in Manteca and 2400-2500 MIKEY DR in Tracy or 300-400 STEVEN ST in Manteca and 3000-4000 STEPHEN ST in Tracy. POTENTIALLY ALLOWED: 200-300 MERRY ST in Manteca and 1500-1600 MURRAY LN in Escalon).

5.     Street Segments.

a.     Where a through street makes a distinguishable change in direction and cannot be considered curvilinear, a separate name for each direction shall be assigned. See Figure 16.23.060-1 (Change in Direction).

 

FIGURE 16.23.060-1: CHANGE IN DIRECTION

 

b.     When streets can reasonably be considered as either north-south or east-west oriented, they must not cross a street with the same orientation whenever possible (example: No East-West meets East-West or North-South meets North-South). See Figure 16.23.060-2 (Orientation).

 

FIGURE 16.23.060-2: ORIENTATION

 

c.     Where there is more than one access point from different streets to a circular loop street, each directional segment of a circular or loop road should be named separately. See Figure 16.23.060-3 (Loop Street).

 

FIGURE 16.23.060-3: LOOP STREET



 

d.     No street name may connect into any other street so as to create more than one intersection of the same named street. See Figure 16.23.060-4 (Intersection).

 

FIGURE 16.23.060-4: INTERSECTION

 

e.     Where the continuation of a through street is restricted by design, separate names shall be designated for the various lengths of the street. See Figure 16.23.060-5 (Through Street).

 

FIGURE 16.23.060-5: THROUGH STREET

f.      Cul-de-sacs shall be considered a separate street from their cross street as defined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

g.     Frontage roads shall bear the same designation as the main traveled street except when the main traveled street is a designated state or federal route. Frontage roads on state or federal routes shall be assigned names separate from highway designations.

h.     A street that crosses city/county jurisdictional boundaries shall be given separate names within each jurisdiction if necessary to avoid any potential addressing conflicts arising from separately maintained addressing grids or systems.

6.     Street Annexations. When an existing street is annexed into the city, the city reserves the right to rename streets if they are not in compliance with city standards. This includes assigning or changing prefixes to comply with prefix standards (example: S AIRPORT WY to N AIRPORT WY).

7.     Private Road Names.

a.     All procedures, standards, and requirements for public road names shall apply to private roads.

b.     The private road must serve as the primary access for the properties.

c.     The various owners shall be in agreement as to the name of the road before submitting the name for review. If the various owners cannot agree upon a road name, the city shall assign the road name.

K.    Addresses.

1.     Address Criteria. The following criteria provide a standardized addressing method for properties within the city that minimizes confusion and conflict for the public, delivery agencies, and public safety staff. The process for proposing and approving new addresses is outlined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

2.     Address Rules.

a.     All new addresses/address changes must be approved by city staff. Address change requests shall be submitted to and reviewed by city GIS staff. The address change request shall be submitted through the Address Change Request Form.

b.     North-south block ranges begin at 100 on either side of YOSEMITE AVE, and east-west block ranges begin at 100 on either side of MAIN ST. New block ranges must fit logically with the existing block grid, and addresses must fit logically within the block ranges.

c.     On streets designated north-south, odd numbers must be on the west side of the street and even numbers must be on the east side of the street. On streets designated east-west, odd numbers must be on the north side of the street, and even numbers must be on the south side of the street.

d.     Numbers must be sequential along a continuous street.

e.     A/B and ½ designations shall be prohibited, except in the following scenarios:

i.      If two or more new addresses are required, and they are bounded by sequential numbers above and below (example: Between 222 and 226), letter designations are allowed (example: 224A and 224B).

ii.     If one or more new addresses are required on a parcel with an existing address that cannot be changed, and it is bounded by sequential addresses above and below (example: Existing address is 120, between 118 and 122), fractional designations are allowed (example: 120 and 120 ½). If the existing address can be changed, A/B designations are preferred.

iii.    Each duplex or triplex shall be assigned a numeric address in accordance with city addressing guidelines. Each individual unit of a duplex or triplex shall be given A/B/C designations, as necessary (example: 100 MAIN ST, UNIT A and 100 MAIN ST, UNIT B). Any complex larger than a triplex is defined as an apartment complex and should follow the apartment recommendations in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city staff.

f.      Commercial suites shall be numbered 101, 102, 103, etc. For multi-story buildings, suites shall correspond with the floor number (2nd Floor: 201, 202, 203, etc.). Suites shall ascend in the direction of the street addresses wherever possible.

g.     Apartments.

i.      If all buildings are located on one parcel on the same side of the street with the same address, the apartment numbers must ascend in a logical order with each apartment receiving a unique number, regardless of building letter or number.

ii.     If buildings are located on different parcels and on different sides of the street, with different addresses, apartment numbers may be assigned independently for each address, but it is recommended that each apartment receive a unique number regardless of address and building letter/number.

h.     Reserved numbers shall be designated for possible future commercial splits, combines, and/or split and combines. These numbers shall be issued every twenty feet.

i.      Newly assigned address numbers must be placed on all structures within forty-five days of address assignment. The old address number may be displayed concurrently with the new address number for up to six months after the new address number is assigned. Noncompliance will result in action as outlined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

j.      Annexed properties will be addressed to meet the standards outlined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

k.     City GIS staff has authorization to correct any errors in a numeric address or street range that violate the standards and shall provide written notice to the owner as outlined in the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff.

l.      Further addressing considerations must comply with the Addressing Protocols and Guidelines document maintained by city GIS staff and are at the discretion of city GIS staff.

(O2017-17 § 1; Ord. 1325 § 1, 2006; Ord. 936 § 1, 1992)

 

16.23.070 Improvement plans.
A.    General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and shall be signed and sealed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state. Improvement plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities. The public works department will review all improvement plans except for drainage plans outside a planned drainage area.

B.     Form. The form of the improvement plan shall be as specified by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the city engineer.

C.     Contents. The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private, including common areas and shall be submitted with the appropriate fees. Improvement plans shall not be reviewed until the public works department has determined that the submittal is complete.

D.    Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates, sewage calculations and any structural calculations, as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and sealed, and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form approved by the city engineer.

E.     Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans, all computations and appropriate improvement plan checking fees to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans with the required revisions indicated will be returned to the subdivider’s engineer.

F.     Approval by the City Engineer.

1.     After completing all required revisions, the subdivider’s engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for signature.

2.     Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans.

3.     Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the gas, electric, telephone, cable television or irrigation district construction plans.

4.     Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map.

G.    Revisions to Approved Plans.

1.     By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the originals shall be submitted to the city engineer for initialing. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and forwarded to the city inspection division.

2.     By the City Engineer.

a.     When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and engineer. The subdivider’s engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for initialing within the time specified by the city engineer.

b.     If revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer, construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped until revised drawings have been submitted.

c.     The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk within ten days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

H.    Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised prints and applied toward the actual costs. (Ord. 936 § 1, 1992)

 

16.23.080 Completion of improvements.
A.    Improvement Completion Agreements.

1.     Completion Agreement Required.

a.     The subdivider shall enter into an agreement for completion of improvement work, to be effective concurrently with approval of the final map by the city council which shall require faithful, proper and full completion of all improvement work, required to be done under the provisions of this chapter. The subdivider shall furnish agreement improvement security and insurance. The final map shall not be approved until such documents have been filed with the city clerk and are in proper form and fully executed. The city engineer may also require, where he or she deems appropriate, a completion agreement as a condition of approval of a parcel map.

b.     The city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, shall have discretion to require each completion agreement to contain provisions as it may deem to be in the public interest, for the proper protection of the city, its governing board, officers, employees and agents, and necessary for the prompt and faithful completion of such improvement work.

c.     The form of completion agreements shall be subject to approval by the city attorney.

d.     The subdivider’s surety shall endorse its consent on the completion agreement; provided, however, that failure to do so shall not affect the validity of such agreement nor the validity of the security.

e.     No limitation upon the liability of a corporate surety shall be construed as a limitation on the liability of the subdivider.

f.      The liability of the subdivider shall not be deemed limited to the amount of the improvement security in any case.

 

2.     Exceptions. This section does not apply to work which has been completed, approved and secured in conformity with Section 16.13.060 of this title.

3.     Completion Agreement for Waiver of Parcel Map.

a.     In cases where the, requirement for filing a parcel map is waived, unless all of the improvements required as a condition of such waiver have been constructed and approved, the city engineer shall not issue a certificate of compliance and no certificate of compliance or other evidence of waiver shall be filed for record, until the improvement agreement and the improvement security have been approved and accepted as provided in this chapter.

b.     Requirements for construction of improvements under improvement agreement, as provided in this section, shall be noticed by and referred to in a certificate on the parcel map or on the certificate of compliance or other instrument evidencing the waiver of parcel map, or by a separate instrument, and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or certificate of compliance or other instrument evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, as the case may be.

B.     Completion of Improvements.

1.     Time Limits for Completion of Improvements.

a.     Land Divisions of Five or More Parcels. The improvements for land divisions of five or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within twelve months, or some later time as provided by the city council or city engineer, as appropriate, pursuant to subsection A of this section.

b.     Land Divisions of Four or Fewer Parcels. The completion of improvements for land divisions of four or fewer parcels shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the land division is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the city when the completion of improvements are found to be necessary for the public health and safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the land division improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to the final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the land division.

c.     Should the subdivider fail to complete improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

2.     Time Extensions.

a.     The city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, upon a showing of good cause by the subdivider, may authorize an extension of time for completion of improvement work under any agreement subject to this chapter, for a period of not more than one year, or for one or more additional successive periods of not more than one year each; provided, however, that the aggregate of the time authorized for the completion of the improvement work shall not exceed five years from the date of approval of the final map.

b.     Each such extension of time shall be subject to written agreement between the city and subdivider.

c.     If the subdivider has filed a corporate surety bond to secure faithful performance, no such extension shall be granted nor be of any effect unless the surety has authorized such extension under the provisions of the bond, or shall consent to such extension of time in writing otherwise.

d.     As a condition of approval of any such extension of time, the city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, may require additional improvement security, if it is determined that the security on file may be insufficient to cover the cost of completion of all improvements.

e.     The city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, shall have discretion to grant such extensions of time as to certain areas of improvement features, and deny such extensions of time as to others, as may appear to be in the public interest.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.090 Improvement security.
A.    Filing Security. The completion agreement described in Section 16.23.080 of this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk prior to approval of the final map by the city council or the city engineer prior to approval of the parcel map.

B.     Requirements for Security. The completion agreement described in Section 16.23.080 of this chapter shall be secured by a good and sufficient improvement security in a form approved by the city attorney. All required securities shall be separate in form and amount. The completion agreement shall be secured in all the following ways:

1.     Security for Faithful Performance.

a.     Improvement security shall be provided to secure faithful performance of the completion agreement and the covenants thereof, including but not confined to, maintenance of improvements pending acceptance or approval, repair of damage to accepted work, and guarantee against defects.

b.     All forms of improvements security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of improvement work as determined by the city council or the city engineer, as appropriate.

2.     Security for Payments of Claims.

a.     Security shall be provided for payment of all claims and sums mentioned in Section 66499.2 of the California Government Code, including costs, reasonable expenses, and fees (including reasonable attorney’s fees) incurred in successfully enforcing such obligation.

b.     Security shall be in the amount of fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the work, as determined by the city council or the city engineer, as appropriate, and the obligation to pay such costs, expenses and fees shall be in addition to the face amount of such bond.

3.     Security Against Defective Work or Materials.

a.     Security shall be provided to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements.

b.     Security shall be in the amount of ten percent of the cost of construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period.

4.     Security for Monumentation.

a.     Security shall be provided to guarantee the proper placement of monuments.

b.     All forms of monumentation security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of monumentation work as determined by the city council or the city engineer, as appropriate.

In accordance with Section 66499.6 of the California Government Code, such security shall be held by the city as a trust fund to guarantee and secure performance of the subdivider’s obligations, and shall not be subject to levy or attachment by any creditors of the subdivider or other depositor thereof, except when and to the extent that it is reduced or released pursuant to Section 16.23.110 of this chapter.

C.     General Provisions.

1.     If a corporate surety shall undertake all or any part of the improvement, it shall be deemed to be subject to all of the covenants and guarantees of the subdivider as in completion agreement provided, except that the liability of the surety for faithful performance of the completion agreement shall not exceed the amount of its bond under other provisions of this chapter, and such other sums as the surety may be required to pay under the express provisions of the bond.

2.     The completion agreement may be amended by mutual agreement of the subdivider and the city, and extensions of time may be granted by the city for completion of the work or for the performance of any covenant therein or any act thereunder, and the city may waive the performance of any covenant therein or any act thereunder, and the city may waive the performance of the agreement in any respect, at any time and from time to time, without notice to or consent of the surety, and without prejudice to right of the city to recover against the surety upon the bond, all of which the surety shall authorize the city to do, subject to the provisions of this chapter respecting limitations on liability of the surety relative to changes or alterations.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.100 Inspection.
A.    Improvement work which is subject to a completion agreement shall be subject to inspection and approval by the public works department.

B.     The city council may authorize inspection and acceptance or approval in separate units, in its discretion, in the case of:

1.     A distinct area of the land division in which all improvement features will be completed at the same time, and which area will thereafter have all required access, improvements and services independent of any incomplete work in other areas, and which will not be subject to inference from or damage by incomplete work or the doing of any work; or

2.     A distinct feature of the improvement work which will be fully completed, and which will not be subject to interference from or damage by any incomplete work or the doing of any work.

C.     Certification of Inspection.

1.     When all of the required improvement work or a separate unit of the work has been properly and fully completed in accordance with completion agreement, the subdivider may apply in writing for inspection thereof.

2.     The responsible city official shall cause such inspection to be made within a reasonable time, and if he or she finds such work or unit thereof to have been properly and fully completed in accordance with such agreement and the rules relating to inspection, he or she shall certify such fact in writing to the city engineer.

(Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.23.110 Acceptance of improvements and release of security.
A.    When the city engineer has received all certificates pertaining to work or such separate unit of work, he or she shall within a reasonable time recommend to the city council acceptance of the improvements and exoneration of the improvement bond, in the case of parcel maps or final maps with associated improvement agreements, or shall sign the encroachment permit where no improvement agreement exists.

B.     If the city council finds that such work or unit thereof has been faithfully, properly and fully completed in accordance with such agreement and the rules relating to inspection, the city council shall make an order accepting or approving the work of improvement or completed unit thereof. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. Such order shall be deemed operative from the time the resolution of acceptance is approved and delivered to the city clerk.

C.     If the public improvements have been accepted by the city, the city clerk shall file an acceptance of public improvements with the county recorder.

D.    When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the city engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the city only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this chapter.

E.     Where All Work Accepted or Approved.

1.     When the city council makes an order accepting or approving all of the improvement work, an order shall also be made releasing the improvement security for faithful performance.

2.     When the city council makes an order accepting or approving all of the improvement work, the subdivider and his or her surety shall be deemed released from liability with respect to maintenance of improvements from the date such order is operative, excepting such obligations as may have accrued prior to the time such order is operative.

F.     Where Separate Unit of Work Accepted or Approved.

1.     When the city council makes an order accepting or approving a separate unit of the work, the improvement security for faithful performance shall be reduced in an amount commensurate with the unit of work completed and which will leave adequate security for completion of the remaining work, as determined by the city council in its discretion, and for the purposes mentioned below in this section.

2.     In such case, the city council shall order retained a reasonable amount to secure repair of damage to completed work.

3.     In such case, the city council shall order retained a reasonable amount to secure performance or payment of any obligations of the subdivider arising from failure to perform any covenant, including but not limited to any obligations which may have accrued.

4.     When the city council makes an order accepting or approving a separate unit of work, the subdivider and his or her surety shall be deemed released from liability with respect to maintenance of the work so accepted or approved from the time such order is operative, excepting such obligations as may have accrued prior to the time such order is operative.

G.    Release of Security Retained for Guarantee Against Defects.

1.     Upon the expiration of one year following the completion and acceptance of the work, the security retained for the guarantee against defects shall be released, provided that no defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished in the performance of the work has been reported in writing and delivered to the clerk of the city council at any time within one year after the operative date of acceptance or approval of such work by the city council.

2.     In case such security is retained on account of such defect, it shall be released when all such defects have been corrected, repaired, or replaced by the subdivider or his or her surety.

H.    Upon the expiration of ninety days following the completion and acceptance of all the work of improvement, the improvement security for payment to the contractors and others may be reduced to an amount not less than the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full.

I.      The city council may by order from time to time authorize the city engineer to release or reduce any such improvement security by twenty-five percent increments in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to certify such release or reduction. (Ord. 1079 § 1, 1998; Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

Part IV. Enforcement and Penalties
Chapter 16.25 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
16.25.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the enforcement of the provisions of this title and any entitlements granted pursuant thereto, in order to provide for their effective administration, to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval for a map, to promote the city’s planning efforts, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.25.020 Responsibility for enforcement.
A.    It shall be the duty of the community development director of the city to enforce the provisions of this title.

B.     All department officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue approvals shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no approvals in conflict with the provisions of this title. Any such approval issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.25.030 Prohibition.
A.    No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, has been filed for record by the county recorder.

B.     No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter has been filed for record by the county recorder.

C.     Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

D.    This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this chapter, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

E.     Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.25.040 Remedies.
A.    Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee.

B.     Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed in accordance with Sections 66499.35 and 66499.52 of the Subdivision Map Act or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording.

The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

D.    This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter.

E.     The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.25.050 Notice of violation.
If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Sections 66412.6(a) and (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the subdivision committee why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from the date of mailing the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the subdivision committee determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the subdivision committee determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall record the notice of violation for record with the county recorder.

The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.25.060 Violation as a misdemeanor.
In addition to the remedies and procedures provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the regulatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by both.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

Part V. Definitions
Chapter 16.27 DEFINITIONS
16.27.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define terms used in this title and establish rules for the construction of the language to ensure a consistent interpretation of the requirements of this title. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.27.020 Rules for construction of language.
In interpreting the various provisions of the title, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A.    The particular shall control the general.

B.     In case of conflict between the text and diagram, the text shall control.

C.     All references to departments, commissions, boards or other public agencies are to those of the city, unless otherwise indicated.

D.    All references to public officials are to those of the city, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

E.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

F.     The words “shall,” “will” and “is to” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The words “should” or “may” are permissive.

G.    The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the past.

H.    The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

I.      Whenever a certain hour or time of day is specified in this title or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this title, such hour shall be Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, whichever is current use in the city.

J.      Whenever this title requires consideration of distances, parking spaces or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers, such numbers are to be rounded to the next highest whole number, when the fraction is .5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than .5, except as otherwise noted in this title. In the case of the number of dwelling units (development permit or density bonus option), the numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers shall be rounded to the next lowest whole number in all such instances. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

 

16.27.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Abut” means to physically touch, border upon or to share a common corner or property line. For the purposes of this title, abutting properties shall include those properties separated by any road, street, highway, except a limited access major highway, canals, and railroads.

“Access, approved” means a means of vehicular access which conforms to all of the requirements of this title and which has been approved by the city council or its designee.

“Access, legal.” See Access, approved.

“Access, off-site” means an easement for vehicular access located on land not owned by the subdivider and used to gain access to the property being subdivided.

“Access, on-site” means an easement for vehicular access located within the boundaries of or which border on the land division.

“Access, required” means access as required by any provision of this title as a condition of approval of a land division subject to this title.

“Access road” means a way or means of approach to provide vehicular ingress and egress to a property.

“Acre” means a measure of land containing forty-three thousand five hundred and sixty square feet.

“Advisory agency” means the community development director or his or her designated representative, for the purpose of parcel maps, parcel map waivers, and lot line adjustments.

“Aliquot” means the division or measurement of land into equal parts.

“Alley” means a service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.

“Arterial” means a street or roadway fed by local and collector streets and which provides intra-city circulation and connections to regional roadways and generally carries relatively heavy traffic volumes.

“Authorized representative” means any person who has been designated in writing by the subdivider as the person, firm or corporation to represent the subdivider.

“Bicycle trail” means a trail or path designated primarily for the use of bicycles.

“Block” means the area of land within a land division which is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the land division.

“Block length” means that distance as measured along rear property lines between intersecting streets.

“Bridge” means a crossing over a waterway, railway, freeway, or canyon.

“Building” means any permanent structure built or installed for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.

“Centerline, legal” means a line designated by official survey to be the center of a future or existing fully developed easement, street, road or highway, which may or may not coincide with the construction centerline.

“City” means the city of Manteca, California.

“City council” means the city council of the city.

“City engineer” means the city engineer of the city or designee.

“City official” means any employee of the city.

“Civil engineer” means the person, firm or corporation retained by a subdivider to process a land division or parcel map, and who shall be registered to practice civil engineering in the state.

“Collector” means a street or roadway fed by local streets and which provides local circulation options, connections to arterial streets, and generally carries moderate to light traffic volumes.

“Committee” means the development review committee of the city.

“Common area” means land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and which may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.

“Common property line” means a lot or parcel line shared by two or more properties.

“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in a space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property.

“Construction” means design, acquisition of site or right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction.

“Contiguous” means to physically touch, border upon, or to share a common corner or property line. For the purposes of this title, contiguous properties shall include those properties separated by any road, street or highway, except a limited access major highway, canal and railroad, which in the reasonable discretion of the community development director can be developed as a single unit.

“Conversion” means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings.

Cul-de-sac. See Street, cul-de-sac.

“Dedication (or offer of dedication)” means a conveyance of or offer to convey land to some public use, especially streets, made by the owner.

“Density” means the number of dwelling units per specific area of land.

“Design” means (1) street alignments, grades and widths; (2) drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades; (3) location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; (4) fire roads and fire breaks; (5) lot size and configuration; (6) traffic access; (7) grading; (8) land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and (9) other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire land division as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or any adopted specific plan.

“Development” means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.

“Standard plans and specifications” means the minimum acceptable standards of design, materials and methods required to be used in improvement of land divisions and other developments, as adopted and amended by the city council from time to time, in the manner provided by law.

“District attorney” means the district attorney of the County of San Joaquin or designee.

Double Frontage Lot. See Lot, Through.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more habitable rooms which are designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.

“Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

“Environmental document” means documents prepared under the California Environmental Quality Act, including initial studies, negative declarations, draft and final EIR5, documents prepared as substitutes for EIRs and negative declarations under a program certified pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 21080.5, and documents prepared under National Environmental Policy Act and used by a state or local agency in the place of an initial study, negative declaration, or an EIR.

“Equestrian trail” means a trail path or right-of-way designed primarily for the riding of horses, but may also be designed as a hiking trail and excludes motorized vehicles.

“Fire chief” means the chief of the city fire department or designee.

“Fire protection facilities” means facilities including, but not limited to, water supply for fire fighting purposes, fuel breaks, emergency access roads, and an offer of dedication of a site for said facilities.

“Final map” means a map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, and designed to be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

“Flood” or “flooding” means any general inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of tidal waters or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood boundary floodway map (FBFM)” means an official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration, using their own information or information supplied by the city water agency, the department of planning, the State Reclamation Board, or other federal agencies, has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special and historical flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.

“Floodplain” means a land area adjoining a river, stream, natural watercourse or lake which is likely to be flooded, including alluvial cones, wherein streams may change their course.

“Floodway or designated floodway” means the channel of river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot or increasing the velocity to greater than seven feet per second, whichever results in the widest floodway. The floodway is delineated on the flood boundary floodway map and the State Reclamation Board designated floodway map. Floodways are also delineated on the official zoning maps as floodplain primary (FPP) district.

“Frontage road” means a street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial, limited-access highway or freeway, and which is designed to provide access to abutting properties.

“Full-width street improvement” means a street improvement that includes provision of curb, gutter and sidewalk on the side of the street abutting the project area and curb and gutter on the offside of the street.

“General plan” means the general plan of the city adopted by the city council pursuant to the California Government Code Section 65300 et seq.

“Improvement” means streets, storm drainage facilities, utilities and landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the land division and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map. Other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to, or implementation of, the general plan or any adopted specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications.

“Land use” means a description of how land is used or proposed to be used.

“Land division” means the division of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agriculture land for agricultural purposes.

“Local street” means a street or road, including access road, designed and constructed in accordance with the city standard plans and specifications, with a size or capacity only as needed for the general use of the lot owners in the land division and local neighborhood traffic needs.

“Lot” or “parcel” means a designated parcel, subdivision or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

“Lot or parcel area, gross” means the horizontal area within the lot or parcel boundary lines and including the area to the centerline of abutting street or access road lying within the street or access road.

“Lot or parcel area, minimum” means the smallest lot or parcel area established by this title on which a use or structure may be located in a particular Zoning District.

“Lot or parcel area, net” means the horizontal area within the lot or parcel boundary lines and exclusive of the area contained within the street or access road and including only that area which is suitable for its intended purpose.

“Lot or parcel, corner” means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or a lot abutting one street that forms an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. The frontage of a lot abutting one street that forms an interior angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees or more shall be considered the front yard of an interior lot.

“Lot or parcel depth” means the distance measured from the front lot line, or right-of-way (in the case of a flag lot) to the rear lot line.

“Lot, flag” means a lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.

“Lot frontage” means the length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way.

“Lot, interior” means a lot abutting one street that forms an interior angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees or more.

“Lot, key” means a lot whose side lot line is coincident with the rear lot line of an adjacent lot.

“Lot line adjustment” means a change in any lot line between two or more existing, adjacent parcels where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created.

“Lot or parcel line” means a line of record that divides one lot or parcel from another lot or parcel or from a public or private street or any other public space.

“Lot or parcel line, front” means the property line dividing a lot or parcel from a street. On a corner lot, only one street line shall be considered as a front or parcel line and the shorter street frontage shall be considered the front lot or parcel line.

“Lot or parcel line, rear” means the lot or parcel line opposite and most distant from the front lot or parcel line; or in the case of triangular, an imaginary line ten feet in length entirely within the lot or parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot or parcel line.

“Lot or parcel line, side” means any lot or parcel line other than front lot or parcel line or rear lot or parcel line.

“Lot, reversed corner” means a corner lot whose side street line is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the first lot to its rear.

“Lot, through” means a lot having frontage on two or more non-intersecting streets (also known as a double frontage lot).

“Lot width” means the distance measured parallel to the street between the side lot lines; in the event of a corner lot, the lesser dimension.

“Map” means a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, final map or a parcel map, as indicated by the context.

“Nonconforming lot” means a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this land division ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the ordinance.

“Obstruction” means any obstruction of whatever kind or nature, including but not limited to, structures, power poles, telephone and telegraphic poles, and appurtenances, pipelines, conduits, canals and easements which affect the intended and/or permitted use of a lot or parcel.

“Off-site” means located outside the lot in question.

“Official plan line” means the future right-of-way of any road or highway as adopted by resolution of the city council.

“Open space” means any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to one or more of the following uses: Preservation of natural resources; outdoor recreation; or public health and safety.

Parcel. See Lot.

“Parcel map” means a map showing a division of land of four or less parcels (with specific exceptions) as required by the ordinance codified in this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

“Park” means public or private land used for active or passive recreation.

“Pedestrian way” means a walkway designed for use by pedestrians, which shall not be used by motor vehicles.

“Permit” means written governmental permission issued by an authorized official or city council empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, organization, syndicate, city, county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Community development director” means the community development director of the city or designee.

“Plot plan” means a plan graphically describing proposed and existing buildings, structures, lot lines and other required information submitted in conjunction with an application for discretionary or ministerial review and approval.

“Principal use” means the primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.

“Property line” means a line of record that divides one lot or parcel from another lot or parcel or from a public or private street or any other public space.

“Public works department” means the public works department of the city.

“Remainder” means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land. The remainder is not considered as part of the land division but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area surrounding land division development.

“Right-of-way” means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by: A road, crosswalk; pedestrian or bicycle path; railroad; electric transmission lines; oil or gas pipeline; water line; sanitary storm sewer; or other similar uses.

Road. See street.

“Sidewalk” means a paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.

“Specific plan” means a plan prepared and adopted pursuant to Section 65450 et seq., of the California Government Code.

“Specific plan line” means the designated centerline of any road or highway as adopted by resolution of the city council from which the ultimate right-of-way is determined in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan.

“Start of construction” means the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, or any site preparation work, including, but not limited to, leveling and grading.

“Stream” means a watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and channel through which waters flow at least periodically.

“Stream, major” means a stream with the following characteristics: runoff comes from a remote area which is relatively undeveloped; the natural watercourse has a recognizable channel or channels; and the natural watercourse has a drainage area of ten square miles or more; provided, however, that in any case where there is a pending or existing flood control study by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, or the state, the natural watercourse shall be deemed to be a major stream.

“Stream, minor” means a stream having a drainage area under ten square miles, including those streams in which the watershed is or will be largely urbanized.

“Street, cul-de-sac” means a street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround or loop at the end.

“Street, future” means an area dedicated on the final map for use as a street at a future time, and which is not required to be improved by the subdivider. A future street shall not be considered as part of any lot in application of zoning or setback regulations. The form of dedication of a future street shall be such as to keep it free and clear of any permanent structure.

“Street, local” means a street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property except in the case of double frontage lots.

“Street, looped” means a street which is intended to serve as direct or indirect access to residential lots, which begins and terminates in the same street or highway but not at the same location.

“Street, one-way” means a street which is intended to provide for the movement of vehicular traffic in one direction only.

“Street, public” means a street built to standards required and maintained by the city.

“Street, private” means a right-of-way owned and maintained by a person or persons and intended for access to their property.

“Street, stubbed” means an improved street which terminates at the boundary of a land division, and which is, or may be, necessary for the orderly development of an adjacent area at a future time.

“Structure” means an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

“Study map” means a map prepared in accordance with Chapter 16.07 of this title, in advance of the tentative subdivision map.

“Subdivider” means a person who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a land division for oneself or for others. Employees and consultants of persons acting in that capacity are not “subdividers.”

“Subdivision Map Act” (“SMA” or “Map Act”)means California Government Code Sections 66410 to 66499 as may be amended from time to time.

“Surveyor” means a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer licensed by the state to practice surveying.

“Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed land division and the existing conditions in and around it.

“Uniform Fire Code” means the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended by this code, or such like publication as may be adopted by the city council.

“Use” means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained.

“Watercourse” means a natural or man made, intermittent or perennial drainage channel which includes, but is not limited to, the terms river, tributary, stream or creek.

“Water purveyor” means any public utility, mutual water company or governmental body providing water for a land division.

“Yard” means an open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specifically provided in the zoning ordinance.

“Zoning” means dividing of the city into districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.

“Zoning district” means a specifically delineated area or district in the city within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.

“Zoning ordinance” means the zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 936 § 1, Ex. A (part), 1992)

Title 17 ZONING
Article I ZONING CODE ESTABLISHMENT, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENTITLEMENTS
Article II ZONING DISTRICTS, ALLOWED USES, AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Article III SITE PLANNING STANDARDS
Article IV STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
Article V GLOSSARY

Article I ZONING CODE ESTABLISHMENT, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENTITLEMENTS
Chapter 17.02 ZONING CODE PURPOSE AND ADOPTION
17.02.010 Title and Authority
A.    Title. This Title shall be known and cited as the “Manteca Zoning Ordinance,” the “Zoning Ordinance,” the “Manteca Zoning Code,” “this Ordinance,” “this Code” or “this Title.”

B.     Authority. This Zoning Title is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the City of Manteca by the State of California, including, but not limited to, Article XI, Section 7 of the Constitution of the State of California, the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000 et seq.), the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.), and the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.02.020 Purpose and Intent of the Zoning Ordinance
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Zoning Ordinance is to protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare as well as to set forth and coordinate City regulations governing the development and use of land in accordance with the City of Manteca General Plan. More specifically, the Zoning Ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives:

1.     To provide a precise guide for the physical development of the City in such a manner as to progressively achieve the arrangement of land uses depicted in the Manteca General Plan consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan;

2.     To facilitate prompt review of development proposals and provide for public information, review, and comment on development proposals;

3.     To foster a harmonious, convenient, and workable relationship among land uses to help ensure the provision of adequate water, sewer, transportation, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, drainage, parks, open space, and other public and community facilities and institutions;

4.     To promote the stability of existing land uses that conform with the General Plan and to protect them from inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions;

5.     To ensure that public and private lands are ultimately used for the purposes which are most appropriate and most beneficial from the standpoint of the City as a whole;

6.     To protect and enhance real property values;

7.     To ensure compatibility between residential and nonresidential development and land uses;

8.     To conserve and protect the City’s natural resources and features, such as creeks, significant trees, and historic and environmental resources;

9.     To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the City and its established character and the social and economic stability of agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial, and other types of improved areas.

B.     Intent. This Zoning Ordinance is intended to:

1.     Apply to all private, public, quasi-public, institutional, and public utility properties, and all other lands, buildings, and structures within the incorporated area of the City.

2.     Be consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section 65920 et seq. (the Permit Streamlining Act). Nothing in this Title shall be interpreted as imposing time limits on actions taken by the decision-making body pursuant to this title that are legislative in nature or that require both adjudicatory and legislative judgments.

3.     Indicate the nature of prezoning and future zoning of lands beyond the City limits in the City’s Sphere of Influence. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.02.030 Applicability
This Title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all property in incorporated Manteca, whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations, or organizations; by the United States or any of its agencies; by the state or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any county or city, including the City of Manteca; or by any authority or public entity organized under the laws of the state. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this Title only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the City.

A.    Relationship to Prior Ordinance. The provisions of this Title, as it existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Title (Ordinance No. 940), are repealed and superseded as provided in Ordinance No. 1501. No provision of this Title shall validate or legalize any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of the Title as it existed prior to its repeal by Ordinance No. 1501.

B.     Prior Rights and Violations. The enactment of this Title shall not terminate or otherwise affect vested land use development permits, approvals, or agreements authorized under the provisions of any ordinance, nor shall violation of a prior ordinance be excused by the adoption of this Title.

C.     New Land Uses or Structures. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the Manteca Municipal Code for any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the requirements of this Title.

D.    Continuation of an Existing Land Use or Structure. It is unlawful and a violation of the Municipal Code for anyone to use a parcel or structure in a manner that violates any provision of this Title. However, a land use that was lawfully established before this Title was enacted, or before enactment of any applicable amendment to this Title, may continue except as provided in Chapter 17.12 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures). No expansion or modification to a pre-existing legal nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted except as allowed by Chapter 17.12 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).

E.     Subdivisions. Any subdivision of land proposed within the City after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall be consistent with the minimum lot size requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards), the subdivision requirements of the City of Manteca Subdivision Code (Title 16 of this Municipal Code), and all other applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.

F.     Effect of Zoning Ordinance Changes on Pending Applications. The enactment of this Ordinance or amendments to its requirements may have the effect of imposing different standards on new land uses, development, and/or structures than those that applied to existing land uses, development, and/or structures. Following the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendments to this Ordinance, the following provisions shall apply:

1.     Pending Applications. All land use permit applications that have been determined by the Community Development Department to be complete before the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment, will be processed according to the regulations in effect when the application was accepted as complete.

2.     Approved Projects Not Yet Under Construction. Any structure authorized by a Conditional Use Permit, Site Development Review, Temporary Use Permit, or Variance, for which construction has not begun as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment, may still be constructed in compliance with the approved permit, as long as construction is completed and the approved land use is established before the expiration of the permit or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension.

3.     Projects Under Construction. A structure that is under construction pursuant to a valid building permit on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment, may be completed and need not be changed to satisfy any new or different requirements of this Ordinance as long as construction is beyond the approval of the first inspection on the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment, and provided that construction is diligently prosecuted to completion. Such a structure shall be deemed to be a lawfully existing building.

G.    Conflicting Requirements. Wherever conflict occurs between the provisions of this Title and any other provision of law, the more restrictive of any such provisions shall apply.

1.     Zoning Code and Municipal Code Provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of this Zoning Code, or between this Zoning Code, the Municipal Code, or other plans and policies adopted by the City, the most restrictive shall apply.

2.     General Plan. If conflict occurs between the requirements of this Zoning Code and the adopted City General Plan, the requirements of the General Plan shall govern.

3.     Specific Plan. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this Zoning Code and any adopted City Specific Plan, the requirements of the Specific Plan shall govern.

4.     Private Agreements. This Zoning Code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction (for example, CC&Rs) without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The City shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

H.    Other Requirements/Permits. Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit, approval, or entitlement required by the regulations of any regional, state, or federal agency.

I.      Public Nuisance. Neither the provisions of this Title nor the approval of any permit authorized by this Title shall authorize the maintenance of any public nuisance as defined in this Municipal Code (also see Section 17.14.040, Violations, Abatement, Penalties, and Remedies).

J.      Severability, Partial Invalidation of Zoning Ordinance. If any portion of this Title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Title. The City Council hereby declares that this Title and each article, chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and portion thereof is adopted, irrespective of the fact that one or more portions of this Title may be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable.

K.    Permit Streamlining Act. In no case shall the time limit for action required by this Title for any approving body exceed time limits as set forth in Government Code Section 65920 et seq., otherwise known as the Permit Streamlining Act. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.02.040 Exemptions from Zoning Ordinance Requirements
The following activities, land uses, structures, and/or site improvements are exempt from the permit requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, but are not exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or any requirements resulting from City implementation of the Act, unless specifically exempted from CEQA:

A.    Governmental Facilities. A building or structure owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental agency to provide governmental service to the public and actions prescribed by Federal and/or State law shall be exempt from this Code.

B.     Civic Improvements and Structures. Site selection and construction of civic improvements and structures, including roadways; water, sewer and storm water management systems improvements; park development and improvements; civic buildings as well as accessory and adjunctive buildings and structures to support said improvements erected by a government agency; contractor with a valid contract with a governmental agency for construction of such improvements shall be exempt from this Code.

C.     Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or public agency of underground or overhead utilities (i.e., water, gas, electric, telecommunication, supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, etc.), but not including structures (e.g., substations), shall be permitted in any zoning district without limit as to height, provided that the route of any electrical transmission line(s) shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval prior to acquisition of rights-of-way. Satellite and cellular telephone antennas are subject to Chapter 17.88, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.

D.    Local, State or National Disasters. Pursuant to Section 2.44.060(A)(5) of the Municipal Code, during a declared local, State or National Disaster, all projects, measures and operations considered as essential services to the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the Emergency Director shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code. (Ord. O2020-03 § 2)

 

Chapter 17.04 INTERPRETATION
17.04.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to specify the authority and procedures for clarification of ambiguity in the regulations of this Title in order to ensure consistent interpretation and application. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.04.020 Applicability and Authority for Interpretations
A.    This Zoning Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the City of Manteca by the State of California, including, but not limited to, the State Constitution, the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.) and the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.).

B.     If questions arise concerning the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this Title, it shall be the responsibility of the Community Development Director to review pertinent facts, determine the intent of the provision, and issue an administrative interpretation of said provision(s) as specified in this Chapter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.04.030 Rules of Interpretation
A.    Zoning Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various zones as shown on the Zoning Map, the provisions of Chapter 17.20 (Establishment of Zoning Districts and Land Use Classification System) shall apply.

B.     Zoning Regulations. Any list of any item, including zones or uses, is exclusive. If a use or other item is not listed, it is not permitted unless, per the provisions of Section 17.10.040 (Similar Use Determination), the use is determined to be similar to a listed use or use category.

C.     Conflicting Requirements. The regulations of this Title and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this Title shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the City Council, any board, commission, or department of the City, or any other local, state, or federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development authorized by this Title. All uses and development authorized by this Title shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements. Where two or more ordinances regulate the same use or activity, the more restrictive ordinance shall apply.

D.    Private Agreements. This Zoning Ordinance applies to all land uses and development, but may not affect private agreements or restrictions in the use of land or development of structures. The City shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

E.     General Terminology. When used in this Title, the following rules apply to all provisions of this Title.

1.     Language and Conjunctions.

a.     The word “City” refers to the City of Manteca.

b.     The phrase “Community Development Director” refers to the City of Manteca Community Development Director and his or her designee.

c.     The words “shall,” “must,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are always mandatory. “Should” is not mandatory but strongly recommended, and “may” is permissive.

d.     The word “building” includes the word “structure.”

e.     Conjunctions. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply. “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. “Either...or” indicates that the connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. “Includes” and “including” shall mean “including, but not limited to,...”

2.     Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine, and neutral genders.

3.     Tense and Number. Words used in the present tense include past and future and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular.

4.     Number of Days. Whenever the number of days is specified in this Title, or in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as provided in this Title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. When the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or City holiday, time limits shall extend to the end of the next working day. The term “holiday” or “City holiday” shall mean any day other than the weekend when the City offices are closed for the entire day.

F.     Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this Title, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless specifically stated otherwise.

G.    Calculations – Rounding. Where any provision of this Code requires calculation to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal results of the calculation shall be rounded to the nearest whole number (0.5 or more is rounded up, less than 0.5 is rounded down). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.04.040 Record of Interpretation
A.    Official Interpretation. Whenever the Community Development Director determines that an ambiguity in a zoning regulation exists or when an applicant, property owner, or interested party requests, the Community Development Director shall issue an official interpretation. Official interpretations shall be in writing and shall cite the provisions being interpreted, together with an explanation of the meaning or applicability of the provision(s) in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation. The Community Development Director shall make an interpretation based on his or her judgment and understanding of the current Code. All official interpretations shall be maintained in the Community Development Department for public review and shall be provided to the requestor including information regarding the City’s appeal procedures, as appropriate.

B.     Amendment. Any provision determined by the Community Development Director to be ambiguous or conflicting pursuant to this Chapter shall be clarified by amendment to the Zoning Code as soon as is practical. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.04.050 Appeals
Appeal of the Community Development Director for official interpretations shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.06 ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION
17.06.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the authority and responsibilities of the officials and bodies charged with administration of the Zoning Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.06.020 Responsibilities for Administration
This Zoning Code shall be administered by the Manteca City Council, the Planning Commission, the City Manager, the Zoning Administrator, and the Community Development Director. For the purposes of this Title, the Community Development Director shall be the City’s designated Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.06.030 Responsibilities of the City Council
A.    Approve Mayor’s appointments of members of the Planning Commission.

B.     Review appeals of Planning Commission decisions.

C.     Make final decisions on applications for land use entitlements as listed in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements).

D.    Initiate plans, plan amendments, and studies related to City land use policy and processes.

E.     Exercise such other powers and duties as prescribed by state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.06.040 Responsibilities of the Planning Commission
A.    Review appeals of Community Development Director (Zoning Administrator) decisions.

B.     Make final decisions on applications for land use entitlements as listed in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements).

C.     Make recommendations to the City Council on land use decisions as listed in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements).

D.    Initiate amendments to the General Plan or this Zoning Code.

E.     Exercise such other powers and duties as prescribed by state law or local ordinance, or as directed by the City Council. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.06.050 Responsibilities of the City Manager
A.    Negotiate and conduct periodic review of Development Agreements.

B.     Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law or local ordinance, or as directed by the City Council. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.06.060 Responsibilities of the Community Development Director
A.    The Community Development Director or his/her designee shall serve as the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Government Code Section 65900. If there is no Community Development Director, the Planning Manager, or as otherwise designated by the City Manager, shall serve as the Zoning Administrator.

B.     Oversee the comprehensive application of this Title, the Zoning Map, and all records of zoning actions and interpretations.

C.     Advise the City Council, Planning Commission, and City Manager on planning matters.

D.    Decide and issue administrative entitlements as listed in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements).

E.     Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law or local ordinance, or as directed by the Planning Commission, City Council, or City Manager. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.08 GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURES
17.08.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish review and approval procedures for the processing of planning and development applications and requests provided for by this Title. Development standards and conditions for the approval of land use entitlements are contained in the appropriate chapters of this Title. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.020 Application and Fee
A.    Application. Applications pertaining to this Title shall be submitted in writing to the Community Development Director on a completed form designated for the particular request. Every application shall include applicant signature(s), agent authorization as appropriate, and the fee established by the City Council pursuant to Subsection 17.08.020(B) (Fee) of this Title to cover the cost of processing. Applications shall be submitted together with all plans, maps, and data about the project development, project site, and vicinity deemed necessary by the Community Development Director to provide the Approving Authority the adequate information on which to base decisions. Each application form lists the necessary submittal materials for that particular type of permit. The application shall contain all the information specified for the application by the Community Development Director. The application shall be accompanied by the fee established by the City Council.

B.     Fee. The City Council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this Title. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.030 Determination of Completeness for Discretionary Projects
A.    Application Completeness. Within 30 days of application submittal, the Community Development Director shall determine whether or not the application for a discretionary project is complete. The Community Development Director shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the determination that either:

1.     All the submittal requirements have been satisfied and the application has been accepted as complete.

2.     Specific information is still necessary to complete the application. The letter may also identify preliminary information regarding the areas in which the submitted plans are not in compliance with City standards and requirements.

B.     Application Completeness without Notification. If the written determination is not made within 30 days after receipt, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this Chapter.

C.     Resubmittal. Upon receipt and resubmittal of any incomplete application, a new 30-day period for all other applications shall begin during which the Community Development Director shall determine the completeness of the application. Application completeness shall be determined and noticed as specified in Subsection 17.08.030(A) (Application Completeness).

D.    Incomplete Application. If additional information or submittals are required and the application is not made complete within six months of the completeness determination letter, the application shall be deemed by the City to have been withdrawn and no action will be taken on the application. Unexpended fees, as determined by the Community Development Director, will be returned to the applicant. If the applicant subsequently wishes to pursue the project, a new application, including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials, must then be filed in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Application and Fee).

E.     Right to Appeal. The applicant may appeal the determination in accordance with Section 17.08.070 (Appeals) and the Permit Streamlining Act (California Government Code Section 65920 et seq.). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.040 Application Review and Report
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in accordance with the environmental review procedures of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The Community Development Director will consult with other departments as appropriate to ensure compliance with all provisions of the Municipal Code and other adopted policies and plans. The Community Development Director will prepare a report (the staff report) to the designated Approving Authority describing the project, along with a recommendation to approve, conditionally approve, deny the application, or deny the application without prejudice. The report shall be provided to the applicant and property owner at the same time as it is provided to the Approving Authority prior to consideration of the entitlement request. The report may be amended as necessary or supplemented with additional information at any time prior to the hearing to address issues or information not reasonably known at the time the report is due. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.050 Public Hearing and Public Notice
A.    Public Hearing Required. The following procedures shall govern the notice and public hearing, where required pursuant to this Title. A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of all Major Use Permits, Major Site Plan and Design Reviews, Variances, Planned Developments, Development Agreements, Specific Plans, Master Plans, prezonings, subsequent amendments to the Zoning Code (text and map) and General Plan, and Minor Zone and Plan Modifications by the Planning Commission or City Council.

B.     Notice of Hearing. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65090 through 65094, not less than 10 days before the scheduled date of a hearing, public notice shall be given of such hearing in the manner listed below. The notice shall state the date, time, and place of hearing, identify the hearing body, and provide a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the real property (text or diagram), if any, which is the subject of the hearing.

1.     Notice of public hearing shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city.

2.     Except as otherwise provided herein, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the current tax assessors records. If the number of owners exceeds 1,000, the City may, in lieu of mailed notice, provide notice by placing notice of at least 1/8 page in one newspaper of general circulation within the city.

3.     Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the owner of the subject real property or the owner’s authorized agent and to each local agency expected to provide water, sewerage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the proposed project.

4.     Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at City Hall.

5.     Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to any person who has filed a written request for notice.

C.     Requests for Notification. Any person who requests to be on a mailing list for notice of hearing shall submit such request in writing to the Community Development Director. The City may impose a reasonable fee for the purpose of recovering the cost of such notification.

D.    Receipt of Notice. Failure of any person or entity to receive any properly issued notice required by law for any hearing required by this Title shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of a designated Approving Authority for which the notice was given.

E.     Hearing Procedure. Hearings as provided for in this Chapter shall be held at the date, time, and place for which notice has been given as required in this Chapter. The Approving Authority, as identified in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements), shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony. The summary minutes shall be prepared and made part of the permanent file of the case. Any hearing may be continued to a date certain. If the hearing is not continued to a specific date/time, then the hearing shall be re-noticed. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.060 Approving Authority
A.    Approving Authority. The Approving Authority as designated in Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements) shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed land use entitlement, or deny without prejudice the proposed land use entitlement in accordance with the requirements of this Title. Table 17.08.060-1 (Approving Authority for Land Use Entitlements) identifies both recommending (R) and final (F) authorities for each land use entitlement. In acting on a land use entitlement, the Approving Authority shall make the applicable findings as established in Chapter 17.10 (Entitlements) and as may be required by other laws and regulations. An action of the Approving Authority may be appealed pursuant to procedures set forth in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

B.     Multiple Land Use Entitlements. When a proposed project requires more than one land use entitlement with more than one Approving Authority, all project land use entitlements shall be processed concurrently and final action shall be taken by the highest-level designated Approving Authority for all such requested land use entitlements.

 

TABLE 17.08.060-1

APPROVING AUTHORITY FOR LAND USE ENTITLEMENTS

 

Type of Land Use Entitlement

Designated Approving Authority1

“R” symbolizes the Recommending Body

“F” symbolizes the Final Decision-Making Body

Community Development Director

Planning Commission

City Council

Zoning Conformance

F

 

 

Similar Use Determination

F

 

 

Reasonable Accommodations

F

 

 

Site Plan and Design Review (Minor)

F

 

 

Site Plan and Design Review (Major)

R

F

 

Minor Use Permit

F

 

 

Conditional Use Permit

R

F

 

Temporary Use Permit

F

 

 

Master Sign Program

F

 

 

Minor Zone Modification

F2

F2

 

Minor Plan Modification

F2

F2

 

Variance

R

F

 

Planned Development

R

R

F

Development Agreement

R

R

F

Specific Plan

R

R

F

Master Plan

R

R

F

Prezoning

R

R

F

Zoning Amendment (Text and Map)

R

R

F

General Plan Amendment (Text and Map)

R

R

F

Notes:

1.      All listed actions are subject to appeal pursuant to Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

2.      Final decision-making body is the same as the original decision-making body for original plan proposed for modification.

(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.070 Appeals
A.    Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe the procedure through which an appeal may be made in case an interested person is dissatisfied with any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, approval, or disapproval, made in the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this title.

B.     Appeal Authority. Any person dissatisfied with a determination or action of the Community Development Director or Planning Commission made pursuant to this Article may appeal such action to the designated Appeal Authority listed in Table 17.08.070-2 (Appeal Authority) below, within 10 days from the date of the action. Actions by the City Council are final, and no further administrative appeals are available.

 

TABLE 17.08.070-2

APPEAL AUTHORITY

 

Approving Authority for Action Being Appealed

Appeal Authority

Planning Commission

City Council

Community Development Director

X

 

Planning Commission

 

X

 

C.     Filing an Appeal. All appeals shall be submitted in writing, identifying the determination or action being appealed and specifically stating the basis or grounds of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed within 10 days from, but not including, the date of determination or action for which an appeal is made, accompanied by a filing fee established by City Council resolution, and submitted to the Community Development Director. The filing of an appeal shall stay the issuance of any necessary subsequent permit(s) associated with any right or entitlement that will be the subject of the appeal.

1.     Appeal of Community Development Director Decision

a.     The applicant or any other person may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community Development Director prior to the time the decision becomes final. The Community Development Director shall furnish forms of notice of appeal.

b.     The Planning Commission may appeal a decision made by the Community Development Director by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk prior to the time the decision becomes final.

2.     Appeal of Planning Commission Decision

a.     The applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community Development Director prior to the time the decision becomes final.

b.     The City Council may appeal a decision made by the Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk prior to the time the decision becomes final.

D.    Notice and Schedule of Appeal Hearings. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the person filing the appeal and the applicant, appeal hearings should be conducted within 45 days from the date of appeal submittal. Notice of hearing for the appeal shall be provided pursuant to noticing requirements of Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice).

E.     Appeal Hearing and Action. Each appeal shall be considered a de novo (new) hearing. In taking its action on an appeal, the Appeal Authority shall state the basis for its action. Only such evidence and plans as were submitted to and ruled upon by the Approving Authority may be provided to the Appeal Authority for review. The Appeal Authority may act to confirm, modify, or reverse the action of the Approving Authority, in whole or in part, or add or amend such conditions as it deems necessary. The action of the Appeal Authority is final on the date of decision and, unless expressly provided by this Chapter, may not be further appealed. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.080 Effective Date
Generally, the action to approve, conditionally approve, deny, or deny without prejudice a permit or entitlement authorized by this Title shall be effective on the 11th day after the date of action, immediately following expiration of the 10-day appeal period. Legislative actions by the City Council become effective 30 days from the date of final action and may not be appealed. In accordance with Section 17.04.030 (Rules of Interpretation), where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or City holiday, the time limit of the appeal shall extend to the end of the next working day. Entitlement(s) shall not be issued until the effective date of the required permit. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.090 Denial without Prejudice
If the application is denied without prejudice, the applicant may reapply for substantially the same request without complying with the time limit prescribed in Section 17.08.100 (New Application). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.100 New Application
Following a denied or prejudicially denied land use entitlement application, no application for a land use entitlement for the same or substantially the same land use entitlement on the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial of the land use entitlement, unless it can be shown that there has been a change in the property or environs substantially affecting the land use entitlement. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.110 Approvals to Run with Land
Unless otherwise conditioned, land use entitlements granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall run with the land through any change of ownership of the site, business, service, use, or structures, provided that such use is compliant with this Title or as specified in the land use entitlement, and the land use entitlement does not expire. All applicable conditions of approval shall continue to apply after a change in property ownership. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.120 Time Limits and Extensions
A.    Time Limits. Unless a condition of approval or other provision of this Title establishes a different time limit, any permit not exercised within two years of approval shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time is approved in compliance with Subsection 17.08.120(C) (Permit Extensions) below.

B.     Exercising Approvals. The exercise of a land use entitlement occurs when the property owner has performed substantial work and incurred substantial liabilities in good faith reliance upon such permit(s) to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director. A land use entitlement may be otherwise exercised pursuant to a condition of the land use entitlement or corresponding legal agreement that specifies that other substantial efforts or expenditures constitute exercise of the land use entitlement. Unless otherwise provided, land use entitlements that have not been exercised prior to a Zoning Amendment that would make the permitted use or structure nonconforming shall automatically be deemed invalid on the effective date of the Zoning Amendment.

C.     Permit Extensions. The approval of an extension extends the expiration date for one year from the original two-year time limit described in this Section. A one-year extension of time may be granted pursuant to the same process as set forth in this Section.

1.     Process. The same Approving Authority that granted the original land use entitlement may extend the period within which the exercise of a land use entitlement must occur. Notice and/or public hearing shall be provided in the same manner as for the original land use entitlement. An application for extension shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the land use entitlement, along with appropriate fees as adopted by the City Council by resolution and necessary submittal materials listed on the application form of the appropriate land use entitlement application.

2.     Conditions. The land use entitlement, as extended, may be conditioned to comply with any development standards that may have been enacted since the land use entitlement was initially approved.

3.     Land Use Entitlement Extension Findings. The extension may be granted only when the designated Approving Authority finds that the original land use entitlement findings can be made and there are changed circumstances or there has been diligent pursuit to exercise the land use entitlement that warrants such extension. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.130 Modification
A.    Any person holding a land use entitlement granted under this Title may request a modification or amendment to that land use entitlement. For the purpose of this Section, the modification of a land use entitlement may include modification of the terms of the land use entitlement itself, project design, or the waiver or alteration of conditions imposed in the granting of the land use entitlement.

B.     If the Community Development Director determines that a proposed project action is not in substantial conformance with the original approval, the Community Development Director shall notify the property owner of the requirement to submit an application for consideration and action by the same Approving Authority as the original land use entitlement. A modification to the land use entitlement may be granted only when the Approving Authority makes all findings required for the original approval and the additional finding that there are changed circumstances sufficient to justify the modification of the approval. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.08.140 Revocation of Previously Approved Entitlement
This Section provides procedures for the revocation of previously approved land use entitlements.

A.    Consideration. The Approving Authority for the original land use entitlement shall consider the revocation of same land use entitlement.

B.     Noticed Public Hearing. The decision to revoke a land use entitlement granted pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall be considered at a noticed public hearing. Public notice shall be provided and public hearing conducted pursuant to Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice).

C.     Findings. A decision to revoke a land use entitlement may be made if any one of the following findings can be made:

1.     Circumstances under which the land use entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original land use entitlement can no longer be met.

2.     The land use entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public hearing, for the land use entitlement.

3.     One or more of the conditions of the land use entitlement have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated.

4.     The use or structure for which the land use entitlement was granted has ceased to exist or has lost its legal nonconforming use status.

5.     The improvement authorized in compliance with the land use entitlement is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute.

6.     The improvement/use allowed by the land use entitlement has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a public nuisance. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.10 ENTITLEMENTS
17.10.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for administering all planning- and zoning-related land use entitlements required and regulated by the City in accordance with this Title. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.020 Applicability
Each land use entitlement is described in this Chapter in terms of purpose and applicability, Approving Authority, and unique processing provisions. Exemptions to permit requirements are listed throughout this Title. General processing procedures are established in Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). Provisions for Tentative Maps, Parcel Maps, and Final Maps are identified in Title 16 of this Municipal Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.030 Zoning Conformance Approval
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Zoning Conformance Approval is to ensure that all new and modified uses and structures comply with applicable provisions of this Title, using simple administrative plan check procedures.

B.     Applicability. Zoning Conformance Approval is required for the following actions:

1.     All structures that require a building permit;

2.     All business license applications;

3.     All sign programs;

4.     All home occupation permits; and

5.     All large family day care home permits.

C.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Zoning Conformance Approval.

D.    Procedure. The Zoning Conformance Approval process will be conducted by the Community Development Director as part of the building permit, land use entitlement, or other City application review. No public hearing is required for a Zoning Conformance Approval.

E.     Approval Findings. Zoning Conformance Approval shall be granted only when the Community Development Director finds the proposal to be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this Title. The Community Development Director shall evidence his/her finding of the Zoning Conformance Approval by affixing his/her signature to the building permit application, business license application, or other such permit requiring a Zoning Conformance Approval.

F.     Determinations. The determination of the Community Development Director shall be final on the date of decision. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of decision. There shall be no appeal from a decision of the Community Development Director made on a Zoning Conformance Approval. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.040 Similar Use Determination
A.    Purpose and Applicability. All possible uses may not be listed within the provisions of this Title, and new uses may evolve over time. When a particular use is not specifically listed in this Zoning Ordinance and it is unclear whether the use is permitted, the provisions established in this Chapter allow the Approving Authority, by formal action, to determine whether or not a proposed use is similar to a permitted or conditionally permitted use and whether such proposed use may be permitted in a particular Zoning District.

B.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Similar Use Determinations.

C.     Procedure. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director as part of building permit review, land use entitlement, or other City application review. No public hearing is required for a Similar Use Determination.

D.    Approval Findings. In determining “similarity,” the Approving Authority shall make all of the following findings:

1.     The characteristics of and activities associated with the proposed use are equivalent to one or more of the listed uses and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the Zoning District.

2.     The proposed use will be consistent with the purposes of the applicable Zoning District.

3.     The proposed use will be consistent with the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and the Zoning Ordinance.

E.     Record and Notification of Determinations. Determinations shall be made in writing and shall contain the facts that support the determination. The Community Development Department shall maintain all such determinations on record for review by the general public upon request. The notice of decision shall be provided, in writing, to the applicant and interested parties within five working days after the date of decision. The notice shall include:

1.     A brief statement explaining the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision.

2.     A statement of the standards and facts relied upon in rendering the decision.

3.     An explanation of appeal rights and appeal deadlines. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.050 Reasonable Accommodation
A.    Purpose. The purpose of allowing reasonable accommodation is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation for relief from the various land use, zoning, or rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City. It is the policy of the City, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act (as amended), to provide persons with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.

B.     Requesting Reasonable Accommodation

1.     In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable accommodation relating to the various land use, zoning, or rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City.

2.     If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Community Development Director will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative.

3.     A request for reasonable accommodation with regard to City regulations, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures may be filed on an application form provided by the Community Development Director at the time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.

C.     Required Information. The applicant shall provide the following information when requesting reasonable accommodation:

1.     A completed City application indicating, among other things, the applicant name, address, and telephone.

2.     The address of the property for which the request is being made.

3.     The current actual use of the property.

4.     The Zoning Ordinance provision, regulation, or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

5.     The basis for the claim that the person(s) for whom the reasonable accommodation is sought is/are considered disabled under the Fair Housing Act and why the accommodation is reasonably necessary to make specific housing available to the person(s).

6.     Such other relevant information as may be requested by the Community Development Director.

D.    Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for reasonable accommodation.

E.     Procedure

1.     When a request for reasonable accommodation is filed with the Community Development Director, the request will be reviewed and considered as a ministerial action unless determined otherwise by the Community Development Director. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be considered ministerial in nature when it is related to a physical improvement that cannot be constructed to conform to the City’s setbacks or design standards. Typical improvements considered to be “ministerial” in nature would include ramps, walls, handrails, or other physical improvements necessary to accommodate a person’s disability. The Community Development Director shall issue a written determination of his or her action within 30 days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may:

a.     Grant or deny the accommodation request; or

b.     Grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory condition(s); or

c.     Determine that the request for reasonable accommodation is nonministerial in nature and forward the request to the Planning Commission. The request will be considered by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit) and shall be subject to the findings stated in Subsection 17.10.050(F) (Approval Findings).

2.     All written determinations of actions of the Community Development Director shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process (e.g., requesting that City staff attempt to schedule an appeal hearing as soon as legally and practically possible), if necessary. The notice of action shall be sent to the applicant by mail.

3.     If necessary to reach a determination or action on the request for reasonable accommodation, the Community Development Director may request further information from the applicant specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the 30-day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant fully and sufficiently responds to the request.

F.     Approval Findings. In making a determination regarding the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the Approving Authority shall make the following findings:

1.     The housing which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used for an individual protected under the Fair Housing Act.

2.     The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual protected under the Fair Housing Act.

3.     The requested reasonable accommodation does not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City and does not fundamentally alter City zoning, development standards, policies, or procedures.

G.    Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

H.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.060 Site Plan and Design Review (Minor and Major)
A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of Site Plan and Design Review is to provide a process to promote excellence in site planning and design, to encourage the harmonious appearance of buildings and sites, to ensure that new and modified uses and development will be compatible with the existing and potential development of the surrounding area, and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character.

B.     Applicability. There are two categories of Site Plan and Design Review, depending on the type of project as follows:

1.     Minor Site Plan and Design Review. A Minor Site Plan and Design Review entitlement is required for changes in use or modifications to existing multi-family and nonresidential uses and structures that are exempt from state environmental review requirements as outlined in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

2.     Major Site Plan and Design Review. A Major Site Plan and Design Review entitlement is required for new multi-family and nonresidential uses and structures. Additionally, Major Site Plan and Design Review is required for changes in use or modifications to existing multi-family and nonresidential uses and structures that are not exempt from state environmental review requirements as outlined in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for the two categories of Site Plan and Design Review is as follows:

1.     Minor Site Plan and Design Review. The Approving Authority is the Community Development Director.

2.     Major Site Plan and Design Review. The Approving Authority is the Planning Commission.

D.    Procedure. The procedures for Site Plan and Design Review shall be as provided in Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures), with the following special provisions:

1.     Minor Site Plan and Design Review. No public hearing or notice is required.

2.     Major Site Plan and Design Review. The City shall provide public hearing for consideration of the approval modification revocation or appeal of an application for a Major Site Plan and Design Review entitlement in accordance with Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice).

E.     Considerations. In conducting a Site Plan and Design Review, the designated Approving Authority shall consider the following:

1.     Site layout, the orientation and location of building, signs, other structures, open spaces, landscaping, and other development features in relation to the physical characteristics, zoning, and land use of the site and surrounding properties;

2.     Traffic, safety, and traffic congestion, including the effect of the development plan on traffic conditions on abutting streets, the layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, driveways, and walkways, the adequacy of off-street parking facilities to prevent traffic congestion, and the circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development;

3.     Availability of City services, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, drainage, police and fire, and whether such services are adequate based on City standards.

F.     Approval Findings. The designated Approving Authority shall make all of the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Site Plan and Design Review application:

1.     The proposed project is consistent with the objectives of the General Plan, complies with applicable zoning regulations, Planned Development, Master Plan or Specific Plan provisions, Improvement Standards, and other applicable standards and regulations adopted by the City;

2.     The proposed project will not create conflicts with vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian transportation modes of circulation;

3.     The site layout (orientation and placement of buildings and parking areas), as well as the landscaping, lighting, and other development features, is compatible with and complements the existing surrounding environment and ultimate character of the area under the General Plan; and

4.     The proposed architecture, including the character, scale, and quality of the design, relationship with the site and other buildings, building materials, colors, screening of exterior appurtenances, exterior lighting and signing, and similar elements, establishes a clear design concept and is compatible with the character of buildings on adjoining and nearby properties.

G.    Conditions of Approval. The Approving Authority may modify plans, in whole or in part, apply conditions of approval, or require guarantees to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this Title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact to the surrounding neighborhood. Specifically, the Approving Authority may require that the plans address issues related to ingress, egress, internal traffic, circulation, lighting, signage, landscaping and screening, architectural design, and other factors to ensure that the project is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood if a potential conflict exists, or to otherwise comply with relevant design guidelines.

H.    Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

I.      Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for Site Plan and Design Review entitlement shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

J.      Expiration. Site Plan and Design Review approvals shall expire 24 months from the date of approval. A one-year extension may be granted pursuant to Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated permit. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.070 Minor Use Permit
A.    Purpose. Minor Use Permits provide a mechanism for administrative review. Minor Use Permits are for those uses that are exempt from CEQA review and that are expected to have minimal impacts and effects on surrounding uses.

B.     Applicability. A Minor Use Permit is required for those land uses shown with an “M” in Table 17.22.010-1 (Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts).

C.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Minor Use Permits.

D.    Procedure. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). No public hearing is required for a Minor Use Permit.

E.     Approval Findings. Whenever authorized by ordinance, the Approving Authority may issue a Minor Use Permit when he or she finds as follows:

1.     The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and the provisions of this Title.

2.     The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the applicable district or districts.

3.     The proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the public or to property and residents in the vicinity.

4.     The proposed project is consistent with the objectives of the General Plan, complies with applicable zoning regulations, Planned Development, Master Plan or Specific Plan provisions, Improvement Standards, and other applicable standards and regulations adopted by the City.

F.     Conditions of Approval. Whenever any Minor Use Permit is granted, the designated Approving Authority may impose such conditions as may be necessary to safeguard the public safety and the intent of this Title.

G.    Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

H.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Minor Use Permit shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

I.      Expiration. All approved Minor Use Permits are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.080 Temporary Use Permit
A.    Purpose. Temporary Use Permits provide a mechanism for administrative review and determinations for proposed short-term activities as listed in Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses) and to ensure that entitlements are consistent with the General Plan and provisions of the Zoning Code. Temporary uses may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable Zoning District, but may be acceptable because of their temporary nature. The Temporary Use Permit applicant must demonstrate that the application is consistent with code requirements.

B.     Applicability. A Temporary Use Permit is required for temporary uses including, but not limited to, carnivals, circuses, religious revivals, Christmas tree lots and pumpkin farms, animal shows or displays, and food stands.

C.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Temporary Use Permits.

D.    Application Contents. Applications for Temporary Use Permits shall be made to the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by the following:

1.     Five copies of a dimensional plot plan showing the following:

a.     The subject property with the lot lines and abutting properties.

b.     The location of the temporary use related to the subject and adjoining properties.

c.     The parking, driveway, and loading areas.

d.     The vehicular ingress and egress.

2.     One copy of the dimensioned elevations of any structure proposed for location.

E.     Procedure. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). No public hearing is required for a Temporary Use Permit.

F.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority shall make the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Temporary Use Permit application:

1.     The proposed use is a temporary use and will be limited to a specific duration of time, as established in the Temporary Use Permit.

2.     The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use.

3.     The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

4.     The use, as described and conditionally approved, will not function or be located in a manner that restricts access to any required parking spaces.

5.     Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this Zoning Code.

6.     The approval includes provisions to ensure that each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code. The Approving Authority may require appropriate security before initiation of the use to ensure proper cleanup after the use is terminated.

G.    Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

H.    Conditions of Approval. In approving a Temporary Use Permit, the Approving Authority may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the required findings.

I.      Time Limits. Time limits for Temporary Use Permits are listed in Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses).

J.      Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Temporary Use Permit shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.090 Master Sign Program
A.    Purpose. The Master Sign Program provides a process for Community Development Director review and decisions related to requests for signs for multi-tenant projects. The intent is to allow the integration of a project’s signs with the design of the structures to achieve a unified architectural statement and to approve common sign regulations for multi-tenant projects, and to encourage design flexibility without circumventing the intent of this Code.

B.     Applicability. A Master Sign Program shall be required for all new multi-tenant shopping centers, office parks, and other multi-tenant or mixed-use developments of three or more separate tenants/uses that share either the same parcel or structure and use common access and parking facilities.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for a Master Sign Program is the Community Development Director.

D.    Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). No public hearing is required for a Master Sign Program.

E.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority may approve a Master Sign Program with the finding that the proposed sign plan complies with the standards and requirements of this Title. Master Sign Programs which do not clearly meet such requirements shall be referred to the Planning Commission.

F.     Conditions of Approval. Whenever any Master Sign Program is granted, the designated Approving Authority may impose such conditions as may be necessary to safeguard the public safety and the intent of this Title.

G.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Master Sign Program shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

H.    Expiration. All approved Master Sign Programs are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.100 Minor Zone Modification
A.    Purpose. Minor Zone Modifications provide limited relief from the strict application of development requirements specified by this Title in order to promote uniform development or relieve an unreasonable hardship.

B.     Applicability. Minor Zone Modifications apply to the requests for minor deviation from any of the following development standards:

1.     Maximum 10 percent waiver of off-street parking and loading requirements, including the number of spaces required or the amount of landscaped area required by Chapter 17.52 (Parking) of this Title.

2.     Yards, lot coverage, height, lot area, lot width, and lot depth requirements. A 10 percent maximum waiver may be granted if no other structures exist on the site; a 20 percent maximum waiver may be granted for additions to existing structures.

3.     Maximum 10 percent waiver of open space requirements for residential development.

C.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Minor Zone Modifications.

D.    Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). The City shall provide notice of hearing in compliance with Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice). The notice shall state that the Community Development Director will decide whether to approve or disapprove the Minor Zone Modification application on a date specified in the notice and that a public hearing will be held only if requested in writing by any interested party prior to the specified date for the decision. When a hearing is requested, notice of the hearing shall be provided in compliance with Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice), and the Community Development Director shall conduct the public hearing prior to a decision on the application.

E.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority shall make all of the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Minor Zone Modification application:

1.     The modification does not exceed the limits specified in this section.

2.     The granting of the modification will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing in the neighborhood.

3.     The modification, as described and conditionally approved, will not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

4.     The granting of the modification either would promote the uniformity in development on the lot or in the area or would alleviate an unreasonable hardship imposed by the strict application of the requirements of this Title.

F.     Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

G.    Conditions of Approval. In approving a Minor Zone Modification, the Approving Authority may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the required findings.

H.    Time Limits. All approved Minor Zone Modifications are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions).

I.      Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Minor Zone Modification shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.110 Minor Plan Modification
A.    Purpose and Applicability. Minor Plan Modifications provide for minor modifications to previously approved plans or permits where the change is in substantial conformity with the approved plan or permit.

B.     Approving Authority. The Community Development Director shall be the designated Approving Authority for Minor Plan Modifications.

C.     Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). The City shall provide notice of hearing in compliance with Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice). The notice shall state that the Community Development Director will decide whether to approve or disapprove the Minor Plan Modification application on a date specified in the notice and that a public hearing will be held only if requested in writing by any interested party prior to the specified date for the decision. When a hearing is requested, notice of the hearing shall be provided in compliance with Section 17.08.050 (Public Hearing and Public Notice), and the Community Development Director shall conduct the public hearing prior to a decision on the application.

D.    Approval Findings. The Approving Authority shall make the following findings to approve or conditionally approve a Minor Plan Modification application:

1.     The modification is in substantial conformance with the previously approved plan or permit.

2.     The modification is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Title.

3.     The modification will not create impacts substantially different from those of the project as previously approved.

4.     The granting of the modification will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing in the neighborhood or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city.

E.     Notification of Determination. The decision of the Approving Authority shall be mailed to the applicant within five working days after the date of the decision.

F.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a Minor Plan Modification, the Approving Authority may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the required findings.

G.    Time Limits. All approved Minor Plan Modifications are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions).

H.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Minor Plan Modification shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.120 Variance
A.    Purpose. In accordance with California Government Code Section 65906, variances from the development standards and provisions of this Title shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, and location of surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and within the same Zoning District. A Variance approval is required to grant exception from any of the development standards and provisions of this Title. Any Variance granted is subject to such condition as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated.

B.     Applicability. A Variance may not be granted to waive or modify any of the following requirements of this Zoning Ordinance:

1.     Allow a land use not otherwise permitted in the zone;

2.     Increase the maximum allowed residential density;

3.     Waive a specific provision (e.g., prohibited sign); or

4.     Waive or modify a procedural requirement.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for a Variance is the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may, upon its own motion or upon the verified application of any interested parties, initiate proceedings for the granting of a Variance. The Community Development Director provides a recommendation and the Planning Commission approves, conditionally approves, denies, or denies without prejudice the Variance in accordance with the requirements of this Title.

D.    Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). A public hearing is required for a Variance.

E.     Required Findings for a Variance. The Approving Authority may approve and/or modify any Variance application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if the applicant can demonstrate that the circumstances of their particular case can justify making all of the following findings:

1.     There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions), so that the strict application of this Zoning Ordinance denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and within the same Zoning District.

2.     Granting the Variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights enjoyed by other property owners in the same vicinity and Zoning District and denied to the property owner for which the Variance is sought.

3.     Granting the Variance will not adversely affect the interests of the public or the interests of residents and property owners in the vicinity of the premises in question.

4.     The Variance is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan or Development Agreement, and the intent of this Title.

F.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a Variance, the Approving Authority:

1.     Shall impose conditions to ensure that the Variance does not grant special privileges inconsistent with the limitation on other properties in the vicinity and the Zoning District in which the property is located.

2.     May impose any reasonable conditions (e.g., the placement, height, nature, and extent of the use, buffers, landscaping and maintenance, off-site improvements, performance guarantees, screening, surfacing, hours of operation) to ensure that the approval complies with the findings required by this Chapter.

G.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for Variance shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

H.    Time Limits. All approved Variances are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.130 Conditional Use Permit
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Conditional Use Permit is for the individual review of uses, typically having unusual site development features or operating characteristics, including the request to expand or modify a nonconforming use or structure. Conditional Use Permits are intended to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas and uses where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the various elements or objectives of the General Plan.

B.     Applicability. A Conditional Use Permit is required for all uses specifically identified as requiring a Conditional Use Permit in Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Land Uses, and Development Standards) and Article IV (Standards for Specific Land Uses) of this Title. A Conditional Use Permit is also required for the expansion or modification of existing nonconforming structures or uses. Applicable provisions for nonconforming uses and structures can be referenced in Chapter 17.12 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures) of this Title.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for a Conditional Use Permit is the Planning Commission.

D.    Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). A public hearing is required for a Conditional Use Permit.

E.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority shall make the following findings to approve a Conditional Use Permit application.

1.     General. Conditional Use Permits shall be granted only when the Planning Commission determines that the proposed use or activity complies with all of the following findings:

a.     The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and all applicable provisions of this Title.

b.     The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size, design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use or to the general welfare of the city.

c.     The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the applicable district or districts.

d.     The proposed use meets the minimum requirements of this Title applicable to the use and complies with all other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the city and state.

2.     Approval Findings for Nonconforming Uses. A Conditional Use Permit shall be granted only when the designated Approving Authority determines that the proposed use or activity complies with all of the following findings:

a.     The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable provisions of this Title.

b.     The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case (location, size, design, and operating characteristics), be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use or to the general welfare of the city.

c.     The benefit to the public health, safety, or welfare exceeds the detriment inherent in the expansion of nonconformity.

d.     The modified or expanded nonconforming structure or uses would not be incompatible with reasonably foreseeable uses as allowed under the applicable zoning regulations.

e.     The modified or expanded nonconforming structure or use would be consistent with the General Plan.

F.     Conditions. The Approving Authority may impose conditions for the Conditional Use Permit to ensure compliance with this Section and other applicable provisions of this Title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact to the surrounding neighborhood.

G.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for Conditional Use Permit shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

H.    Time Limits. All approved Conditional Use Permits are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.140 Planned Development
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Development is to provide a process to allow diversity in the relationship between buildings and open spaces to create interesting physical environments and to maximize the development potential of underutilized or problematic land areas. This land use entitlement is intended to demonstrate that the development plan with any proposed deviations is consistent with the General Plan and will result in a quality project that is compatible with surroundings, preserves site resources, minimizes hazards, and provides a public benefit.

B.     Applicability. A Planned Development is required in conjunction with any rezone request for a Planned Development Overlay Zone designation. To qualify for rezoning, projects must include developed or undeveloped property with one or more contiguous parcels totaling a minimum of two acres in size. Projects of less than two acres may be considered when determined that the development area is underutilized or problematic (e.g., infill, reuse, redevelopment) and that the surrounding area will be better served by the project.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for a Planned Development is the City Council.

D.    Procedures. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). A public hearing is required for a Planned Development.

E.     Deviations from Development Standards. The Approving Authority may grant requests to deviate from the development standards (e.g., minimum lot area, yard requirements, building heights), but shall not grant exceptions to the allowed land use or density of the base Zoning District. Physical development standards may be modified if the plan includes examples of superior design, environmental preservation and public benefit amenities, and the Approving Authority makes all of the required findings herein.

F.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority shall make the following findings to approve a Planned Development application.

1.     The proposed project does not exceed the total density allowed under the base Zoning District or the General Plan land use designation.

2.     The proposed project is superior to development that could occur under the development standards of the base district in at least two of the following ways:

a.     Greater open space and common areas than required;

b.     Greater landscaping than required that enhances the public street appearance (including street trees, benches, lights, special paving, water fountains, etc.) or increases landscape buffers with adjacent properties;

c.     Superior site design. Utilization of the applicable commercial/industrial design standards as provided in the Manteca Community Design Handbooks to achieve a superior site design;

d.     Superior subdivision design. Utilization of the applicable residential design standards to achieve a superior subdivision design;

e.     Greater connectivity to surrounding public streets, bike paths, pedestrian walkways, and public open spaces than required by zoning or subdivision regulations;

f.      Enhanced environmental preservation by clustering development to preserve sensitive plant or wildlife habitat, biological resources, or contiguous open space;

g.     Reduced impacts on surrounding properties, in terms of privacy, access to sunlight, shadow, views, building bulk, noise, or other types of negative impacts, beyond what would be achieved under existing requirements.

3.     The proposed project incorporates best site planning practices for quality design and compatibility with surroundings.

4.     The proposed project incorporates high quality architectural design and durable materials.

5.     The proposed project shall not be substantially detrimental to adjacent property and will not materially impair the purposes of this Title or the public interest.

G.    Conditions. The Approving Authority may impose conditions for the Planned Development to ensure compliance with this Section and other applicable provisions of this Title and to prevent adverse or detrimental impact to the surrounding neighborhood.

H.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for Planned Development shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

I.      Time Limits. All approved Planned Developments are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.150 Development Agreement
A.    Purpose. This Section establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of Development Agreements when applied for as part of a land use entitlement in compliance with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. The City Council finds and declares the use of Development Agreements is beneficial to the public, in that:

1.     Development Agreements increase the certainty in the approval of development projects, thereby preventing the waste of resources, reducing the cost of development to the consumer, and encouraging investment in and commitment to comprehensive planning, all leading to the maximum efficient utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public.

2.     Development Agreements provide assurance to the applicant for a development project that upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with existing policies, rules, and regulations, and subject to conditions of approval, thereby strengthening the public planning process, encouraging private participation in comprehensive planning, and reducing the economic costs of development.

3.     Development Agreements enable the City to plan for and finance public facilities, including, but not limited to, streets, sewerage, transportation, drinking water, school, and utility facilities, thereby removing a serious impediment to the development of new housing.

B.     Qualified Applicant. Only a qualified applicant, a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the Development Agreement (or his or her authorized agent), may submit an application for a Development Agreement.

C.     Submittal Requirement. Section 17.08.020 (Application and Fee) identifies the requirement for submittal of any application to the City for permit or entitlement.

D.    Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for Development Agreements is the City Council. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Development Agreement and make a recommendation to the City Council.

E.     Approval Findings. A Development Agreement may only be granted when the City Council makes all of the following findings specifying that the Development Agreement:

1.     Is consistent with the objectives, policies, and general land uses specified in the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plans.

2.     Is compatible and in conformity with public convenience, general welfare, and good land use and zoning practice.

3.     Will not be detrimental to health, safety, and general welfare of the city.

4.     Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values.

F.     Amendment and Cancellation of Agreement. Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or part of the Development Agreement, the procedure for which is the same as the procedure for entering into the agreement initially. Where, however, the City initiates the proposed amendment or cancellation, the City must first notice the property owner of its intent at least 15 days in advance. Additional amendment provisions may be incorporated into individual Development Agreements.

G.    Recordation. Within 10 days after the City enters into the Development Agreement or any amendment thereof, the City Clerk shall cause the agreement or amendment to be recorded with the County Recorder. Additionally, the City Clerk shall be the official custodian of the Development Agreement file. Said file shall include an executed copy of the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review, amendments, and/or cancellations to the Development Agreement.

H.    Periodic Review. The City Manager shall review the Development Agreement every 12 months from the date the Development Agreement is entered into and provide a written report to the City Council. The burden of proof is on the applicant to provide necessary information verifying compliance with the terms of the Development Agreement. The applicant shall also bear the cost of such review in accordance with the fee established by City Council resolution. If the City Manager finds that any aspect of the development project is not in strict compliance with the terms of the Development Agreement or may warrant consideration by the Approving Authority, the City Manager may schedule the matter before the appropriate Approving Authority for review. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.160 Specific Plan
A.    Purpose. The purpose of a Specific Plan is to provide a vehicle for implementing the City’s General Plan on an area-specific basis. The Specific Plan is intended to serve as a regulatory document, consistent with the General Plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted Specific Plan and comparable provisions of this Title, the Specific Plan shall prevail. This Section is consistent with California Government Code Section 65450 et seq. This Section describes the process for adopting, amending, and subsequent development under a Specific Plan. Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) describes the individual Specific Plan Districts and adopts them by reference.

B.     Applicability. The City’s General Plan encourages preparation of Specific Plans. A Specific Plan may be initiated in the following manner:

1.     By the City through resolution of intention adopted by the City Council with recommendation from the Planning Commission; or

2.     By a property owner through an application filed requesting to be included in a Specific Plan.

If initiated by a property owner, a pre-submittal application and conference with the director are required prior to the filing of a formal Specific Plan application.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for Specific Plans is the City Council.

D.    Contents. In addition to the minimum content requirements of California Government Code Section 65451, the following items outline the City’s content requirements for an application.

1.     Statement of the relationship of the Specific Plan to the General Plan.

2.     Policies for development and standards for regulating development within the plan area.

3.     The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the Specific Plan.

4.     The types and configurations of buildings to be included in all developments within the plan area.

5.     The location of and types of streets.

6.     Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments within the Specific Plan area.

7.     A parking and circulation plan for off-street parking areas showing the location of parking lots, the approximate number of spaces, and the approximate location of entrances and exits.

8.     Proposed conservation, open space, and/or recreation areas, if any.

9.     Any other programs, guidelines, or standards appropriate for the area covered by the plan.

E.     Environmental Review. It is anticipated, under the California Environmental Quality Act Section 15812 and Guidelines, that most Specific Plans will require preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR). Once certified, the EIR for a Specific Plan may be relied upon for further entitlements sought subsequent to adoption of the Specific Plan. Unless otherwise exempt, an initial study shall be prepared for all subsequent applications to determine whether a supplement to the EIR must be prepared. If a supplement to the EIR is determined not to be necessary, a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration shall be prepared.

F.     Approval Findings. Specific Plans and any amendment thereto shall be approved/adopted only when the City Council makes the following findings:

1.     The proposed Specific Plan is consistent with the General Plan goals, policies, and implementation programs.

2.     The land use and development regulations within the Specific Plan are comparable in breadth and depth to similar zoning regulations contained in this Title.

3.     The administration and permit processes within the Specific Plan are consistent with the administration and permit processes of the Zoning Ordinance.

G.    Adoption. Adoption of the Specific Plan by ordinance of the City Council shall constitute final action and approval of the Specific Plan. Authorization for construction in accordance with the Specific Plan may only be granted after the effective date of the adoption.

H.    Delineation of Specific Plan Areas. On the Zoning Map, a Specific Plan Zoning District shall be delineated in a manner similar to that of any other Zoning District, except that each SP-zoned area shall also bear a number, text, or other symbol which distinguishes it from other Specific Plan areas. See Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts).

I.      Application of Specific Plan Development Requirements. Where specific conditions of the Specific Plan are more restrictive than the Zoning Ordinance development standards, the conditions of the Specific Plan shall apply. Where a standard is not addressed in the Specific Plan, the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.170 Master Plan
A.    Purpose. The purpose of a Master Plan is to provide a procedure for the consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed comprehensive development with detailed development plans. The Master Plan is intended to serve as a regulatory document, consistent with the General Plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted Master Plan and comparable provisions of this Title, the Master Plan shall prevail. Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) describes the individual Master Plan Districts and adopts them by reference.

B.     Applicability. A Master Plan may be initiated in the following manner:

1.     By the City through resolution of intention adopted by the City Council with recommendation from the Planning Commission; or

2.     By a property owner through an application filed requesting to be included in a Master Plan. If initiated by a property owner, a pre-submittal application and conference with the director are required prior to the filing of a formal Master Plan application.

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for Master Plans is the City Council. The Community Development Director and the Planning Commission provide recommendations to the City Council. The City Council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Master Plan in accordance with the requirements of this Section.

D.    Contents. In addition to the minimum general requirement, the City shall require, at a minimum, the following:

1.     A completed City application form indicating, among other things, the applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.

2.     The address of the property for which the request is being made.

3.     Detailed project description indicating the request for the zone change to Master Plan.

4.     The following data is required:

a.     Topographic map showing natural features of the site and adjacent property and location of proposed facilities and roads;

b.     Description of existing site, including vegetation, wildlife, natural features, and present services, access, and land use;

c.     Description of proposed uses and structures, landscaping, fencing, services, streets, utilities, and other facilities;

d.     Other information as required by the Community Development Director or Planning Commission, including, but not limited to, detailed construction, improvement, utility, and drainage plans and other data as is deemed necessary to adequately consider the proposed development; and

e.     Such other relevant information as may be requested by the Community Development Director in order to provide the Approving Authority with adequate information on which to base a decision.

E.     Environmental Review. It is anticipated, under the California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines, that most Master Plans will require preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR). Once certified, the EIR for a Master Plan may be relied upon for further entitlements sought subsequent to adoption of the Master Plan. Unless otherwise exempt, an initial study shall be prepared for all subsequent applications to determine whether a supplement to the EIR must be prepared. If a supplement to the EIR is determined not to be necessary, a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration shall be prepared.

F.     Required Contents of a Master Plan. When a Master Plan is being established, it shall set forth in text, maps, and diagrams the following items, at the level of detail appropriate for the Master Plan submittal:

1.     A list of permitted, conditionally permitted, and prohibited uses.

2.     Performance and development requirements related to yards, lot area, and intensity of development on each lot, parking, landscaping, and signs.

3.     Other design standards appropriate for the specific site and development.

4.     Legal description of property covered by the Master Plan.

5.     Reasons for establishment of a Master Plan on the particular property.

G.    Additional Contents of a Master Plan. Additional contents may be required as determined by the Community Development Director including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     Regulations relating to nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and signs.

2.     Time, phasing, and sequence of development projects.

3.     Infrastructure plan.

4.     Circulation plan.

H.    Approval Findings. Master Plans and any amendment thereto shall be approved/adopted only when the City Council makes the following findings:

1.     The proposed Master Plan is consistent with the General Plan goals, policies, and implementation programs.

2.     The land use and development regulations within the Master Plan are comparable in breadth and depth to similar zoning regulations contained in this Title.

3.     The administration and permit processes within the Master Plan are consistent with the administration and permit processes of the Zoning Ordinance.

4.     Adequate services are available for the proposed uses, including, but not limited to, water supply, sewage disposal, roads, and utilities.

I.      Adoption. Adoption of the Master Plan by ordinance of the City Council shall constitute final action and approval of the Master Plan. Authorization for construction in accordance with the Master Plan may only be granted after the effective date of the adoption.

J.      Delineation of Master Plan Areas. On the Zoning Map, a Master Plan Zoning District shall be delineated in a manner similar to that of any other Zoning District, except that each MP-zoned area shall also bear a number, text, or other symbol which distinguishes it from other Master Plan areas. See Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts).

K.    Application of Master Plan Development Requirements. Where specific conditions of the Master Plan are more restrictive than the Zoning Ordinance development standards, the conditions of the Master Plan shall apply. Where a standard is not addressed in the Master Plan, the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.180 Prezoning
A.    Purpose. The purpose of prezoning is to establish the designation of land use by Zoning District for unincorporated property adjoining the city, within the Sphere of Influence. This Section is consistent with California Government Code Section 65859.

B.     Procedure. The procedure, review, and action for prezoning are the same as that established for a Zoning Amendment pursuant to Section 17.10.190 (Zoning Amendment). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.190 Zoning Amendment (Text and Map)
A.    Purpose. The purpose of a Zoning Amendment is to allow modification to any provisions of this Title (including the adoption of new regulations or deletion of existing regulations) or to rezone or change the zoning designation on the Zoning Map for any parcel(s). This Section is consistent with California Government Code Section 65853.

B.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for Zoning Amendments is the City Council. The Community Development Director and Planning Commission provide recommendations, and the City Council may approve, conditionally approve, deny, or deny without prejudice the Zoning Amendment in accordance with the requirements of this Title.

C.     Initiation of Amendment. A Zoning Amendment to this Title may be initiated by motion of the Planning Commission or City Council, by application by property owner(s) of parcel(s) to be affected by the Zoning Amendment, or by recommendation of the Community Development Director to clarify text, address changes mandated by state law, maintain General Plan consistency, address boundary adjustments affecting land use designation(s), or for any other reason beneficial to the city.

D.    Findings for Zoning Amendment (Text or Map). Zoning Amendments shall be granted only when the City Council makes the following findings:

1.     The proposed Zoning Amendment (text or map) is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan goals, policies, and implementation programs;

2.     The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City;

3.     The amendment has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);

4.     If a map amendment, the site is physically suitable (including absence of physical constraints, access, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and provisions of utilities) for the requested zoning designations and anticipated land uses/development; and

5.     If a text amendment, the amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code.

E.     Conditions/Restrictions. When considering an application for a Zoning Amendment to rezone property, the City Council has the authority to impose restrictions on property including use restriction. Conditions imposed by the City Council shall run with the land and shall not be automatically removed by subsequent rezonings of the property. Conditions may only be modified or removed by the City Council in accordance with Section 17.14.070 (Permit Revocation or Modification).

F.     Action/Adoption. Adoption of the Zoning Amendment by ordinance of the City Council shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment. Authorization for construction or occupancy in accordance with the amendment may only be granted upon or after the effective date of the action. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.200 General Plan Amendment (Text and Map)
A.    Purpose. The purpose of a General Plan Amendment is to allow for modifications to the General Plan text (e.g., goals, policies, or implementation programs) or to change the General Plan land use designation on any parcel(s).

B.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for General Plan Amendments is the City Council. The Community Development Director and Planning Commission provide recommendations, and the City Council may approve, conditionally approve, deny, or deny without prejudice the General Plan Amendment in accordance with the requirements of this Title.

C.     Frequency of Amendment. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65358, no mandatory element of the General Plan may be amended more frequently than four times during any calendar year. Subject to that limitation, an amendment may be made at any time and may include more than one change to the General Plan.

D.    Initiation of Amendment. A General Plan Amendment may be initiated by motion of the Planning Commission or City Council, by application of property owner(s) of parcel(s) to be affected by the General Plan Amendment, or by recommendation of the Community Development Director to clarify text, address changes mandated by state law, maintain internal General Plan consistency, address boundary adjustments affecting land use designation(s), or for any other reason beneficial to the city.

E.     Findings for General Plan Amendment (Text or Map). In the event that a General Plan Amendment is requested by a property owner, the applicant shall demonstrate to the City Council that there is a substantial benefit to be derived from such amendment. Additionally, the City Council must find that the proposed amendment meets the letter and intent of the General Plan goals and policies.

F.     Adoption. Adoption of the General Plan Amendment by the City Council shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment. Authorization for construction or occupancy in accordance with the amendment may only be granted upon the effective date of the action. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.10.210 Storage Container Permit
A.    Purpose. A Storage Container Permit provides a process for Community Development Director review and decisions related to requests for storage, cargo, or shipping containers. The intent is to allow the integration of a storage container with the design of the structures to achieve a unified architectural statement and to encourage design flexibility without circumventing the intent of this Code.

B.     Applicability. A Storage Container Permit shall be required for storage, cargo, or shipping containers in accordance with Section 17.40.040 (Development Standards for Accessory Structures).

C.     Approving Authority. The designated Approving Authority for a Storage Container Permit is the Community Development Director.

D.    Procedure. This process will be conducted by the Community Development Director in accordance with Chapter 17.08 (General Application Processing Procedures). No public hearing is required for a Storage Container Permit.

E.     Approval Findings. The Approving Authority may approve a Storage Container Permit with the finding that the proposed storage container complies with the standards and requirements of this Title.

F.     Conditions of Approval. Whenever any Storage Container Permit is granted, the designated Approving Authority may impose such conditions as may be necessary to safeguard the public safety and the intent of this Title.

G.    Appeals. Appeal of the Approving Authority’s action on the request for a Storage Container Permit shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals).

H.    Expiration. All approved Storage Container Permits are subject to the provisions set forth in Section 17.08.120 (Time Limits and Extensions). (Ord. O2018-11 § 1)

 

Chapter 17.12 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
17.12.010 Purpose
This Chapter establishes special regulations for nonconforming land uses and structures that were lawful before the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the current terms of this Zoning Code or future amendments. It is the intent of these regulations to allow the continuation of nonconformities under the limited conditions outlined herein and reconstruction in the event of natural disaster. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.020 Applicability and General Regulations
A.    Legal Nonconforming Uses. The provisions of this Chapter apply to legal nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed or established, and any time limit for the suspension of a nonconforming use of land shall date from (effective date) or any amendment of district boundaries which first creates a nonconforming use or uses.

B.     Subdivision of a Nonconforming Parcel. No subdivision shall be approved that would increase the nonconformity of an existing parcel or any nonconforming use on the parcel; existence of a legal nonconforming use or parcel shall not be interpreted to allow the increase of the nonconformity of such parcel or any nonconforming use on the parcel.

C.     Exemption for Legal Building Site. A nonconforming parcel that does not comply with the applicable area or width requirements of this Zoning Code shall be considered a legal building site if it meets at least one of the following criteria, as documented to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director through evidence furnished by the applicant.

1.     Approved Subdivision. The parcel was created by a recorded subdivision.

2.     Individual Parcel Legally Created by Deed. The parcel is under single ownership of record and was legally created by a recorded deed before the effective date of the Zoning Amendment that made the parcel nonconforming.

3.     Variance or Lot Line Adjustment. The parcel was approved through the Variance procedure or resulted from a lot line adjustment.

4.     Partial Government Acquisition. The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, but was made nonconforming when a portion was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing a public right-of-way was decreased not more than 50 percent.

D.    Exemption for Nonconforming Lot. Any lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful on the effective date of this title or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the requirements of the applicable Zoning District, shall be considered buildable for the purposes of this Title.

E.     Exemption for Public Utilities. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply so as to prevent the modernization or replacement of public utility buildings, structures, equipment, and facilities where there is no change of use or increase in area of property so used.

F.     Exemption for Parking and Loading. No use of land or structure existing at the time of the adoption of this Title shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of a failure to meet the requirements of Chapter 17.52 (Parking), provided that the facilities being used for off-street parking or loading at that time shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of spaces or berths required by Chapter 17.52 (Parking) or reduced in area to less than the minimum standards required by Chapter 17.52 (Parking).

G.    Exemption for Commercial Districts. Any nonconforming site proposed for further development, including expansion of use, building additions, and establishment of new uses, shall conform to all current codes except as follows:

1.     In commercial districts, an existing use on a nonconforming site may be expanded, provided that the expansion does not involve the installation of permanent improvements. The installation of any permanent improvement will be subject to site plan and design review.

2.     In commercial districts, a new accessory use can be established on a nonconforming site, provided that the expansion does not involve the installation of permanent improvements including any building additions. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.030 Continuation
A.    Continuation. Except as established below, a nonconforming use may continue to operate in perpetuity, be transferred, or be sold, provided that the use shall not be enlarged or intensified nor be expanded to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied before becoming nonconforming.

B.     Building Permits. When any nonconforming building or use is required to be abated pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall thereafter be issued for further continuance, alteration, or expansion of the nonconforming building or use.

C.     Approved Plans and Effective Date. Plans for any use, building, or structure approved as of the effective date of this Chapter may be carried out as approved.

D.    Prohibited Use. Any person asserting the nonconforming use must present evidence that the use existing before the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance provision prohibited the use.

E.     Converted to a Conforming Use. Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, provided that all applicable permit requirements and standards of this Title are satisfied. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.040 Maintenance
Normal maintenance of a nonconforming structure shall be permitted subject to Building Code requirements in effect at the time of such maintenance work and as provided below.

A.    Repair. Maintenance may include repair work necessary to keep the structure in sound condition, but maintenance shall not include the replacement of a structure.

B.     Seismic Retrofitting and Building Code Compliance. Repairs, alterations, or reconstruction to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures or to comply with Building Code requirements, or where the building official determines modifications are immediately necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or occupants, shall be allowed, provided that the work is exclusively to comply with applicable earthquake safety standards and the Building Code.

C.     Structural Alteration. Maintenance and repair may include structural alteration of a nonconforming structure to improve safety or to reduce fire hazard. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.050 Modification, Expansion, and Reconstruction
A nonconforming use or structure may be modified or expanded as listed below, subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit as listed in Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit).

A.    Structural Modification. Addition, enlargement, extension, or relocation of a nonconforming structure may be allowed if the changes to the structure conform to all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Such modifications may not expand the extent of the nonconforming aspect of the structure or result in any new nonconforming conditions for the subject property.

B.     Expansion of Use. A lot or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use may be further developed by the addition of conforming uses and structures. Said expansion may not increase the extent of the nonconforming use. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.060 Structural Alterations
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without the approval of the Planning Commission and then only to a use which in the opinion of the Planning Commission is of the same or more restricted classification. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.070 Repair and Replacement of Destroyed Buildings
A.    Ministerial Building Permit Required. If a nonconforming structure in existence or use maintained on the effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located, is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, flood, wind, earthquake, explosion, act of God, or act of the enemy, subsequent to the effective date of this Title and the expense of such reconstruction is less than or equal to 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure at such time just prior to the damage occurring, then without further action by the City Council, such structure and use of land may be repaired, restored, replaced, or reconstructed and reoccupied in the same manner in which it originally existed upon issuance of a ministerial building permit and subject to the following terms:

1.     All such reconstruction shall be performed under one building permit.

2.     All such reconstruction shall be initiated within a period of one year from date of damage.

3.     All such reconstruction shall be diligently pursued to completion.

B.     Conditional Use Permit Required. If the repair, restoration, replacement, or reconstruction expands from the original state of the nonconforming structure, at such time just prior to the damage occurring, issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to the provisions set forth in Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit) is required. The Approving Authority may consider up to a maximum 10 percent expansion of the square footage from the original state of the nonconforming structure at such time just prior to the damage occurring. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.12.080 Loss of Nonconforming Status
A.    If any nonconforming use is abandoned or discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months or more, rights to nonconforming status shall terminate. Without further action by the City, any subsequent use of such land or structure shall be in conformity with all of the regulations of the applicable Zoning District and all other applicable provisions of this Title.

A determination that a use has been abandoned requires both (1) evidence of an intention to abandon, and (2) an act or failure to act which shows or implies that the owner does not continue to claim or retain an interest in the nonconforming use. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the nonconforming use, disconnected or discontinued utilities, or no business records to document continued operation. Maintenance of a valid business license shall in itself not be considered a continuation of the use. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of six months or more is in itself prima facie evidence of abandonment.

B.     Nonconforming signs shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property) of this Title. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.14 ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL PROCEDURE, AND PENALTIES
17.14.010 Enforcement Authority and Procedures
Authority and procedures for enforcement of the Zoning Code shall be the same as the enforcement provisions for the entire Municipal Code as established in Municipal Code Chapter 1.10 (Administrative Enforcement Provisions). Enforcement provisions therein include purpose, definitions, authority, fees, and procedures for violations, public nuisance, citations, abatement, penalties, and hearings. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

Article II ZONING DISTRICTS, ALLOWED USES, AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 17.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
17.20.010 Purpose
This Chapter establishes the framework of Zoning Districts within the City of Manteca and their relationships to the City’s General Plan land use categories. This Chapter also establishes the Zoning Map as the official designation of Zoning District boundaries. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.020 Zoning Districts
Zoning Districts are established in order to classify, regulate, restrict, and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces around buildings, and to regulate the density of population.

The City of Manteca is divided into Zoning Districts that are generally grouped into two categories: (A) Base Zoning Districts, and (B) Special Purpose Zoning Districts. These districts conform to and implement the City’s General Plan land use categories as described in Table 17.20.020-1 (Zoning Districts). Subsequent Chapters in this Article identify allowed uses and requirements for planning entitlements, as well as development standards unique to each Zoning District.

A.    Base Zoning Districts. The Base Zoning District is the primary Zoning District that applies to a property. Every parcel located outside of a Specific Plan area throughout the City has a Base Zoning District that establishes the primary type and intensity of land use for the parcel, along with development regulations for that particular type and intensity of land use for the parcel. Base Zoning Districts are grouped into six categories as follows:

1.     Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts;

2.     Commercial, Office, Industrial, and Mixed-Use Zoning Districts;

3.     Public/Quasi-Public Zoning Districts; and

4.     Special Purpose Zoning Districts.

B.     Overlay Zoning Districts. An Overlay Zoning District supplements the Base Zoning District for one or more of the following purposes:

1.     When special provisions are needed to protect unique site features or implement location-specific provisions; and/or

2.     To specify a particular standard or guideline for an area.

When an Overlay Zoning District is silent on allowed use provisions, the allowed use provisions of the Base Zoning District shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between the regulations of the Base Zoning District and the Overlay Zoning District, the provisions of the Overlay Zoning District shall apply.

 

TABLE 17.20.020-1

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Zoning District Symbol

Zoning District Name/Description

General Plan Land Use Designation Implemented by Zoning District

Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts

A

Agricultural Zoning District. This designation provides for agricultural uses (such as vineyards, orchards, and row crops), single-family homes directly related to the agricultural use of the property, limited industrial uses directly related to agriculture, and similar and compatible uses.

Agricultural

R-E

Residential Estate Zoning District. This designation allows for large lots and flexible placement of single-family detached housing. Uses include quasi-agricultural activities, including raising and boarding livestock. The agricultural use areas that remain on the residential parcel shall be subject to an easement dedicated to the City that allows continued agricultural use, but prohibits any further nonagricultural-related development.

Very Low Density Residential

R-1

One-Family Dwelling Zoning District. This designation allows for substantial flexibility in selecting dwelling unit types and parcel configurations to suit site conditions and housing needs. The types of dwelling units include small lots and clustered lots as well as conventional large-lot detached residences.

Low Density Residential

R-2

Limited Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District. The medium-density residential use includes single-family homes and smaller-scale multi-family developments, including garden apartments, townhouses, and cluster housing.

Medium Density Residential

R-3

Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District. The high-density residential use includes multi-family apartment-style housing. The multi-family dwelling sites are typically located with direct access to arterial streets, bicycle paths, and other transit options.

High Density Residential

Commercial, Office, Industrial, and Mixed-Use Zoning Districts

CMU

Mixed Use Commercial Zoning District. This designation will accommodate a variety of uses including high-density residential, employment centers, retail commercial, and professional offices.

Commercial Mixed Use

BIP

Business Industrial Park Zoning District. This designation creates large sites for office park environment that includes multi-tenant buildings. It will be well suited for research and development facilities and light industrial uses, as well as professional and medical offices. Warehouses will be permitted but limited in size.

Business Industrial Park

CN

Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District. Serving neighborhood needs, this district is locally oriented, providing retail and service uses, offices, restaurants, grocery stores, and service stations.

Neighborhood Commercial

CG

General Commercial Zoning District. This category provides for wholesale, warehousing, and heavy commercial uses, highway-oriented commercial retail, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses. The designation is also intended to accommodate visitor lodging, commercial recreation and public gathering facilities, such as amphitheaters, or public gardens. It also allows most neighborhood and mixed commercial uses.

General Commercial

CM

Commercial Manufacturing Zoning District. This designation is intended for establishments engaged in servicing equipment, materials, and products, but which do not necessarily require the manufacturing or processing of articles or merchandise for distribution and retail sales.

General Commercial or Light Industrial

M1

Light Industrial Zoning District. This designation provides for industrial parks, warehouses, distribution centers, light manufacturing, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.

Light Industrial

M2

Heavy Industrial Zoning District. This designation provides for manufacturing, processing, assembling, research, wholesale, and storage uses, trucking terminals, railroad and freight stations, and similar activities that require separation from residential uses. It also allows many light industrial uses.

Heavy Industrial

Public/Quasi-Public Zoning Districts

OS

Open Space Zoning District. This designation is set aside for habitat, open space, natural areas, lands of special-status species, wetlands, and riparian areas. These areas are set aside as permanent open space preserves to protect environmentally sensitive areas.

Open Space, Recreational

P

Park Zoning District. This designation provides for neighborhood, community, and regional parks, golf courses, and other outdoor recreational facilities within urban development.

Park

PQP

Public/Quasi-Public Zoning District. This designation provides for government-owned facilities, public and private schools, institutions, civic uses and public utilities, and quasi-public uses such as hospitals and religious institutions.

Public/Quasi-Public

Special Purpose Zoning Districts

SP

Specific Plan Zoning District. This designation identifies properties that require subsequent master planning in the form of approval of a Specific Plan consistent with Government Code Section 65450.

All

MP

Master Planned Zoning District. This designation provides a process for the consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed comprehensive development with detailed development plans and those areas that require special planning to provide appropriate planned development.

All

Overlay Zoning Districts

CBD

Central Business Overlay Zoning District. This designation provides special development standards and regulations for development within the central business district of the city.

Business and Professional

Neighborhood Commercial

PD

Planned Development Overlay Zoning District. This designation identifies properties that require subsequent site planning in the form of approval of a Planned Development.

All

(Ord. O2018-6 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.030 Conformance with Zoning District Regulations
Except as otherwise provided in this Title:

A.    No building shall be erected, and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, or premises be used, designed, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than listed in this Title, or amendments thereto, as permitted in the Zoning District in which such land, building, or premises is located.

B.     No building shall be erected nor any existing building be moved, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established by this Title, or amendments thereto, for the Zoning District in which such building is located.

C.     No building shall be erected nor shall any existing building be moved, altered, or enlarged nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the building-site requirements and the area and yard regulations established by this Title, or amendments thereto, for the Zoning District in which such building is located. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.040 Zoning Map
The City Council hereby adopts the City of Manteca Zoning Map (hereafter referred to as the “Zoning Map”) as the official designation of Zoning District boundaries on real property within the city. The Zoning Map shall be regulated as set forth:

A.    Incorporated by Reference. The Zoning Map is hereby incorporated into this Zoning Code by reference.

B.     Relationship to the General Plan. The Zoning Map shall implement and shall be consistent with the City’s adopted General Plan. Specifically, the Zoning Map shall be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Plan.

C.     Relationship to Specific Plans. The Specific Plans adopted in the City of Manteca establish special zoning regulations and other design and development provisions in designated portions of the city. As such, the Specific Plans essentially replace the citywide zoning regulations in those areas and are shown on the Zoning Map with the adopted Specific Plan name and/or number, referring the reader to the adopted Specific Plan document to govern subsequent land development within the plan area. The Zoning Code shall be relied upon for development topics not included within the Specific Plan. In the event of a conflict between the Specific Plan and the Zoning Code, the Specific Plan shall prevail.

D.    Planned Developments. In addition to the Zoning District symbol for the PD district, a reference to the PD-Planned Development approval for the site shall be included on the Zoning Map whenever possible.

E.     Zoning District Symbol. Zoning Districts shall be illustrated on the Zoning Map as follows:

1.     Each Base Zoning District shall be described on the Zoning Map by use of its identified Zoning District Symbol, as listed in Table 17.20.020-1 (Zoning Districts).

2.     Special Purpose Zoning Districts shall be delineated with a name, number, symbol, or other delineation, as determined by the Community Development Director, which distinguishes it from other Special Purpose Zoning Districts or Base Zoning Districts. The assignment of the Special Purpose designation serves to provide a reference to the corresponding Special Purpose zoning document (e.g., Specific Plan, Planned Development) adopted by ordinance of the City Council.

F.     Zoning Map Interpretation. If there is uncertainty about the location of any Zoning District boundary shown on the Zoning Map, the precise location of the boundary shall be determined by the Community Development Director as follows:

1.     Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

2.     In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

3.     Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

4.     Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal, or transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned property. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.050 Classification of Land Uses
In order to simplify land use regulations, land uses listed in this Article and throughout this Title have been grouped into general categories on the basis of common function, product, or compatibility characteristics. These allowed use categories are called “use classifications.” Use classifications describe one or more uses having similar characteristics but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. Each land use is described in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions). For example, “personal service use” includes a wide range of individual personal service uses (beauty parlor, dry cleaning, tanning salons, tailors). Rather than listing all such uses individually throughout this Title, personal service use is listed once and is further defined in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions).

The following rules apply to use classifications:

A.    Special Use Regulations. Additional use regulations for special land uses are listed in Article IV (Standards for Specific Land Uses).

B.     Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in the Zoning District tables are not allowed, except as otherwise provided for in this Title.

C.     Illegal Uses. No use that is illegal under local, state, or federal law shall be allowed in any Zoning District within the city.

D.    Special Purpose Zoning District. When a property is located within a Special Purpose Zoning District, the allowed use provisions of that Special Purpose Zoning District shall prevail. When a Special Purpose Zoning District is silent on allowed use provisions, it defers the allowed use provisions to the Base Zoning District. Only where there is a conflict do the Special Purpose Zoning District provisions prevail.

E.     Similar Uses. When a use is not specifically listed in this Code, it shall be understood that the use may be permitted if the Community Development Director determines that the use is substantially similar to other uses listed based on established criteria and required findings outlined in Section 17.20.070 (Similar Use Determination). It is further recognized that every conceivable use cannot be identified in this Title and, anticipating that new uses will evolve over time, the Community Development Director may make a Similar Use Determination to compare a proposed use and measure it against those uses listed. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.060 Allowed Land Uses
Zoning District allowed uses and corresponding requirements for entitlements are listed in Table 17.22.020-1 (Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts) for all of the City’s Base Zoning Districts. Generally, a use is either allowed by right, allowed through issuance of a conditional use permit, or not permitted. In addition to the requirements for planning entitlements of this Title, other permits may be required prior to establishment of the use (e.g., Building Permit or permits required by other agencies). The requirements for planning entitlements identified in Table 17.20.020-1 include:

A.    Allowed (A). A land use shown with an “A” indicates that the land use is permitted by right in the designated Zoning District, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g., development standards) as well as state and federal law.

B.     Conditional (C). A land use shown with a “C” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit from the designated Approving Authority, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g., development standards) as well as state and federal law.

C.     Minor Use Permit (M). A land use shown with an “M” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Minor Use Permit from the designated Approving Authority, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code (e.g., development standards) as well as state and federal law.

D.    Not Permitted (N). A land use shown with an “N” in the table is not allowed in the applicable Zoning District. Additionally, uses not shown in the table are not permitted, except as otherwise provided for in this Title. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.20.070 Similar Use Determination
When a use is not specifically listed in this Title, it shall be understood that the use may be permitted if the Community Development Director determines that the use is substantially similar to other uses listed. It is further recognized that every use cannot be identified in this Title and, anticipating that new uses will evolve over time, this Section establishes the Community Development Director’s authority to compare a proposed use and measure it against those uses listed in this Title for determining similarity. In determining similarity, the Community Development Director shall make all of the following findings:

A.    The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed use are equivalent to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the Zoning District;

B.     The proposed use will be consistent with the purposes of the applicable Zoning District; and

C.     The proposed use will be consistent with the General Plan.

Determinations shall be made in writing and shall contain the facts that support the determination. The Community Development Department shall maintain all such determinations on record at the public counter for review by the general public. All recorded determinations shall be provided to the Planning Commission, City Council, City Manager, City Attorney, and City Clerk. The Community Development Director’s decision may be appealed as provided in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). Interpretations shall be made consistent with the provisions outlined in Chapter 17.04 (Interpretation). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.22 ALLOWED LAND USES AND REQUIREMENTS
17.22.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish allowed land uses and requirements for planning entitlements for each of the City’s Base Zoning Districts. Allowed uses herein are consistent with and implement the City’s General Plan corresponding land use designations as shown in Table 17.22.020-1 (Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts). Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts) includes regulations for the City’s Special Purpose Zoning Districts, and Chapter 17.30 (Overlay and Combining Zoning Districts Land Use and Development Standards) includes regulations for the City’s Overlay and Combining Zoning Districts. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.22.020 Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements
Table 17.22.020-1 (Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts) below identifies allowed uses and corresponding requirements for planning entitlements for all Base Zoning Districts within the City of Manteca other than Special Purpose Zoning Districts [see Chapter 17.28 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts)]. Definitions for the land uses listed herein (use classifications) are provided in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions). See additional use requirements in Article IV (Standards for Specific Land Uses). In the table below, an “A” indicates that the land use is permitted by right, a “C” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit [pursuant to Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit)], an “M” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Minor Use Permit, and an “N” indicates that the use is not allowed. Except as otherwise provided for in this Title, uses not shown in the table are not permitted.

Zoning district names for the Zoning District symbols used in the table are as follows:

A        Agricultural Zoning District

R-E     Residential Estate Zoning District

R-1      One-Family Dwelling Zoning District

R-2      Limited Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District

R-3      Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District

CMU   Mixed Use Commercial Zoning District

BIP     Business Industrial Park Zoning District

CN      Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District

CG      General Commercial Zoning District

CM     Commercial Manufacturing Zoning District

M1      Light Industrial Zoning District

M2      Heavy Industrial Zoning District

OS      Open Space Zoning District

P         Park Zoning District

PQP    Public/Quasi-Public Zoning District

 

TABLE 17.22.020-1

ALLOWED USES AND REQUIRED ENTITLEMENTS FOR MANTECA’S BASE ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Residential Uses

Adult Day Care Home

N

A

A

A

A

M

N

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

N

Caretaker Housing

A

A

A

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

C

C

N

N

C

Dwelling, Multi-Family

N

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Dwelling, Second Unit1

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Dwelling, Single-Family

A

A

A

M

M

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Dwelling, Two-Family

N

N

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Dwelling, Three- and Four-Family

N

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Emergency Shelter2

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

Employee Housing, Large

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Employee Housing, Small

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Family Day Care Home, Large19

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Family Day Care Home, Small

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Group Residential

N

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Home Occupations3

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Live-Work Facility

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Mobile Home Park

N

N

N

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Residential Care Facility

N

N

N

C

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Residential Care Home

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Facility

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Supportive Housing

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Transitional Housing

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Agricultural and Animal-Related Uses

Agricultural Tourism

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Husbandry

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Keeping, Domestic Pet

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Keeping, Exotic Animals

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Keeping, Livestock Animals4

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Keeping, Insects

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Keeping, Poultry/Rabbits5

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Animal Sales and Grooming

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

N

Crop Production

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Equestrian Facility, Commercial

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Kennel, Commercial6

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

Veterinary Facility7

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

C

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Recreation, Resource Preservation, Open Space, Education, and Public Assembly Uses

Assembly Uses

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

C

C

Cemetery/Mausoleum

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

Church/Place of Worship

C

C

C

C

C

A

C

A

A

M

C

N

N

N

A

Community Garden

A

A

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

Golf Course/Clubhouse8

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

Indoor Amusement/ Entertainment Facility

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

N

Indoor Fitness and Sports Facility

N

N

N

N

N

A

C

N

A

A

C

C

N

C

C

Library and Museum

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

M

N

N

N

N

M

A

Outdoor Commercial Recreation

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

Outdoor Community Recreation

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

A

A

A

Park and Public Plaza

A

A

A

A

A

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

A

A

A

Recreational Vehicle Park

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

P

Resource Protection and Restoration

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

Resource-Related Recreation

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

School, Academic-Private

N

N

A

A

A

A

M

A

M

A

M

N

N

N

A

School, Equipment/ Machinery/Vehicle Training

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

C

A

A

C

N

N

N

School, Specialized Education and Training/Studio

N

N

N

N

N

A

C

A

A

A

C

N

N

N

C

Theater/Auditorium

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Utility, Transportation, Public Facility, and Communication Uses

Airport

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

C

Ambulance Service

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

C

C

A

A

C

N

N

N

Broadcasting and Recording Studio

N

N

N

N

N

C

A

C

C

A

A

N

N

N

N

Fuel Storage and Distribution

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

A

N

N

N

Heliport

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

C

Park and Ride Facility

N

N

N

N

C

A

A

C

A

A

A

A

N

N

A

Parking Facility

N

N

N

C

C

A

C

C

A

A

C

C

N

N

A

Public Safety Facility

C

C

C

C

C

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

Transit Facility

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

A

A

C

A

N

N

A

Transit Station/Terminal

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

A

Utility Facility and Infrastructure

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

N

N

A

Wireless Telecommunication Facility – Major9

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

C

C

Wireless Telecommunication Facility – Minor9

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Retail, Service, and Office Uses

Adult Day Health Care Center

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

Adult-Oriented Business10

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

Alcoholic Beverage Sales

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

C

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

Bar/Nightclub

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

Bed and Breakfast Inn

N

N

N

N

C

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Brew Pub

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

N

N

N

N

Building Materials Store/ Yard

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

A

N

N

N

Business Support Services11

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

M

A

A

M

N

N

N

N

Child Day Care Center12

C

C

C

C

C

A

C

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Convenience Store

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Drive-In and Drive-Through Use13

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

M

M

N

N

N

N

N

N

Equipment Sales and Rental

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

A

A

A

N

N

N

Grocery Store/ Supermarket

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Home Improvement Supplies

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

N

Hotel and Motel14

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

N

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Maintenance and Repair of Small Equipment

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

N

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

Massage Therapy15

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Medical Services, Extended Care

N

N

N

C

C

C

N

N

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

Medical Services, General

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Medical Services, Hospital

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

N

Mortuary/Funeral Home

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

C

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

Neighborhood Market

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Office, Business and Professional

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

N

Personal Services

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Restaurant

N

N

N

N

N

A

M

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Retail, General

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

N

N

Tasting Room

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

N

N

N

N

Tobacco Related Uses18

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

C

C

N

N

N

N

N

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Automobile and Vehicle Uses

Auto and Vehicle Rental

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

N

M

M

M

N

N

N

N

Auto and Vehicle Sales

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

C

M

M

M

N

N

N

N

Auto and Vehicle Storage

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

M

A

N

N

N

Auto Parts Sales

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

N

Auto Vehicle Dismantling

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

N

N

N

Car Washing and Detailing

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

M

A

A

C

N

N

N

N

Fueling Station

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

M

M

M

N

N

N

N

N

Vehicle Services–Major

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

M

M

A

N

N

N

N

Vehicle Services–Minor

N

N

N

N

N

M

M

M

M

A

A

N

N

N

N

Land Use/Zoning District

A

R-E

R-1

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M1

M2

OS

P

PQP

Industrial, Manufacturing, and Processing Uses

Agricultural Products Processing

A

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

M

A

N

N

N

Freight Yard/Truck Terminal

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

A

A

N

N

N

Manufacturing, Major16

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

A

N

N

N

Manufacturing, Minor

N

N

N

N

N

N

M

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

Manufacturing, Small Scale

N

N

N

N

N

M

A

M

A

A

A

M

N

N

N

Recycling Facility – Collection17

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

N

N

N

Recycling Facility – Processing

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

N

N

N

Recycling Facility – Scrap and Dismantling

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

N

N

N

Research and Development

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

N

M

A

A

M

N

N

N

Storage, Personal Storage Facility

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

C

C

A

A

N

N

N

Storage, Warehouse

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

Storage, Yard

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

Wholesaling and Distribution

N

N

N

N

N

N

C

N

N

A

A

A

N

N

N

Notes:

1.      See additional regulations for Second Dwelling Units in Chapter 17.82.

2.      See additional regulations for Emergency Shelters in Chapter 17.76.

3.      See additional regulations for Home Occupations in Chapter 17.78.

4.      Minimum 2 acres for the first horse, then 1 additional acre for each additional horse. Stables and paddocks shall be located on the rear half of the lot a minimum of 20 feet to any lot line and a minimum of 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or adjoining property.

5.      Minimum of 1,000 square feet per animal.

6.      200-foot minimum setback from all property lines.

7.      Where veterinary facilities include any outdoor uses, such facilities shall maintain a minimum 50-foot setback from any residential district, restaurant, or hotel or motel. However, this minimum separation standard may be reduced where an applicant produces a noise analysis by a qualified acoustical professional to demonstrate that the proposed noise source will meet all of the City’s adopted noise standards for nearby residences.

8.      Minimum 20-foot setback; 25-foot setback when adjacent to a residential Zoning District.

9.      See additional regulations for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in Chapter 17.88.

10.   See additional regulations for Adult-Oriented Businesses in Chapter 17.70.

11.   Business occupying more than 25,000 square feet shall require approval of a Minor Use Permit to ensure that potential impacts associated with the larger business (e.g., noise, odor) are mitigated to a less than significant level.

12.   Minimum 10,000 square feet of lot area.

13.   See additional regulations for Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities in Chapter 17.74.

14.   Minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet.

15.   See additional regulations for Massage Therapy in Chapter 17.86.

16.   1,000-foot minimum setback from any residential Zoning District.

17.   Facilities located within 150 feet of a property zoned or used residential shall operate only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.

18.   100-foot minimum distance from any school.

19.   See additional regulations for Family Day Care Home, Large under Section 17.10.030 Zoning conformance approval.

 

(Ord. O2018-24 § 1; Ord. O2018-20 § 1; Ord. O2018-6 § 1; Ord. O2018-5 § 1; Ord. O2017-20 § 1; Ord. 1571 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1558 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1546 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.24 ALLOWED USE DEFINITIONS
17.24.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to define use classifications listed in Chapter 17.22 (Allowed Land Uses and Requirements) and throughout this Title. Use classifications are land uses that have been grouped into general categories on the basis of common function, product, or compatibility characteristics. This chapter should be used as a reference. Additional definitions for specialized terms used in the Zoning Code can be found in Article VI (Glossary). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.24.020 Allowed Use Definitions
The following list represents the complete list of allowed uses and corresponding definitions as used in Table 17.22.020-1 (Allowed Uses and Required Entitlements for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts) and throughout this Title. Individual use classifications describe one or more uses having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. Additional definitions are found in Article VI (Glossary). Allowed uses are organized into the following seven use categories as follows:

•       Residential Uses

•       Agriculture and Animal-Related Uses

•       Recreation, Resource Preservation, Open Space, Education, and Public Assembly Uses

•       Utility, Transportation, Public Facility, and Communication Uses

•       Retail, Service, and Office Uses

•       Automobile and Vehicle Uses

•       Industrial, Manufacturing, and Processing Uses

A.    Residential Uses

1.     Adult Day Care Home. A facility, as defined under Health and Safety Code Section 1507.7, that provides nonmedical care and supervision for adult health care for six or fewer adults, including organized day program of therapeutic, social, and skilled nursing health activities and services to elderly persons or adults with disabilities with functional impairments, either physical or mental, for the purpose of restoring or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care. Programs offered are on a less than 24-hour basis.

2.     Caretaker Housing. A residence that is accessory to a site with a nonresidential primary use and that is needed for security, 24-hour care or supervision, or monitoring of facilities, equipment, or other conditions on the site.

3.     Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed and intended for occupancy by three or more households living independently of each other, each in a separate dwelling unit, which may be owned individually or by a single landlord (e.g., apartment, apartment house, townhouse, condominium).

4.     Dwelling, Second Unit. An attached or detached dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. This definition includes granny flats.

5.     Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by one household on a single lot. This classification includes factory-built, modular housing units constructed in compliance with the City-adopted Building Code and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations (defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18007) and model homes for the first sale of homes within the subdivision.

6.     Dwelling, Two-Family. An attached building (e.g., duplex) designed for occupancy by two households living independently of each other, where both dwellings are located on a single lot. For the purposes of this Title, this definition also includes halfplexes (two attached units, each with a separate lot). Does not include second dwelling units (see Dwelling, Second Unit).

7.     Dwelling, Three- and Four-Family. An attached building (e.g., triplex) designed for occupancy by three or four households living independently of each other, where each dwelling is located on a single lot. Does not include second dwelling units (see Dwelling, Second Unit).

8.     Emergency Shelter. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay (Health and Safety Code Section 50801).

9.     Employee Housing. Property used temporarily or seasonally for the residential use of unrelated persons/families employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor either on- or off-site of agricultural activities. The accommodations may consist of any living quarters, dwelling, boardinghouse, tent, bunkhouse, mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing accommodations maintained in one or more buildings, or on one or more sites, and the premises upon which they are situated, including areas set aside for parking of mobile homes or camping of employees by the employer. Employee housing may also involve permanent residency if the housing accommodation is a mobile home, manufactured home, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle. Specifically, there are two types of employee housing as follows:

a.     Employee Housing, Large. Employee housing that serves more than six employees and consists of no more than 36 beds in group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household.

b.     Employee Housing, Small. Employee housing that serves six or fewer employees.

10.   Family Day Care Home. Facility that provides nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours for an individual child. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the state:

a.     Family Day Care Home, Large. A single-family residence that provides day care for 7 to 14 children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at the home.

b.     Family Day Care Home, Small. A single-family residence that provides day care for eight or fewer children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at the home.

11.   Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen and/or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes residential hotels, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, convents, rectories, and private residential clubs but does not include living quarters shared exclusively by a family. This category includes boardinghouses, which are defined as a building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or lodging or both meals and lodging are provided for compensation for four or more persons.

12.   Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property. Examples include, but are not limited to, accountants and financial advisors, architects, artists, attorneys, offices for construction businesses (no equipment or material storage), and real estate sales.

13.   Live-Work Facility. A structure or portion of a structure:

a.     That combines a commercial or manufacturing activity allowed in the zone with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or manufacturing business, or the owner’s employee, and that person’s household;

b.     Where the resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and

c.     Where the commercial or manufacturing activity conducted takes place subject to a valid business license associated with the premises.

14.   Mobile Home Park. Consistent with definitions of state law (Welfare and Institution Code Section 18214), a mobile home park is any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes.

15.   Residential Care Facilities. Consistent with the definitions of state law, residential care facilities provide 24-hour nonmedical care for more than six persons 18 years of age or older, or emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. This classification includes, but is not limited to, rest homes, residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the juvenile court, and other facilities licensed by the State of California. Convalescent homes, nursing homes, and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of Medical Services, Extended Care.

16.   Residential Care Home. Consistent with the definitions of state law (Health and Safety Code Section 1502), a residential care home is a home that provides 24-hour nonmedical care for six or fewer persons 18 years of age or older, or emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection of the individual. This classification includes rest homes, residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the juvenile court, and other facilities licensed by the State of California. Convalescent homes, nursing homes, and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of Medical Services, Extended Care.

17.   Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Facilities. Multi-unit housing for very low-income persons that typically consists of a single room and shared bath and also may include a shared common kitchen and common activity area. SROs may be restricted to seniors or be available to persons of all ages. Subsidized versions may be supervised by a government housing agency.

18.   Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (Government Code Section 65582(f)). Supportive housing units must be considered residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

19.   Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operating under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance (Government Code Section 65582(h)). Transitional housing units must be considered residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

B.     Agriculture and Animal-Related Uses

1.     Animal Keeping. Care and maintenance of animals on private property. The listing below provides a distinction between various types of animals related to allowed use provisions in this Article. This classification is distinct from Animal Sales and Grooming and Equestrian Facility, Commercial. Also see Kennel, Commercial, which provides for the boarding of animals (e.g., doggy day-care).

a.     Domestic Pets. Small animals (no larger than the largest breed of dogs) customarily kept as pets within a dwelling unit. This classification includes dogs, cats, fish, and birds (excluding large tropical birds and poultry). Includes a kennel where the animals are owned or kept by the owner or occupant for personal, noncommercial purposes, including hunting, tracking, exhibiting at shows, exhibitions, field trials or other competitions, or for enhancing or perpetuating a given breed, other than dogs or cats used in conjunction with an agricultural operation on the lot or premises.

b.     Exotic Animals. Wild animals not customarily confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes, but kept as a pet or for display, including potbelly pigs, snakes, reptiles, and large tropical birds (including peacocks).

c.     Insects. Small arthropod animals confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes including but not limited to flies, crickets, mosquitoes, beetles, butterflies, and bees.

d.     Livestock Animals. Domesticated animals that may be kept or raised in pens, barns, houses, and pastures whether for commercial or private use. Livestock includes, but is not limited to, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, equine, and fowl. This definition includes horses and equestrian facilities for individual homeowners.

e.     Poultry. Domesticated birds (fowl) customarily kept for eggs or meat. This classification includes chickens, roosters, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea fowl, and Cornish game hens.

2.     Animal Sales and Grooming. Retail sales of domestic and exotic animals and bathing and trimming services, excludes kenneling of animals. See Kennel, Commercial.

3.     Crop Production. Raising and harvesting of plants, tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including packing and processing. Includes horticulture establishments engaged in the cultivation of flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental trees and shrubs for wholesale and incidental retail sales. This classification includes agricultural buildings accessory to such uses and roadside stands for display/sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. Excludes uses for which other garden, nursery, or landscape merchandise are stored and sold on the site.

4.     Equestrian Facility, Commercial. Commercial horse, donkey, and mule facilities including horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals, and paddocks accessory and incidental to these uses.

5.     Kennel, Commercial. Facilities that provide boarding of animals as the primary use of the facility. May also include daytime boarding and activity for animals (e.g., doggy day care) and ancillary grooming facilities. Also see Animal Sales and Grooming.

6.     Veterinary Facility. Veterinary facility that is primarily enclosed, containing only enough cage arrangements as necessary to provide services for domestic and exotic animals requiring acute medical or surgical care with accessory outdoor use that provides long-term medical care. Grooming and boarding of animals is allowed only if accessory to the facility use.

C.     Recreation, Resource Preservation, Open Space, Education, and Public Assembly Uses

1.     Assembly Uses. Include any of the following uses:

a.     Meeting facilities for organizations including facilities for business associations, civic, social, and fraternal organizations, labor unions and similar organizations, political organizations, professional membership organizations, and other membership organizations;

b.     Community centers and other multipurpose meeting and recreational facilities that include one or more meeting or multipurpose facilities, kitchens, and outdoor barbecue facilities available for use by various groups for meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc.

2.     Cemetery/Mausoleum. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, columbariums, and mausoleums. Also see Mortuaries and Funeral Homes.

3.     Church/Place of Worship. A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose, including living quarters for ministers and staff, but excluding other establishments maintained by religious organizations such as educational institutions and day care, which are separately regulated. Includes synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious activities.

4.     Community Garden. A site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, or flowers, which is shared and maintained by city residents.

5.     Golf Course/Clubhouse. Golf courses and accessory facilities and uses including clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower facilities, driving ranges, “pro shops” for on-site sales of golfing equipment, and golf cart storage and sales facilities.

6.     Indoor Amusement/Entertainment Facility. Establishment providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including dance halls and ballrooms and electronic game arcades, as primary uses. Four or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or premises where 50 percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an amusement device arcade as described above; three or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

7.     Indoor Fitness and Sports Facilities. Predominantly participant sports and health activities conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice/roller skating rinks, indoor racquetball courts, indoor climbing facilities, soccer areas, athletic clubs, and health clubs. This use does not include special studios not a part of an athletic or health club (e.g., karate studio, dance studio, etc.).

8.     Libraries and Museums. Public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, which are generally noncommercial in nature.

9.     Outdoor Commercial Recreation. Facility for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use (e.g., amphitheaters, amusement and theme parks, golf driving ranges, health and athletic club with outdoor facilities, miniature golf courses, skateboard parks, stadiums and coliseums, swim and tennis clubs, water slides, zoos).

10.   Outdoor Community Recreation. Facility for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation provided by the community and typically located in public parks and open space areas.

11.   Park and Public Plaza. Public parks include playgrounds and athletic fields/courts and public plazas and outdoor gathering places for community use. If privately owned and restricted to the public (e.g., require payment of fee), the same facilities are included under the definition of Outdoor Commercial Recreation.

12.   Recreational Vehicle Park. A site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents. Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher-density, more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve RV park patrons only.

13.   Resource Protection and Restoration. Activities and management of an area to preserve, re-create, and enhance natural resource values such as fish and wildlife habitat, rare and endangered plants, vernal pools, erosion control, and floodwater conveyance.

14.   Resource-Related Recreation. Facility related to passive recreation in open space areas including bicycle and pedestrian trails, picnic areas, parking areas, and interpretive centers.

15.   School. A facility that provides for the education and/or training of individuals or groups as further defined as follows:

a.     Academic-Private. Any privately-owned elementary schools, middle schools, junior high schools, secondary schools, high schools, colleges, universities, and any other privately-owned school providing academic instruction for students from kindergarten through 12th grade and higher not defined as Equipment/Machinery/Vehicle Training or Specialized Education and Training/Studios.

b.     Equipment/Machinery/Vehicle Training. Facilities and programs for training students in the repair and maintenance of various equipment, machinery, and vehicles which tend to have a more industrial nature to them. Examples include, but are not limited to, maintenance of business equipment and consumer products (e.g., computers and other electronic equipment, appliance repair, re-upholstery and furniture repair), trade schools (e.g., metal work/welding), and vehicle repair and maintenance (e.g., repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning, or finishing of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles).

c.     Specialized Education and Training/Studios. Specialty schools for instructing and training students in a variety of specialized programs, including, but not limited to, the following:

i.      Computers and electronics training schools;

ii.     Drama schools;

iii.    Driver educational schools;

iv.    Language schools;

v.     Music schools;

vi.    Professional, vocational, and trade schools of a non-industrial nature (e.g., culinary, cosmetology, arts and media, accounting and finance, health and dental including nursing, legal, psychology, and technology); and

vii.   Studio-style facilities including, but not limited to, dance/ballet, art, photography, yoga, martial arts (e.g., karate, kung fu, judo, tae kwon do, jujitsu), and fitness studios other than indoor fitness and sports facilities.

16.   Theater/Auditorium. Indoor facility for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events (e.g., civic theaters, facilities for “live” theater and concerts, exhibition and convention halls, motion picture theaters, auditoriums). Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events; see Outdoor Commercial Recreation.

D.    Utility, Transportation, Public Facility, and Communication Uses

1.     Airport. A facility where aircraft such as airplanes can take off and land. An airport minimally consists of one runway but other common components are hangars and terminal buildings.

2.     Ambulance Service. Emergency medical care and transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

3.     Broadcasting and Recording Studio. Commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Does not include transmission and receiving apparatus such as antennas and towers, which are under the definition of Wireless Telecommunication Facility.

 

4.     Fuel Storage and Distribution. A large-scale facility where fuel (such as propane and gasoline) is stored and distributed without retail sales.

5.     Heliport. A designated, marked area on the ground or the top of a structure where helicopters may land at any time.

6.     Park-and-Ride Facility. A designated area where a vehicle may be left in order for the driver to carpool with other commuters or to ride public transit.

7.     Parking Facility. A parking lot or parking structure used for parking motor vehicles where the facility is the primary use of the site. Parking structures and lots that are developed in conjunction with another primary use of the site to satisfy the on-site parking requirements for the development are not included in this definition.

8.     Public Safety Facility. Facility operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, and police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

9.     Transit Facility. Maintenance and service centers for the vehicles operated in a mass transportation system. Includes buses, taxis, railways, monorail, etc.

 

10.   Utility Facility and Infrastructure. Includes the following:

a.     Fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use entitlements by Government Code Section 53091: electrical substations and switching stations, natural gas regulating and distribution facilities, public water system wells, treatment plants and storage, telephone switching facilities, wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields. These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in Offices) or equipment and material storage yards.

b.     Pipelines for potable water, reclaimed water, natural gas, and sewage collection and disposal, and facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television, and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits.

11.   Wireless Telecommunication Facility. Facility designed and/or used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, or relaying voice and/or data signals from various wireless communication devices, including transmission tower, antenna, and/or other facility designed or used for that purpose. Telecommunication facilities are divided into two types as follows:

a.     Wireless Telecommunication Facility – Major. A communication facility that is a freestanding ground-mounted facility, is a structure or roof-mounted facility that is more than 10 feet above the structure roof line, and is not specifically identified as a minor facility below. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:

i.      Telecommunication towers (cellular towers);

ii.     Satellite earth station (SES) antennas that are more than 2 meters in diameter; and

iii.    Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas, and multi-point distribution service (MDS) antennas that are more than 1 meter in diameter.

b.     Wireless Telecommunication Facility—Minor. Any wireless communication facility that is either (1) operated exclusively as part of a public safety network, or (2) specifically exempt from local regulation by state or federal law or rule [e.g., by permit of the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or the rules and regulations of the Federal Communication Commission (FCC)]. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following:

i.      Amateur radio transmission facilities which comply with the standards of Chapter 17.88 (Wireless Telecommunication Facilities);

ii.     Satellite earth station (SES) antennas that are 2 meters in diameter or less;

iii.    Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas, and multi-point distribution service (MDS) antennas that are 1 meter in diameter or less;

iv.    Television broadcast service (TVBS) antennas; and

v.     Collocation on an existing major telecommunication structure, so long as the collocation facility satisfies all requirements set forth in Section 65850.6 of the California Government Code.

E.     Retail, Service, and Office Uses

1.     Adult Day Health Care Center. A facility, as defined under Health and Safety Code Section 1507.7, that provides nonmedical care and supervision for adult health care for more than six adults, including organized day program of therapeutic, social, and skilled nursing health activities and services to elderly persons or adults with disabilities with functional impairments, either physical or mental, for the purpose of restoring or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care. Programs offered are on a less than 24-hour basis.

2.     Adult-Oriented Business. Those businesses defined as follows:

a.     Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:

i.      Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassette tapes, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;

ii.     Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.

b.     Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, theater, concert hall, auditorium, bar, or other similar establishment which regularly features live or media presentations of performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

c.     Adult Motel. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:

i.      Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of­way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, or television;

ii.     Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than 10 hours; or

iii.    Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than 10 hours.

d.     Adult Newsrack. Any coin-operated machine or device which dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

e.     Adult Theater. An enclosed or unenclosed building, to which the public is permitted or invited, used for presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

f.      Adult Viewing Area. An area in any adult book and/or novelty store, cabaret, theater, motion picture arcade or other adult entertainment business, where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned for the purpose of viewing or watching a performance, picture show or film.

g.     Bathhouse. An establishment or business which provides the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy during which specified anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activity occurs.

3.     Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The retail sale of beverages containing alcohol for off-site consumption subject to regulation by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) as an off-sale establishment.

4.     Bar. Any establishment devoted to the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in which the serving of food, if any, is incidental to the consumption of alcoholic beverages. A restaurant or bona fide public eating place as defined in Business and Professions Codes Section 23038 that serves alcoholic beverages is not a bar. Nightclub is defined separately in this title.

5.     Bed and Breakfast Inn. A residential structure with one family in permanent residence with up to five bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to applicable Health Department regulations. A bed and breakfast inn with more than five guest rooms is considered a hotel or motel and is included under the definition of Hotel and Motel.

6.     Brew Pub. Any establishment that produces ales, beers, meads, hard ciders, and/or similar beverages to service on-site as part of a restaurant. May include off-site sales of beverages brewed by the brew pub facility.

7.     Building Materials Store/Yard. A retail establishment selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific Zoning District. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in Wholesaling and Distribution. Hardware stores are listed in the definition of Retail, General, even if they sell some building materials. Also see Home Improvement Supplies for smaller specialty stores.

8.     Business Support Services. Establishments, primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services such as maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc. Support services include, but are not limited to:

a.     Equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see Vehicle Services);

b.     Commercial art and design (production);

c.     Computer-related services (rental, repair);

d.     Copying, printing, publishing, and blueprinting services;

e.     Equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are Storage, Yards);

f.      Film processing laboratories;

g.     Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site;

h.     Janitorial services;

i.      Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping);

j.      Mailbox services and other “heavy service” business services;

k.     Outdoor advertising services; and

l.      Photocopying and photofinishing.

9.     Child Day Care Center. A commercial or nonprofit facility that provides nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours for an individual child. The facility is operated outside of a home and is typically able to accommodate 15 or more children. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, infant centers, preschools, sick child centers, day care centers, and school-age child-care centers. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use. Also includes employer­sponsored child-care centers.

10.   Convenience Store. An easy access retail store of 5,000 square feet or less in gross floor area, which carries a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers’ shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or an independent facility. Also see Neighborhood Market and Grocery Store/Supermarket for larger stores or stores oriented toward the daily shopping needs of residents.

11.   Drive-In/Drive-Through Use. A use where a customer is permitted or encouraged, either by the design of physical facilities or by the service and/or packaging procedures offered, to be served while remaining seated within an automobile including, but not limited to, drive-through food, financial services, and automatic car washes.

12.   Equipment Sales and Rental. Service establishments with outdoor storage/rental yards, which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for rental (e.g., construction equipment).

13.   Grocery Store/Supermarket. A retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store. These full-service businesses do not typically have limited hours of operation. See separate but related listing for Convenience Store.

14.   Home Improvement Supplies. Establishments (retail or wholesale) that sell kitchen, bath, furnishings, carpeting, and other home-oriented supplies. Other retail uses are permitted if accessory to the primary use. These uses may include an expansive showroom. This category does not include the sale of lumber and does not permit the outdoor display of merchandise. This use classification is a subcategory of the larger building materials stores and yards use classification and may be combined with or separate from such uses.

15.   Hotel and Motel. Facility with guest rooms or suites, provided without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging, for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail use, etc.

16.   Maintenance and Repair of Small Equipment. Establishments providing on­site repair and accessory sales of supplies for appliances, office machines, home electronic/mechanical equipment, bicycles, tools, or garden equipment, conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Does not include maintenance and repair of vehicles.

17.   Massage Therapy. Establishment where customers can receive a massage.

18.   Medical Services. Facilities that provide medical services as further defined as follows:

a.     Extended Care. Residential facilities providing nursing and health related care as a primary use with inpatient beds, such as board and care homes, convalescent and rest homes, extended care facilities, and skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not include medical treatment are included under residential care home and residential care facilities.

b.     General. Facility primarily engaged in providing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical, and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including medical and dental laboratories, medical, dental and psychiatric offices, outpatient care facilities, and other allied health services. Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under Offices, Business and Professional.

c.     Hospital. Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services and extensive medical treatment (with overnight stay capabilities), including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on­site accessory clinics and laboratories.

19.   Mortuaries and Funeral Homes. Funeral homes and parlors, where the deceased are prepared for burial or cremation and funeral services may be conducted.

20.   Neighborhood Market. A pedestrian-oriented grocery/specialty market store offering food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store and oriented to the daily shopping needs of surrounding residential areas. Neighborhood markets are less than 15,000 square feet in size and operate less than 18 hours per day. Neighborhood markets may include deli or beverage tasting facilities that are ancillary to the market/grocery portion of the use. For larger stores, see Grocery Store/Supermarket.

21.   Nightclub. Any establishment devoted to the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in which the serving of food, if any, is incidental to the consumption of alcoholic beverages, and where floor space could be used for dancing and/or live entertainment. Bar is defined separately in this title.

22.   Offices, Business and Professional. This use listing includes offices of administrative businesses providing direct services to consumers (e.g., insurance companies, utility companies, management consulting), banks and financial institutions, government agency and service facilities (e.g., post office, civic center), professional offices (e.g., accounting, attorneys, employment, public relations), and offices engaged in the production of intellectual property (e.g., advertising, architectural, computer programming, photography studios). This use does not include medical offices (see Medical Services, General), temporary offices, or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use.

23.   Personal Services. Establishments providing nonmedical services as a primary use, including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, clothing rental, dry cleaning pickup stores with limited equipment, home electronics and small appliance repair, laundromats (self-service laundries), shoe repair shops, and tailors. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided, spas and hot tubs for rent, and tanning salons.

24.   Restaurant. A retail business selling food and beverages prepared and/or served on the site, for on- or off-premises consumption. Includes eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premises consumption and establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on-premises consumption, but may include providing food for take-out. Also includes coffee houses and accessory cafeterias as part of office and industrial uses.

25.   Retail, General. Stores and shops selling multiple lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise include, but are not limited to, art galleries, bakeries (all production in support of on-site sales), clothing and accessories, collectibles, department stores, drug and discount stores, dry goods, fabrics and sewing supplies, florists and houseplant stores, furniture, general stores, gift shops, hardware, hobby materials, musical instruments, parts and accessories, newsstands, pet supplies, specialty shops, sporting goods and equipment, stationery, and variety stores.

26.   Tasting Room. Facility allowing beer/wine tasting with on-site and off-site retail sales directly to the public. The tasting room facility must be directly affiliated with a minimum of one brewery/winery (as defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC)). The Tasting Room may be operated within a Brew Pub as an accessory to a separate on-site use, such as a restaurant, or as a stand-alone retail use.

27.   Tobacco Related Uses. A commercial establishment whose primary activity consists of a lounge or eating area where patrons smoke tobacco or non­tobacco related products including, but not limited to, hookah, cigar, cigarette, pipe, e-cigarette, or other smoking device.

F.     Automobile and Vehicle Uses

1.     Auto and Vehicle Rental. Retail establishments renting automobiles, trucks, vans, and large farm equipment (e.g., combines, tractors). This use listing includes the rental of recreation vehicles, motorcycles, and boats. May also include repair shops (for rental vehicles only) and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle rental activities.

2.     Auto and Vehicle Sales. Retail establishments selling automobiles, trucks, vans, and large farm equipment (e.g., combines, tractors). This use listing includes the sales of recreation vehicles, motorcycles, and boats. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. It does not include the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see Auto Parts Sales), bicycle and moped sales (see Retail, General), tire recapping establishments (see Vehicle Services – Major), businesses dealing exclusively in used parts (see Recycling Facility – Scrap and Dismantling), or fueling station, all of which are separately defined.

3.     Auto and Vehicle Storage. Facilities for the storage of operative and inoperative vehicles for limited periods of time. Includes, but is not limited to, storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, and storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses, and recreation vehicles. Does not include retail sales (see Auto and Vehicle Sales).

4.     Auto Parts Sales. Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see Vehicle Services). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under Vehicle Services – Major, or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under Auto and Vehicle Sales.

5.     Auto Vehicle Dismantling. Establishment for the dismantling of automobile vehicles, including the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles, and/or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking. Retail sales are included under the definition of Auto and Vehicle Sales.

6.     Car Washing and Detailing. Permanent, drive-through, self-service, and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes (e.g., fundraising activities generally conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day) are not part of this use classification.

7.     Fueling Station. A retail business selling gasoline, diesel, or other motor vehicle fuels. Vehicle services which are incidental to fuel services are included under Vehicle Services – Minor.

8.     Vehicle Services – Major. The repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (e.g., self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes major repair and body work-repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles; such establishments typically provide towing, collision repair, other bodywork, and painting services and may also include tire recapping establishments.

9.     Vehicle Services – Minor. Minor facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, smog check). Does not include repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see Auto and Vehicle Sales) or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under Recycling Facility – Scrap and Dismantling.

G.    Industrial, Manufacturing, and Processing Uses

1.     Agricultural Products Processing. The act of changing an agricultural crop after harvest from its natural state to the initial stage of processing in order to prepare it for market and for further processing at an off-site location. Examples of this processing include nut hulling and shelling, bean cleaning, corn shelling and sorting, grape sorting and crushing, primary processing of fruits to juice and initial storage of the juice, without fermentation, cleaning and packing of fruits. More comprehensive processing facilities (e.g., raw milk processed to cheese) are considered food and beverage manufacturing and, as such, are included under the definition of Manufacturing, Minor.

2.     Freight Yard/Truck Terminal. Transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including freight forwarding services, freight terminal facilities, joint terminal and service facilities, packing, crating, inspection, and weighing services, postal service bulk mailing distribution centers, transportation arrangement services, truck repair, truck terminals, and trucking facilities including transfer and storage.

3.     Manufacturing, Major. Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly of materials in a raw form. Uses in this category typically create greater than usual amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other objectionable influences that might be obnoxious to persons conducting business on-site or on an adjacent site. Uses include, but are not limited to, batch plants, rendering plants, aggregate processing facilities, and plastics and rubber products manufacturing. Also see Manufacturing, Minor and Manufacturing, Small-Scale.

4.     Manufacturing, Minor. Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, and assembly of materials from parts that are already in processed form and that, in their maintenance, assembly, manufacture, or plant operation, do not create excessive amounts of smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, or other objectionable influences that might be obnoxious to persons conducting business on-site or on an adjacent site. Uses include, but are not limited to, furniture manufacturing and cabinet shops, laundry and dry cleaning plants, metal products fabrication, and food and beverage manufacturing. Also see Manufacturing, Major and Manufacturing, Small-Scale.

5.     Manufacturing, Small-Scale. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including, but not limited to, jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products. Also see Manufacturing, Major and Manufacturing, Minor.

6.     Recycling Facility – Collection. A recycling facility used for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public that does not occupy more than 500 square feet. This classification may include mobile units, kiosk-type units that may include permanent structures, and unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. Also includes so-called “reverse vending machines,” an automated mechanical device that accepts one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass bottles, and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with value of not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state.

7.     Recycling Facility – Processing. A recycling facility located in a building or enclosed space and used for the processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment or to an end-user’s specifications by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Collection of recycling materials as the sole activity is included in the definition of Recycling Facility – Collection.

8.     Recycling Facility – Scrap and Dismantling. Uses engaged in the assembling, breaking up, sorting, temporary storage, and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials. This use does not include landfills or other terminal waste disposal sites. Also see Auto Vehicle Dismantling for related use for automobiles. Collection of recycling materials as the sole activity is included in the definition of Recycling Facility – Collection.

9.     Recycling Redemption Center. A facility, use, or structure for the collection of recyclable goods, including, but not limited to, beverage containers and newspapers.

10.   Research and Development. Indoor facilities for scientific research, and the design, development, and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical, and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes, but is not limited to, chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include computer software companies (see Offices, Business and Professional), soils and other materials testing laboratories (see Business Support Services), or medical laboratories (see Medical Services, General).

11.   Storage, Personal Storage Facility. A structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.

12.   Storage, Warehouse. Facility for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include warehouse, storage, or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see Storage, Personal Storage Facility) or warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see Wholesaling and Distribution).

13.   Storage, Yards. The storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.

14.   Wholesaling and Distribution. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants, assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products, merchant wholesalers, and stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning supplies and equipment. (Ord. O2018-24 §1; Ord. O2018-20 § 1; Ord. O2018-5 § 1; Ord. O2017-2 § 2; Ord. 1571 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1558 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1546 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.26 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICT
17.26.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish development standards for lot area, allowed density, building setbacks, height, and lot coverage as appropriate for each of the City’s Base Zoning Districts as listed in Table 17.26.020-1 (Development Standards for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts). These standards, along with other development standards (e.g., fences and walls, parking, sign standards) listed in Article III (Site Planning Standards) are intended to assist property owners and project designers in understanding the City’s minimum requirements and expectations for high-quality development. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.26.020 Development Standards
Table 17.26.020-1 (Development Standards for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts) includes lot area, allowed density, building setbacks, height, and lot coverage requirements for each of the City’s Base Zoning Districts. Section 17.26.030 (Additional Standards for Multi-Family Zoning Districts) establishes additional development standards for multi-family Zoning Districts, and Section 17.26.040 (Standards for Small-Lot Single-Family Development) establishes additional standards for small-lot single-family residential development. Additional site planning requirements (e.g., landscaping, lighting) are listed in Article III (Site Planning Standards). Development within the City of Manteca is also subject to compliance with all adopted Uniform Building and Fire Codes. Zoning District names for the Zoning District symbols used in the table are as follows:

AG      Agricultural Zoning District

R-E      Residential Estate Zoning District

R-1      One-Family Dwelling Zoning District

R-2      Limited Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District

R-3      Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District

CMU   Mixed Use Commercial Zoning District

BIP      Business Industrial Park Zoning District

CN       Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District

CG       General Commercial Zoning District

CM      Commercial Manufacturing Zoning District

M1       Light Industrial Zoning District

M2       Heavy Industrial Zoning District

OS       Open Space Zoning District

A         Park Zoning District

PQP     Public/Quasi-Public Zoning District

 

TABLE 17.26.020-1

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MANTECA’S BASE ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Development Standard/Zoning District

AG

RE

R-11

R-2

R-3

CMU

BIP

CN

CG

CM

M-1

M-2

OS

A

PQP

Allowed Density

• Minimum Density (du/ac)

0

0.5

2.1

8.1

15.1

15.1

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

• Maximum Density (du/ac)

2.0

2.0

8.0

15.0

25.0

25.0

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

Setback (min. distance between structure and property line in feet)2

• Front Yard

50 ft

20 ft

15 ft

0 ft3

25 ft3

0 ft2,3,6

20 ft2,3,6

0 sf

• Front Yard to Porch

n/a

10 ft

10 ft

n/a3

n/a3

n/a2,6

n/a2,6

n/a

• Side Yard

15 ft

5 ft

5 ft

0 ft3

No min.3

0 ft2,3,6

5 ft2,3,6

0 sf

• Street Side Yard

15 ft

10 ft

10 ft

0 ft3

25 ft3

0 ft2

10 ft 2,6

0 sf

• Rear Yard

20 ft4

15 ft4

10 ft5

0 ft3

No min.3

40 ft (adjacent to residential zone)3,6

0 ft (adjacent to industrial or commercial zone)2,6

40 ft (adjacent to residential zone)3,6

0 ft (adjacent to industrial or commercial zone)2,6

0 sf

Building Height (max.)

• Building Height

30 ft

35 ft

45 ft

35 ft

30 ft

35 ft

No max.

No max.

Floor Area Ratio (maximum ratio of building to lot square footage) and Open Space (min. per dwelling unit)

• Floor Area Ratio

No max.

1.0

0.6

0.5

No max.

• Open Space

35% of lot

40% of lot

30% of lot

30% of lot

No min.

35% of lot

No min.

Notes:

1.      See additional standards for small-lot single-family development in Section 17.26.040.

2.      Setbacks shall be at least the minimum required under the City’s adopted Building Code.

3.      When adjacent to a residential district, the minimum front and side yard setbacks for all structures shall be equal to or greater than the front and side yard setbacks of the adjacent residential district. The final approving authority may increase the setback to ensure consistency with performance standards of Chapter 17.58. The required rear yard setback of commercial and industrial structures shall be a minimum of 40 feet when a commercial or industrial zoned parcel shares a property line with an adjacent residentially zoned parcel.

4.      Garages attached to a main building may encroach into the required rear yard by not more than 10 feet if: (a) it is less than 600 square feet in area; and (b) it shares a common wall of 5 feet or more in length, or is located less than 6 feet from the main building and is connected to the main building by a roofed area (e.g., breezeway) a minimum of 5 feet in width.

5.      Minimum 30 percent of multi-family projects shall be designed for community open space and each unit shall include 400 square feet of private open space as described in Section 17.26.030.

6.      The final approving authority, as defined in Table 17.08.060-1, may reduce the minimum setbacks of all structures upon finding that the proposed use complies with the performance standards in Chapter 17.58 and the structure is of a mass and scale that is compatible with adjacent existing uses and structures. In order to do so, the final approving authority must find that the reduced setbacks will not cause an unreason-able impact on the adjacent property. Where the proposed use does not comply with the performance standards in Chapter 17.58, then the final approving authority may impose a condition of approval to increase the minimum setbacks as necessary to ensure the proposed use complies with such performance standards.

 

(Ord. O2020-09 § 2; Ord. O2018-6 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.26.030 Additional Standards for Multi-Family Zoning Districts
In addition to the development standards listed in Table 17.26.020-1 (Development Standards for Manteca’s Base Zoning Districts), the following development standards apply to multi-family residential development.

A.    Minimum Project Open Space. A minimum of 30 percent of the total project lot area shall be provided as improved and/or landscaped open space for general use.

B.     Private Open Space. Additionally, there shall be a minimum of 400 square feet of private open space per dwelling unit (e.g., porch, balcony, courtyard). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.26.040 Standards for Small-Lot Single-Family Development
In residential Zoning Districts, new lots smaller than 6,000 square feet may be created and single-family homes constructed on those lots when the development complies with the following development standards listed in Table 17.26.020-2 (Small-Lot Single-Family Development Standards). Additionally, small-lot single-family residential development shall comply with any currently adopted small-lot single-family design standards and guidelines.

 

TABLE 17.26.020-2

SMALL-LOT SINGLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Standard

Measurement

Lot Dimensions (minimum dimensions of lot)

• Lot Width (min)

35 ft

• Lot Depth

70 ft

Setback (minimum distance between structure and property line in feet)

• Front Yard

15 ft

• Front Yard, to Garage

20 ft

• Front Yard to Porch

10 ft

• Side Yards

5 ft/0 ft

• Street Side Yard

10 ft

• Rear Yard

10 ft

Building Height (maximum)

• Building Height

30 ft

 

(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.28 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
17.28.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to identify all Special Purpose Districts within the city. Special Purpose Districts require special project entitlement, which allows for flexibility from traditional development standards. These districts are consistent with and implement the City’s General Plan Special Planning land use designation as shown in Table 17.20.020-1 (Zoning Districts). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.28.020 Specific Plan (SP) Zoning District
A.    Purpose of the Specific Plan Zoning District. The purpose of the Specific Plan Zoning District is to designate unique planning areas within the city for which the City Council has adopted or requires adoption of a separate planning document (a Specific Plan) consistent with the General Plan and state law. The contents, requirements, and adoption and amendment procedures for Specific Plans are listed in Section 17.10.160 (Specific Plan).

B.     Designation. Specific Plan Zoning Districts shall be delineated on the Zoning Map in a manner similar to that of any other Zoning District, except that each Specific Plan-zoned area shall also bear a name, number, symbol, or other delineation, as determined by the Community Development Director, which distinguishes it from other Specific Plan Zoning Districts, Base Zoning Districts, or Overlay Zoning Districts. The assignment of the Specific Plan Zoning District serves to provide a reference to the corresponding Specific Plan document adopted by ordinance of the City Council. Applicable zoning regulations and standards applicable to the land area shall be provided in the Specific Plan document and shall be adopted by reference in this Title.

C.     Specific Plan Overlay Zones Adopted by Reference. The following Specific Plan Zoning Districts have been adopted as part of this Title by reference and are so designed on the City Zoning Map:

1.     Union Ranch Specific Plan.

D.    Allowed Uses. Allowed uses within the Specific Plan area are those listed uses in the adopted Specific Plan document as permitted, conditionally permitted, or not permitted.

E.     Development Standards. Development standards within the Specific Plan area are those standards listed in the adopted Specific Plan. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.28.030 Master Plan (MP) Zoning District
A.    Purpose of the Master Plan Zoning District. The purpose of the Master Plan Zoning District is to establish a process for the consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed comprehensive development with detailed development plans and of those areas that require special planning.

B.     Designation. Master Plan Zoning Districts shall be delineated on the Zoning Map in a manner similar to that of any other Zoning District, except that each Master Plan-zoned area shall also bear a name, number, symbol, or other delineation, as determined by the Community Development Director, which distinguishes it from other Master Plan Zoning Districts, Base Zoning Districts, or Overlay Zoning Districts. The assignment of the Master Plan Zoning District serves to provide a reference to the corresponding Master Plan document adopted by ordinance of the City Council. Applicable zoning regulations and standards applicable to the land area shall be provided in the Master Plan document and shall be adopted by reference in this Title.

C.     Master Plan Overlay Zones Adopted by Reference. The following Master Plan Zoning Districts have been adopted as part of this Title by reference and are so designed on the City Zoning Map:

1.     Northwest Airport Way Master Plan

2.     Austin Road Business Park and Residential Community

D.    Allowed Uses. Allowed uses within the Master Plan area are those listed uses in the adopted Master Plan document as permitted, conditionally permitted, or not permitted.

E.     Development Standards. Development standards within the Master Plan area are those standards listed in the adopted Master Plan. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.30 OVERLAY AND COMBINING ZONING DISTRICT LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.30.010 Purpose
A.    The Overlay and Combining Zoning Districts established in this Chapter are designed to supplement the use regulations and/or development standards of the applicable underlying Base Zoning District by recognizing distinctive areas of the city that have special and unique social, architectural, or environmental characteristics which require special considerations not otherwise adequately provided by the underlying base zone applicable to the property. The application of these Overlay and Combining Zoning Districts emphasizes the need for special attention in planning projects in the area governed by the overlay.

B.     The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all parcels of land located within the designed boundaries of an Overlay Zoning District as illustrated on maps contained in this Chapter and on the City Zoning Map. On the Zoning Map, Overlay Zoning Districts shall be designated by their representative symbol along with the Base Zoning District in a format determined by the Community Development Director. In the event of a conflict with the regulations of the underlying Base Zoning District and the Overlay Zoning District, the provisions of the Overlay or Combining Zoning District shall apply. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.30.020 Central Business District (CBD) Overlay Zone
A.    Purpose of the Central Business District Overlay Zones. The purpose of the Central Business District Overlay Zones is to provide unique development and allowed use standards for buildings in uses located within the central business district of the city.

B.     Designation and Applicability. The Central Business District Overlay Zones shall be that area illustrated in Figure 17.30.020-1 (Central Business District). The Central Business District Overlay Zones shall be delineated on the Zoning Map with the symbol CBD-1 and CBD-2 following the designation of the Base Zoning District for the respective property. Those properties within the Central Business District Overlay Zone shall be subject to the development and allowed use standards in this Section.

 

FIGURE 17.30.020-1
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

 



 

C.     Allowed Uses. Specific to the Central Business District Overlay Zones, Table 17.30.020-1 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements in the Central Business District Overlay Zone) identifies the allowed use provisions within the district. The allowed use provisions of Table 17.30.020-1 supersede and replace the allowed use provisions of the underlying Base Zoning District of applicable property. Similar uses may be determined as identified in this Title. Definitions for the land uses listed herein (Use classifications) are provided in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions).

In Table 17.30.020-1, an “A” indicates that the land use is permitted by right, a “C” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit (pursuant to Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit)), an “M” indicates that the land use is permitted in the designated Zoning District upon issuance of a Minor Use Permit, and an “N” indicates that the use is not allowed.

 

TABLE 17.30.020-1
ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONES

 

Land Use Category

CBD Zone 1

CBD Zone 2

Residential Uses

Dwelling, Multifamily

N

A

Group Residential

N

C

Live-Work Facility

N

A

Residential Care Home

N

A

Supportive Housing1

N

A

Transitional Housing1

N

A

Agricultural and Animal-Related Uses

Agricultural Tourism

C

N

Animal Keeping, Domestic Pet

A

A

Animal Sales and Grooming

A

A

Recreation, Resource Preservation, Open Space, Education, and Public Assembly Uses

Assembly Uses

A

A

Church/Place of Worship

A

A

Community Garden

C

N

Indoor Amusement/Entertainment Facility

C

A

Indoor Fitness and Sports Facility

C

A

Library and Museum

C

A

School, Specialized Education and Training/Studio

C

A

Theater/Auditorium

A

A

Utility, Transportation, Public Facility, and Communication Uses

Broadcasting and Recording Studio

N

C

Park and Ride Facility

A

A

Parking Facility

A

A

Public Safety Facility

A

A

Transit Station/Terminal

C

C

Utility Facility and Infrastructure

A

A

Wireless Telecommunication Facility – Minor2

A

A

Retail, Service, and Office Uses

Adult-Oriented Business4

N

N

Alcoholic Beverage Sales

N

A

Bar

C5

C

Brew Pub

M

M

Business Support Services

A

A

Child Day Care Center

C

C

Convenience Store

A

N

Drive-In and Drive-Through Use

C

N

Equipment Sales and Rental

C

C

Grocery Store/Supermarket

C

N

Hotel and Motel

N

A

Maintenance and Repair of Small Equipment

C

C

Massage Therapy3

C

A

Medical Service, General

A

A

Mortuary/Funeral Home

N

A

Nightclub

N

N

Office, Business and Professional

A

A

Personal Services

A6

A

Restaurant

A

A

Retail, General

A

A

Tasting Room

M

M

Automobile and Vehicle Uses

Auto Parts Sales

A

A

Car Washing and Detailing

N

A

Industrial, Manufacturing, and Processing Uses

Recycling Facility – Collection7

N

C

Notes:

1.      See additional regulations for Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities in Chapter 17.76.

2.      See additional regulations for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities in Chapter 17.88.

3.      See additional regulations for Massage Therapy in Chapter 17.86.

4.      See additional regulations for Adult-Oriented Businesses in Chapter 17.70.

5.      At least 300 feet from similar use.

6.      Laundromat is not included with the definition of Personal Services within CBD Zone 1.

7.      Facilities located within 150 feet of a property zoned or used residential shall operate only during the hours of 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.

 

D.    Development Standards. The standards listed in Table 17.30.020-2 (Development Standards in the Central Business District Overlay Zones) are the development standards applicable to the Central Business District Overlay Zones. These standards are in addition to other standards and requirements found in this Title (e.g., signs). Where site development standards listed herein are in conflict with the site development standards in other parts of this Title or the underlying Base Zoning District, these standards shall apply.

 

Table 17.30.020-2

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONES

 

Development Standard

Measurement

Setback (minimum distance between structure and property line in feet)*

•       Front Yard

0 ft

•       Side Yard

0 ft

•       Street Side Yard

0 ft

•       Rear Yard

0 ft

Building Height (maximum)

•       Building Height

3 stories and 45 feet

Floor Area Ratio (maximum ratio of building to lot square footage)

•       Floor Area Ratio

1.0

Note:

*       Setbacks shall be the minimum required under the City’s adopted Building Code.

 

 

E.     Parking Standards. Parking requirements for uses in the Central Business District Overlay Zone shall be as provided in Chapter 17.52 (Parking), except that exiting and new uses occupying existing building within the Central Business District are exempt from parking requirements. New construction within the Central Business District shall not locate required parking between the new structure and the street. (Ord. O2018-24 § 1; Ord. O2017-2 § 1)

 

17.30.030 Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone
A.    Purpose of the Planned Development Overlay Zone. The purpose of the Planned Development Overlay Zone is to establish a process for the consideration and regulation of areas suitable for proposed comprehensive development with detailed development plans and of those areas that require special planning to provide for appropriate planned development in harmony with their natural features and other environmental consideration.

B.     Designation. Planned Development Overlay Zoning Districts shall be delineated on the Zoning Map in a manner similar to that of any other Overlay or Combining Zoning District. The assignment of the Planned Development Overlay Zone designation serves to provide a reference to the corresponding Planned Development Zoning document adopted by ordinance of the City Council. Applicable zoning regulations and standards applicable to the land area shall be provided in the Planned Development document and shall be adopted by reference in this Title.

C.     Planned Development Overlay Zones Adopted by Reference. Planned Development Overlay Zoning Districts have been adopted as part of this Title by reference and are so designated on the Zoning Map of the City.

D.    Allowed Uses. Allowed uses within a Planned Development Zoning District are those listed uses in the adopted Planned Development document. A Planned Development may reference the allowed use provisions of a concurrent Base Zoning District contained in this Title; however, in the event that there are conflicts between the provisions of the Planned Development and this Title, the Planned Development shall prevail. Where a Planned Development does not provide a listing of allowed uses, the regulations of the Base Zoning District shall prevail.

E.     Development Standards. Development standards within the Planned Development Overlay Zoning District are those standards listed in the adopted Planned Development. A Planned Development Overlay Zone may reference the development standards of this Title, in which case the standards of this Title shall apply. Where a Planned Development is silent regarding a citywide standard (e.g., sign regulations), the City standard shall apply. Where a Planned Development establishes unique standards that are in conflict with the standards of this Title, the Planned Development standards shall prevail. When a Planned Development does not establish development standards, the standards for the equivalent Base Zoning District shall apply as determined and formally interpreted by the Community Development Director. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.30.040 200-Year Floodplain (F-200) Overlay Zone
A.    Purpose of 200-Year Floodplain Overlay Zone. The purpose of the 200-Year Floodplain (F-200) Overlay Zone is to comply with provisions of State law that require the City to make specific findings prior to approving certain projects located within a 200-year flood hazard area. The F-200 Zone establishes a process for the consideration and regulation of areas subject to 200-year flooding that require special planning to provide for appropriate development.

B.     Designation. 200-Year Floodplain Overlay Zone Map delineates the extents of the F-200 Overlay Zone. The F-200 Overlay Zone, as shown on the zoning map is intended to comprise all known land subject to 200-year flooding within the City. All lands within the F-200 Overlay Zone shall be required to comply with all provisions of subsection C.

C.     200-Year Floodplain Overlay Zone Findings. The review authority shall not approve the execution of a development agreement, a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, or a discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building, or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building, or issuance of a ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence for property that is located within the F-200 Zone unless the review authority finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following:

1.     The facilities of the State Plan of Flood Control or other flood management facilities protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas;

2.     The City has imposed conditions on a development agreement, map, permit, or entitlement that will protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas;

3.     The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code Section 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system that will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or urbanizing areas; or

4.     The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from a storm event that has a one in two hundred chance of occurring in any given year, from sources other than local drainage, in urban and urbanizing areas.

D.    Exceptions/Exemptions. In certain circumstances, a project(s) or parcel(s) may contain a portion of land that is both inside and outside of the F-200 overlay zone. It is not the intent of the City to encumber or prevent the portion of the project(s) or parcel(s) that is outside the F-200 Overlay Zone from development. Under this circumstance, the review authority shall, after all other discretionary considerations, be authorized to execute a development agreement, a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, or a discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building, or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building, or issuance of a ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence for property that is located within the portion of the project(s) or parcel(s) that is not within the F-200 Zone. The portion of the project(s) or parcel(s) within the F-200 Overlay Zone will not receive the full entitlements and rights under the discretionary action unless or until the review authority makes the appropriate findings under subsection C. This may require discretionary actions, including a development agreement, a tentative map, or a parcel map, to be phased or separated.

E.     Definitions

1.     Two Hundred (200) Year Floodplain. Areas that have a one in two hundred chance of flooding in any given year using criteria consistent with, or developed by, the Department of Water Resources. The term shall be ascribed to all areas delineated by the 200-Year Floodplain Overlay Zone.

The following terms shall have the same meanings as defined in California Government Code Section 65007.

a.     Adequate Progress

b.     Developed Area

c.     Flood Hazard Zone

d.     Non-Urbanized Area

e.     State Plan of Flood Control

f.      Urban Area

g.     Urbanizing Area

h.     Urban Level of Flood Protection. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2016)

Article III SITE PLANNING STANDARDS
Chapter 17.40 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
17.40.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to identify and regulate detached accessory structures to ensure that such structures do not create a public safety issue or public nuisance, create an adverse aesthetic from street rights-of-way, or create a negative impact (light, air, drainage, or aesthetic) on surrounding properties. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.40.020 Definitions
Terms unique to this Chapter are listed in Section 17.100.060 (Universal Definitions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.40.030 Permit Requirements and Exceptions
Generally, no special planning permit or entitlement shall be required for accessory structures that are consistent with the standards herein, except that Zoning Conformance Approval shall be conducted in the event that a building permit is required. Even if a building permit is not required, a planning permit or entitlement may be. Certain structures may require Site Plan and Design Review, Variance, or other permits or entitlements as specified in Chapter 17.10 (Entitlements). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.40.040 Development Standards
A.    Development Standards for All Accessory Structures. The development standards in this Section shall apply to accessory structures. Primary structures, and any other feature attached to the primary structure (e.g., patio cover) are subject to the setback, height, and other requirements for the Zoning District in which they are located.

1.     Setback Measurement. Minimum setback distances for accessory structures from property lines and between all structures shall be measured to any portion of the structure(s) (overhangs, projections, and railings).

2.     Construction Phasing. Accessory structures may be constructed only in conjunction with or after construction of the primary building(s) on the site. However, in agricultural Zoning Districts, accessory structures may be constructed prior to the primary residential dwelling.

3.     Maximum Rear Yard Coverage. The total size of accessory structure(s) on any lot may not exceed 30 percent of the actual rear yard area.

4.     Separation Between Structures. All accessory structures shall maintain the minimum separation between other buildings as required under the City-adopted Building Code.

B.     Development Standards by Type of Accessory Structure. Table 17.40.040-1 (Development Standards for Accessory Structures) establishes development standards based on the type of accessory structure as defined in Section 17.100.060 (Universal Definitions).

 

TABLE 17.40.040-1

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES

 

Accessory Structure

Minimum Setback Distance from Property Line

Maximum Height

Front

Street Side

Interior
(including rear)

Building, ≤120 sf

Not allowed in required front or street side yard setback

0 ft

8 ft

Building, >120 sf

 

 

 

 

• Fully Enclosed

Not allowed in required front yard setback

10 ft

5 ft

15 ft/ 1 story

• Solid Roof Limited/No Enclosure

10 ft

3 ft

15 ft/ 1 story

Landscape Features

No minimum

10 ft

3 ft

16 ft

Pools/Spas

Not allowed in required front yard setback

5 ft*

5 ft *

15 ft/ 1 story

Deck/Patio

No minimum

No minimum

No minimum

No minimum

Play Equipment

Not allowed in required front yard setback

10 ft

3 ft

16 ft

Note:

*       Measurement from water’s edge.

 

C.     Special Development Standards for Accessory Structures in the R-3 and R-4 Zones. Accessory structures in multi-family dwelling complexes (e.g., garages, bicycle storage, laundry rooms, car washing areas, recreation facilities) shall incorporate a design similar to the project’s dwelling units, in terms of materials and colors.

D.    Development Standards for Storage, Cargo, or Shipping Containers. Storage, cargo, or shipping containers are prohibited in all zoning districts unless they conform to the following requirements:

1.     In all zoning districts:

a.     Any storage, cargo, or shipping container, regardless of size, shall conform to Chapter 17.26 (Development Standards By Zoning District), unless specified elsewhere in this Section.

b.     Storage, cargo, or shipping containers may not occupy any required landscaping, open space, parking spaces, loading/unloading areas, circulation aisle/lane, fire access lane, public utility easement or public right-of-way, including streets and sidewalks and parkstrips or impact access to the site or an adjacent site or otherwise create a nuisance or interfere with the peaceful use of neighboring properties.

c.     No storage, cargo, or shipping container may be placed on the public right-of-way at any time unless the required encroachment permit has been previously obtained and a copy of the permit attached to the unit. Any such container found on the public right-of-way without having the required encroachment permit may be subject to immediate removal at the owner’s expense.

d.     All storage, cargo, and shipping containers shall be operated in a safe manner, and be structurally sound, stable and in good repair. The container shall not contain any holes, peeling paint, rust, damage or structural modifications.

 

e.     Those containers placed under a Permanent Storage Container Permit or Temporary Storage Container Permit must remain in compliance with all conditions of approval at all times.

2.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the City to maintain upon any such premises or property the exterior storage or maintenance in a residential zone of a storage, cargo, or shipping container, including moving container (i.e., PODS, etc.), not in compliance with the following:

a.     Storage, cargo, or shipping containers shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts within an opaque fenced side or rear yard where a residential unit is located.

b.     One storage, cargo, or shipping container may be allowed on an approved driveway or in a side or rear yard on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed ninety days in any twelve-month period subject to the issuance of a Temporary Storage Container Permit or up to one hundred eighty days in conjunction with work being done under a valid building permit and after obtaining a Temporary Storage Container Permit.

c.     For recorded subdivisions, storage, cargo, or shipping containers may be included with a Temporary Sales Office subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses). Said containers are not required to be located on the same parcel as the Temporary Sales Office and may be located throughout multiple subdivisions. Containers shall be removed within ten days of final building inspection of the final unit.

3.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the City to maintain upon any such premises or property the exterior storage or maintenance in an agricultural, commercial, industrial, park or public/quasi-public zone of a storage, cargo, or shipping container, including moving container (i.e., PODS, etc.), not in compliance with the following:

a.     Where there is a legally established primary use on-site, storage, cargo, or shipping containers, including moving containers (i.e., PODS, etc.), may be utilized on a permanent basis subject to the issuance of a Permanent Storage Container Permit and shall be completely screened with fencing and/or landscaping so as not to be visible from any roadway or neighboring property or said container façade shall be designed to be compatible in materials and colors as the primary building.

b.     Where there is a legally established primary use on-site, storage, cargo, or shipping containers, including moving containers (i.e., PODS, etc.), may be utilized on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed ninety days in any twelve-month period subject to the issuance of a Temporary Storage Container Permit or up to one hundred eighty days in conjunction with work being done under a valid building permit and after obtaining a Temporary Storage Container Permit.

4.     Notwithstanding Chapter 17.12 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures), within a residential zone, existing uses of any container not conforming to the provisions of this Section shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Section within ninety days after the effective date of this Section. Within all other zoning districts, existing uses of any container not conforming to the provisions of this Section shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Section upon change of ownership of the parcel or within two years after the effective date of this Section, whichever comes first. (Ord. O2018-11 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.42 BUILDING HEIGHT MEASUREMENT AND PROJECTIONS
17.42.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the rules for determining and calculating height of structures within the city. Additionally, the Chapter includes exceptions to the height requirements of the underlying Zoning District based on use type and features. The intent of these regulations is to provide for compatibility of building height when adjacent lots have different maximum height limits or there are different grade levels between a development site and its adjacent roadway. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.42.020 Applicability and Regulations
Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter or any other provisions of this Title, all structures shall be limited to the maximum height identified in the underlying (or applicable overlay) Zoning District as identified in Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards), to the maximum height allowed for accessory structures as identified in Chapter 17.40 (Accessory Structures), or to the maximum height allowed for wireless communication facilities as identified in Chapter 17.88 (Wireless Communication Facilities). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.42.030 Height Measurement
The height of a structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from the natural grade of the site to an imaginary plane located at the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the grade. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.42.040 Height Exceptions
The following features and structures are exempt from the height regulations established by this Title:

A.    Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, observation towers, lines and poles, chimneys, smokestacks, flag poles, and masts and aerials.

B.     Elevator and stair penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery lofts, provided no linear dimension of any such structure exceeds 50 percent of the corresponding street lot line frontage.

C.     Windmills in the agricultural Zoning District.

D.    Towers and monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, gas holders, or other structures where the manufacturing process requires a greater height, provided, however, that any structure above the height otherwise permitted in the underlying Zoning District shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the area of the lot and shall be located not less than 25 feet to every lot line, except the front lot line. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.44 YARD MEASUREMENTS AND PROJECTIONS
17.44.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish rules and regulations for setback measurement, yard areas, and encroachments. These provisions, in conjunction with other applicable provisions of this Title, are intended to ensure open areas around primary structures, maintain clear visibility for traffic safety and pedestrian access, buffer between property and land uses, and establish natural and visual light and air space privacy, landscaping, and recreation. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.44.020 Definitions
Terms unique to this Chapter are listed in Section 17.100.060 (Universal Definitions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.44.030 Lot Types
The following are the types of lots found within the City of Manteca. A lot is a legally established parcel of land under single ownership having frontage upon a street. See Figure 17.44.030-1 (Lot Types and Yard Areas) for illustration of lot types.

A.    “Corner lot” means a lot bounded by two or more abutting and intersecting street lines.

B.     “Double frontage lot” means an interior lot bounded by two or more abutting street lines that do not intersect.

C.     “Flag lot” means a lot connected to a street by an access corridor such as an alley, narrow private drive, or access easement.

D.    “Interior lot” means a lot which is not a corner lot and has only one street frontage.

E.     “Key lot” means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot.

F.     “Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot in which the rear property line abuts the front yard area of an adjoining interior lot (as opposed to the rear yard of another corner lot). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.44.040 Yard Area
A.    A yard is an area between a property line and a building or structure, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward. There are three general types of yards as follows:

1.     Front Yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback.

2.     Rear Yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

3.     Side Yard. An area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback.

B.     A required yard area is the yard space between the property line and the minimum setback as required by this Title.

C.     An actual yard is the yard space between the property line and the nearest structure located outside of the required setback area.

 

FIGURE 17.44.030-1

LOT TYPES AND YARD AREAS

 

Yard Configurations.jpg

 

(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.44.050 Setback Measurements
A.    Setback distances shall be measured at right angles from the designated property line (e.g., front, interior side, street-side, rear) and the setback line shall be drawn parallel to the designated property line at the required setback distance. Designated property lines are determined as follows:

1.     Front Property Line. The front property line shall be the narrowest property line which abuts a public street (see Figure 17.44.050-1). For corner lots, the front property line shall be the shortest street frontage, regardless of where the front door is located. In the case of a flag lot, it shall be the property line that abuts the access corridor (see Figure 17.44.050-2).

2.     Rear Property Line. The rear property shall be the property line which is opposite and most distant from the front property line and most parallel to the front property line. See Figures 17.44.050-1 and -2 for examples of a common rear property line.

3.     Side Property Line. The side property line shall be those property lines that are not the front or rear property lines.

4.     Street Side Property Line. The street side property line shall be that which abuts a public street.

 

FIGURE 17.44.040-1

REQUIRED VS. ACTUAL YARD AREA



 

FIGURE 17.44.050-1

PROPERTY LINES – INTERIOR AND CORNER LOTS

 



 



 

FIGURE 17.44.050-2

PROPERTY LINES – FLAG LOTS

 



(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.44.060 Allowed Encroachments
The following encroachments shall be permitted in required yard areas, provided that all such features and structures do not extend into any public utility easement.

A.    Attached Structures. Accessory structures and architectural features attached to the main building(s) may project into the required yards as listed in Table 17.44.060-1 (Allowed Encroachment for Attached Structures into Required Yard Areas).

 

TABLE 17.44.060-1

ALLOWED ENCROACHMENT FOR ATTACHED STRUCTURES INTO REQUIRED YARD AREAS

 

Attached Structures and Architectural Feature

Encroachment Distance
into Required Yard

Front Yard

Side Yard

Rear Yard

Fireplaces, bay windows, porches, pergolas, awnings, trellis and decks and patios higher than 30 inches above grade

2 ft1, 2

Canopies, cornices, eaves, and roof overhangs

2 ft1

Stairways, fire escapes or landing places higher than 30 inches above grade

6 ft1

4 ft1

6 ft1

Notes:

1       All encroachments shall maintain a minimum three-foot setback from all property lines and a minimum distance of six feet from any other structure.

2       The combined length of bay windows shall not account for more than one-third of the length of the wall surface on which the features are located.

 

B.     Detached Structures. Detached accessory structures as regulated in Chapter 17.40 (Accessory Structures).

C.     Air Conditioning Unit. No air conditioning unit shall be located within the required side yard setback.

D.    Emergency Generators. Emergency generators are allowed to encroach into a required side yard provided emergency access is provided pursuant to the California Residential Code, as amended. (Ord. O2019-09 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.46 FENCES AND WALLS
17.46.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter to regulate the height and location of fences to provide light, air, and privacy without obstructing views, to establish buffers between different land uses, and to safeguard against visual obstructions at the intersections of streets and/or driveways. For the purposes of this Title, the term “fence” includes fences or walls. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.020 Applicability and Exemptions
The requirements of this Chapter apply to all fences and walls, except as otherwise exempt below.

A.    Fences that are required by federal or state law or regulation, or which are required by the City for public safety (e.g., temporary construction site fencing), are exempt from this Chapter.

B.     Walls that are required by a mitigation measure and designed and approved through a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, or major design review for noise attenuation are exempt from this Chapter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.030 Permit Requirements
Except as provided below, no special planning permit or entitlement shall be required for fences or walls except that Zoning Conformance Approval (pursuant to Section 17.10.030) shall be conducted in the event that a building permit is required.

A.    Site Plan and Design Review Required. Site Plan and Design Review is required for all fences that exceed the standards of this Chapter.

B.     Retaining Walls. Retaining walls, as defined in this Title, may only be constructed as part of an approved grading permit or as part of a roadway improvement project. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.040 Measurement of Fence and Wall Height
Fence and wall height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the lowest finished grade at the base of the fence and the top edge of the fence material. The finished grade shall be that as shown on the approved master grading plan for the site at the time of initial development of the residential subdivision, multi-family development, or nonresidential development.

A.    Landscape Walls. When a fence or wall is placed atop a landscape wall, the height of the landscape wall shall be considered as part of the fence or wall for purposes of determining the height of the fence or wall.

B.     Retaining Walls. When a fence or wall is placed atop a retaining wall, the height of the fence shall be determined exclusive of the height of the retaining wall such that the top of the retaining wall is considered the finished grade. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.050 Height Limits
A.    Maximum Allowed Heights and Locations. Each fence and wall on residential and nonresidential property shall comply with height limits and locations shown in Table 17.46.050-1 (Maximum Height of Fences and Walls in Required Yard Area).

 

TABLE 17.46.050-1

MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES AND WALLS IN REQUIRED YARD AREA

 

Location of Fence or Wall

Maximum Height1

Within required front setback2

3½ feet3

Within required street side setback2

 

≤5 feet from back of sidewalk2

3½ feet3

 >5 feet from back of sidewalk

6 feet

Within required interior side and rear setback

6 feet

At the intersections of streets, alleys, and driveways4

30 inches

Outside of required setback

16 feet

Notes:

1.      As part of a discretionary entitlement, the designated approving authority may grant additional height or location requirements to enclose or screen specific areas or uses or for fences and walls designed for noise attenuation.

2.      Setback area for street side yard is measured from back of sidewalk to the fence. If no sidewalk exists, then street side yard is measured from the property line to the fence.

3.      Height of front yard fence may be increased to 4 feet if the fence remains substantially (minimum 80%) open and transparent (e.g., picket fences, open wood slats, open wrought iron).

4.      See definition of clear visibility triangle in Chapter 17.100 (Glossary of Terms).

 

B.     Landscape Walls. Landscape walls within required yard areas shall be constructed to a maximum height of 36 inches. Outside of required yard areas, the maximum height for landscape walls shall be 6 feet. Landscape walls shall not be used to alter the finish grade of the lot.

C.     Retaining Walls. There shall be no height limits for retaining walls when constructed along the exterior property lines of the project or the final interior property lines in the case of a residential subdivision. Otherwise, a retaining wall over 4 feet in height shall be benched so that no individual wall exceeds a height of 6 feet, with the depth of each bench a minimum of 3 feet. (Ord. 1586 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.060 Fence and Wall Design and Maintenance Standards
A.    Fencing Materials. Fences and walls shall be constructed of attractive, long-lasting materials (e.g., masonry, wood, tubular steel, fiberglass, or stone).

B.     Prohibited Fencing Materials. Unless approved as a condition of approval or in conjunction with another entitlement, walls or fences of sheet or corrugated iron, sheet steel, concertina wire, or sheer aluminum are prohibited. Barbed wire fencing shall not be constructed or placed on top of a fence except where properly used for agricultural, open space, or industrial uses.

Electrified fencing is prohibited in all residential and commercial zones, unless Approval Findings can be made in accordance with Section 17.10.110.D. Electrified fencing shall be allowed in CM (Commercial Manufacturing), BIP (Business Industrial Park), M1 (Light Industrial) and M2 (Heavy Industrial) zones. If adjacent to any residential use, electrified fencing shall not exceed seven feet in height or the height of the existing adjacent fence, whichever is lower, within the required landscape buffer separating the commercial or industrial use and the residential use. Electrified fencing is hereby defined as a fence containing metal wire through which an electric current is passed, as a deterrent which will shock people or animals trying to breach or climb the fence, including electrified security fences as defined within State Civil Code, Section 835 and electrified fence within the State Food and Agricultural Code, Section 17151.

C.     Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be continuously maintained in an orderly and good condition, at no more than their maximum allowed height. (Ord. O2018-26 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.46.070 Special Fence and Wall Requirements
A.    Public Frontage Fencing of Nonresidential and Multi-Family Projects. Where fencing is proposed along public frontages of nonresidential and multi-family projects, such fencing shall be open view unless otherwise required to be solid for noise attenuation. Open view fencing shall also be required when located adjacent to open space areas.

B.     Screening of Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall be fenced or screened from view. Such screening shall utilize enclosures including, but not limited to, fences, walls, landscaping, or earthen berms. Screening shall be visually compatible with the primary buildings and landscape on the property. See Section 17.80.040(C) (Outdoor Storage Requirements).

C.     Special Fencing for Large Vehicle Storage. Vehicles greater than one ton that are not permitted to travel on public highways as defined in the California Vehicle Code that are stored on property when not part of an active construction project shall be screened from public view.

D.    Fencing for Pools, Spas, and Similar Features. Swimming pools, spas, and other similar water features shall be fenced in compliance with City-adopted Building Code requirements.

E.     Screening for Commercial or Industrial Uses Adjacent to Residential Zones. Commercial and industrial uses shall be screened from adjacent residential and agricultural zones by a masonry wall with a minimum height of 7 feet to screen the commercial or industrial use. This requirement is not intended to preclude the development of pedestrian/bicycle access points between commercial and residential or agricultural zones.

F.     Screening of Loading Docks and Refuse Areas. Loading docks and refuse storage areas shall be screened from public view, adjoining public streets and rights-of-way, and residentially zoned areas. The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors and materials.

G.    Temporary Fences. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the erection of a temporary fence around construction projects in compliance with the Building Code and other applicable provisions of the City Municipal Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.48 LANDSCAPING
17.48.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum landscape standards to enhance the appearance of developments, control on-site erosion, minimize heat and glare, and require landscaping for qualifying expansions to existing developments, structures, and changes in uses. Additionally, this Chapter provides for ongoing maintenance of landscape areas and the promotion of water conservation, while supporting retention of healthy existing mature trees to contribute to individuals’ enjoyment of property, property value, health, and overall aesthetics and quality of life in the city. Regulations herein are consistent with Government Code Section 65591 et seq. (the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act) and Chapter 2.7, Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations (Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance).

Regulations in this Chapter are intended to promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to use water and other resources as efficiently as possible by establishing the following requirements:

A.    Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention;

B.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water-efficient landscapes in new and rehabilitated projects;

C.     Reduce the water demands from landscapes without a decline in landscape quality or quantity;

D.    Retain flexibility and encourage creativity through appropriate design;

E.     Assure the attainment of water-efficient landscape goals by requiring that landscapes not exceed a maximum water demand of 70 percent of the reference evapotranspiration or any lower percentage as may be required by state legislation, whichever is stricter;

F.     Eliminate water waste from overspray and/or runoff;

G.    Achieve water conservation by raising the public awareness of the need to conserve water through education and motivation to embrace an effective water demand management program; and

H.    Implement the requirements of the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act 2006 and the California Code of Regulations Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.020 Applicability to Standards
A.    This Chapter shall apply to the following types of projects:

 

1.     All projects where the entire property is being developed or redeveloped with one or more new structures, other than accessory structures. For purposes of this chapter, new structures are defined as those which have completely new foundation, walls, and roof.

2.     All projects resulting in the increase of building square footage by 25 percent or more.

3.     All projects that include remodeling or renovation of at least 25 percent of the existing landscape area, or where more than 25 percent of the existing landscaping area is being added to.

4.     All landscaping projects, other than the construction of decks, patios, barbecues, play equipment, and swimming pools, which require a planning approval or building permit.

B.     The following projects and activities are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter:

1.     Properties with a historical site designation;

2.     Ecological restoration, mined lands, and reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3.     Agricultural and farming operations;

4.     Retention and/or detention basins not used as parks and where required for storm drainage; and/or

5.     Any project with a total landscaped area and/or existing landscaped area loss due to damage or neglect less than 250 square feet in area. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.030 Permit Requirements for Landscaping
A.    Preliminary Landscape and Irrigation Plan. A preliminary landscape plan, grading plan, and irrigation plan shall be submitted for each application for new development or existing development as identified in Section 17.48.020 (Applicability to Standards). This plan would conceptually show locations for trees, shrubs, ground cover, etc. Additionally, the plan would include a list of tree species and size.

B.     Final Landscape and Irrigation Plan. Prior to construction, the applicant shall submit a Landscape Documentation Package as described in Section 17.48.070 (Special Report and Design Plan Requirements).

C.     Landscape Certificate of Completion. Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy, a signed Landscape Certificate of Completion shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review. Following receipt and review, the City shall either approve or deny the Landscape Certificate of Completion. If the Landscape Certificate of Completion is denied, the City shall not be obligated to issue an occupancy permit and will provide information to the project applicant regarding necessary corrections, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.040 Landscape Improvement Requirements
Landscaping, grading, and irrigation plans shall comply with the following requirements and standards:

A.    General Locations for Landscape Improvements. Landscaping shall be provided in the following locations for all types of development as listed below, unless the designated Approving Authority determines that the required landscape is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to discourage landscape areas outside and beyond the minimum requirements listed herein.

1.     Setbacks. All setback areas required by this Code shall be landscaped in compliance with this Chapter except where a required setback is occupied by a sidewalk or driveway, or is enclosed and screened from abutting public rights-of-way.

2.     Unused Areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use or purpose in conjunction with a current application, including pad sites being held for future development, shall be landscaped in compliance with this Chapter.

3.     Parking Areas. Within parking lots, landscaping shall be used for shade and climate control, to enhance project design, and to screen the visual impact of vehicles and large expanses of pavement consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.

B.     Landscape Design. Landscaping shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site plan with the purpose of enhancing building design and public views and spaces, and providing buffers, transitions, and screening. At a minimum, the following landscape design provisions shall apply:

1.     Planting design shall have focal points at project entries, plaza areas, and other areas of interest using distinct planting and/or landscape features.

2.     As appropriate, building and site design shall include the use of pots, vases, wall planters, and/or raised planters, as well as flowering vines both on walls and on arbors.

3.     Landscaping shall be designed with pedestrian paths throughout the landscape areas connecting designated on-site pedestrian circulation.

4.     Amenities such as seating areas shall be incorporated. Entry plazas, bicycle parking, trash receptacles, and transit shelters are allowed within landscape areas.

C.     Plant Type. Landscape planting shall emphasize drought-tolerant species (especially along natural, open space areas), shall complement the architectural design of structures on the site, and shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions specific to the site.

1.     Planting Layout and Plant Diversity. Plant selection shall vary in type and planting pattern. Informal planting patterns are preferred over uniform and entirely symmetrical planting patterns. Use of flowering trees and colorful plantings is encouraged in conjunction with evergreen species. Groupings of shrubs shall contain multiple plant types, interspersed with varying heights and blooming seasons for year-round interest.

2.     Street and Parking Lot Trees. Street and parking lot trees shall be selected from the City’s adopted master list of street trees and parking lot trees. A minimum of 30 percent of the street trees and parking lot trees, respectively, shall be an evergreen species.

3.     Trees planted within 10 feet of any hardscape (e.g., street, sidewalk, paved trail, walkway) shall be a deep-rooted species or shall be separated from hardscapes by a root barrier to prevent physical damage to public improvements.

4.     No invasive plant species shall be introduced into the landscape.

D.    Plant Grouping. Plants with similar water and cultural requirements (such as sun and climate) shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

E.     Planting Size, Spacing, and Planter Widths. In order to achieve an immediate effect of a landscape installation and to allow sustained growth of planting materials, minimum plant material sizes, plant spacing, and minimum planter widths (inside measurements) are as follows:

1.     Trees. The minimum planting size for trees shall be 15 gallon, with 25 percent of all trees on a project site planted at a minimum 24-inch box size. For commercial, office, community/civic, and industrial development, tree spacing within perimeter planters along streets and abutting residential property shall be planted no farther apart on center than the mature diameter of the proposed species.

2.     Planter Size. Planter for trees shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide by 5 feet long, consistent with the City’s adopted master list of street trees and parking lot trees.

3.     Shrubs. Shrub planting shall be a minimum 5-gallon size, with a 15-gallon minimum size required where an immediate landscape screen is required (e.g., screening of headlights from drive-through aisles). Vegetative shrubs and perennials shall be a minimum 1-gallon size. The minimum planter width for shrubs is 5 feet.

4.     Groundcover and Turf. Rooted cuttings from flats shall be planted no farther apart than 12 inches on center, and containerized woody, shrub ground cover plantings shall be planted no farther apart than 3 feet on center in order to achieve full coverage within one year. Sod requires a minimum planter width of 6 feet.

5.     Additional Spacing Provisions. Tree or shrub spacing shall ensure unobstructed access for vehicles and pedestrians and provide a clear visibility triangle at intersections. Specifically, tree planting shall comply with the following spacing criteria:

a.     Trees or shrubs with full-grown height equal to or greater than 30 inches shall not be planted in any clear visibility triangle.

b.     The following minimum distances are required:

i.      Thirty-five (35) feet from the beginning of curb returns;

ii.     Twenty (20) feet from electroliers or traffic signal standards;

iii.    Fifteen (15) feet from the edge of buildings;

iv.    Ten (10) feet from driveway approaches;

v.     Fifteen (15) feet from fire hydrants and water and sewer service lines;

vi.    Twelve (12) feet from irrigation rotors;

vii.   Twelve (12) feet from any drain lines;

viii.  Three (3) feet from the back of walk; and

ix.    Necessary clearances from applicable utilities and easements.

6.     Height of Landscape Screening. Unless otherwise specified, required screening shall not be more than 7 feet in height. Trimming and pruning shall be employed as necessary to maintain this height.

F.     Soil Conditioning and Mulching. Mulching shall be used to conserve and retain water and prevent erosion as follows:

1.     A minimum of 6 cubic yards of nitrified soil conditioner per 1,000 square feet shall be incorporated into the top 6 inches of soil.

2.     A minimum of 2 inches of mulch shall be added in non-turf areas to the soil surface after planting. Nonporous materials shall not be placed under the mulch.

3.     Stabilizing mulch products shall be used on slopes.

4.     Grading shall be minimized to avoid disturbance. Top soil shall be stockpiled and shall be reapplied during final grading.

G.    Water Features. Water features shall obtain their water from one or more of the following sources:

1.     Recirculating water;

2.     On-site or municipal recycled/harvested water for non-potable uses; and/or

3.     The capture and reuse of water on-site through such features as rain gardens, rain barrels, or other creative landscaping techniques.

The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high-water-use hydrozone of the water budget calculation.

H.    Irrigation. Irrigation systems shall be designed consistent with the following standards:

1.     Valves and circuits shall be separated based on water use and hydrozone requirements. Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit.

2.     Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage. The system should be designed for minimum runoff and overspray onto nonirrigated areas.

3.     All irrigation systems shall be equipped with rain shut-off devices.

4.     Irrigation systems shall be designed to utilize recycled water.

5.     All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.

6.     Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed one (1.0).

I.      Stormwater Management

1.     Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration, which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration is encouraged.

2.     Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscapes features and practices that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or on-site storage are recommended.

J.      Safety Considerations. Plantings shall be designed to discourage potential safety issues (e.g., persons lying in wait). The design of the landscaping shall comply with Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) guidelines. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.050 Design Requirements for Specific Types of Landscaping
In addition to the general requirements of Section 17.48.040 (Landscape Improvement Requirements), the following provisions apply to the special types of landscaping as established below.

A.    Residential Landscape. For single-family and two-family residential Zoning Districts:

1.     For lots of land on which a building permit was issued on or before 07/15/2015, at least 35 percent of the actual front yard shall be landscaped.

2.     For lots of lands on which a building permit was issued on or after 07/16/2015, at least 35 percent of the actual front yard shall be landscaped and no more than 25 percent of the actual front yard or street-side yard shall be turf.

B.     Project Entry Landscaping. Entries to multi-tenant projects (both residential and nonresidential) shall be designed as a special statement reflective of the character and scale of the project to establish identity for tenants, visitors, and patrons. Flowering access plantings and specimen trees shall be used to reinforce the entry statement.

C.     Screening of Drive-Through Aisles. To screen vehicles and associated headlights in a drive-through lane from view of abutting street rights-of-way, a 5-foot-wide planter shall include a minimum 3-foot-tall (maximum 4-foot-tall) landscape barrier planted with trees and other landscaping consistent with those in the parking area. At no time shall this landscape barrier be pruned in a manner that allows the vehicle headlights from the drive-through lane to be visible from abutting street rights-of-way.

D.    Service Stations. For service stations, a minimum of 20 percent of the lot area shall be landscaped. A minimum of 70 percent of the landscaped area shall be covered with a combination of live landscaping, such as lawn, ground cover, trees, or shrubs, and not more than 30 percent of the landscape area shall be covered with hard surfaces, such as landscaping rock, concrete, artificial materials, or other impervious materials.

E.     Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage, and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted around the tower and related equipment to buffer abutting residential Zoning Districts or uses, and to buffer public trails. Landscaping around the perimeter of the facility (leased area) shall include dense tree and shrub plantings with the necessary irrigation. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be developed with an immediate landscape screen. Trees shall be fast-growing evergreen species, a minimum of 24-inch box in size. Shrubs shall be a minimum 15-gallon size covering a minimum planter area depth of 5 feet around the facility. Trees and shrubs shall be planted no farther apart on center than the mature diameter of the proposed species.

F.     On-Site Pedestrian Pathways. Pedestrian pathway landscaping shall include shade trees placed so as to cover 60 percent of the total pathway area with tree canopies at maturity.

G.    Public Spaces. Pedestrian space landscaping shall include a combination of shade trees and pedestrian shading devices (e.g., canopies, awnings) placed so as to cover 60 percent of the total space with a shade canopy at maturity.

H.    Signs. Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure of freestanding signs equal to twice the area of one face of the sign. For example, 50 square feet of sign area requires 100 square feet of landscaped area. See Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property).

I.      Buffering Between Uses. A landscape buffer shall be provided by nonresidential and multi-family uses adjacent to single-family uses. Buffer areas shall include a minimum 10-foot-wide planter strip with shrubs and both deciduous and evergreen trees. Landscaping shall be used to separate buildings from parking and vehicle circulation areas where practical.

J.      Sound Walls/Masonry Walls. Where setback and open space areas are screened from public view by walls or similar approved structures, landscaping shall be provided to soften the look of the wall.

K.    Parking Lot Landscape. Parking lot landscape includes perimeter planters, abutting parking lots and drive aisles, tree planting for parking lot shade, and a combination of continuous planting strips, planting fingers, and parking islands throughout the parking lot.

1.     Parking Areas. All surface parking areas shall be screened from streets and adjoining properties, and the open space areas between the property line and public street right-of-way shall be landscaped. Parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:

a.     Landscape Materials. Landscape materials shall include a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover.

b.     Curbing. Areas containing plant materials should be bordered by concrete curb at least 6 inches high and 6 inches wide. Alternative barrier design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles and/or to filter/retain runoff on-site may be approved by the designated Approving Authority.

c.     Location of Landscaping. Landscaping shall be distributed throughout the parking lot. Parking lot landscaping shall be located so that pedestrians are not required to cross unpaved areas to reach building entrances from parked cars. This can be achieved through proper orientation of the landscape fingers and islands and by providing pedestrian access through the landscaped areas that would otherwise block direct pedestrian routes.

d.     Perimeter Landscaping. The perimeter of each parking lot shall provide at least 10 feet of landscaping where the lot adjoins a property line. The perimeter landscape area may include any landscaped yard or landscaped area otherwise required, and shall be continuous except for the required access to the parking lot or site. All other perimeter landscape planters shall be a minimum of five feet wide.

e.     Passageways for pedestrians shall be provided in landscape areas for access between parking areas and adjacent streets and access from parking lots to uses on-site. The use of permeable materials for paths is encouraged.

f.      Landscape structures such as trellises, arbors, and benches shall occur within the landscaped areas of parking lots of commercial developments over 10 acres in size to emphasize the pedestrian scale of the project.

g.     Varied tree and plant species shall be used throughout the parking lot. No one species shall comprise more than 75 percent of the plantings within each of the following categories: shade tree, screen tree, shrub.

2.     Parking Lot Screening. Landscaping within the perimeter planter abutting any street right-of-way shall be designed and maintained for partial screening of vehicles to a minimum height of 30 inches measured from the finished grade of the parking lot. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earthen berms, solid masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices authorized by the designated Approving Authority which meet the intent of this screening requirement. Planting materials shall be designed to ensure that planting within the clear visibility triangle at driveway and street intersections will not exceed 30 inches in height at full maturity.

3.     Planters, Landscaping. Planters containing landscaping shall be provided adjacent to and within parking areas in accordance with the following regulations.

a.     A planter at least 10 feet wide, excluding curbing, shall be provided adjacent to all street rights-of-way.

b.     Transit shelters are allowed within the landscaping area.

c.     Parking lots of 20 spaces or more shall provide a landscaped island measuring a minimum of 8 feet by 16 feet at a ratio of one island for every eight spaces. The island shall contain at least one tree.

d.     No planter shall be smaller than 5 feet wide by 5 feet long, or 25 square feet, excluding curbing. Each planter shall include an irrigation system.

e.     Existing mature trees on the site shall be preserved whenever possible.

f.      All landscaped areas shall be designed so that plant materials are protected from vehicle damage or encroachment.

g.     All plant materials shall be maintained free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, insects, and diseases. Plant materials showing such damage shall be replaced by the same or similar species. Planting areas shall be kept free from weeds, debris, and undesirable materials which may be detrimental to safety, drainage, or appearance. Planter areas shall have mulch replenished yearly.

h.     Not more than 25 percent of the planter or landscaped area may be covered with hard surfaces such as gravel, landscaping rock, concrete, or other impervious materials. Bus shelters are excluded from this limitation. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.060 Landscape Care, Maintenance, and Replacement
A.    Maintenance of Required Planting Areas. Required planting areas shall be permanently maintained by water, clearing debris and litter, weeding, pruning, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. All landscaping shall be maintained in such a manner as to not restrict designated pedestrian access. All trees, shrubs, and plants which, due to accident, damage, disease, or other cause, fail to show a healthy growth shall be replaced, in kind, pursuant to the approved landscape plans within 30 days from the identified damage date.

B.     Maintenance of Existing Trees. Existing trees over six inches in trunk diameter, measured 4.5 feet above ground level (DBH), shall be retained in accord with the following:

1.     Notification. The City of Manteca Parks and Recreation Department and Planning Division shall be notified of any planned construction or grade change within the proximity of existing mature trees.

2.     Protection. Existing trees must be protected from construction equipment, grade changes, excavation for utilities, paving, and footers for proposed structures.

3.     Protection from Machinery. A protective fence barrier which encloses the entire area beneath the tree canopy shall be constructed. All exposed roots must be enclosed in this area.

4.     Protection from Grade Changes. Grade changes, either raising or lowering the grade, must be approved by the Planning Department prior to any grading taking place. Refer to landscape references: grading and excavation, root system, and protection zone documents.

C.     Tree Pruning. Tree pruning shall be performed by a California landscape contractor. The licensed contractor shall also be certified by the International Society of Arboriculture as a certified tree trimmer or certified arborist or other qualified tree expert.

Tree pruning is limited to the following:

1.     Remove dead wood and diseased, crowded, and weakly attached trunks and branches which create a hazard to private property and citizens;

2.     Provide adequate clearance and visibility for safe use of parking stalls, travel ways, and walkways for the passage of persons and vehicles;

3.     Remove visibility obstruction of traffic signs;

4.     Provide adequate visibility for security patrols;

5.     Repair split trees and limbs in order to save the tree and its appearance;

6.     Remove or sever roots of trees which are causing damage to public or private property such as curbs, gutters, sidewalk, drainage lines, and parking lot surfaces;

7.     Provide visibility for merchant signage and increase parking lot lighting only when the aesthetics of the tree and the parking lot shading requirements will not be reduced.

D.    Tree Removal and Replacement. For landscaping for multi-family and nonresidential development, removal of trees planted as part of an approved landscape plan shall be limited to trees that are in poor health, structurally distressed, or unsafe. The removal of a tree shall be the final recourse upon determining that it is infeasible to save the tree by any other method (e.g., pruning, treatment of diseases, fertilizing).

1.     Removal Process

a.     Prior to the removal of any tree, the Community Development Director’s approval is required. Failure to obtain approval prior to removing a tree shall require the owner of the project to replace the removed tree as stated in this Section.

b.     The application for request for removal shall include a statement of the health and condition of the trees to be removed by a certified arborist; an explanation of the reason(s) for removal; and a site plan indicating size, quantity, species, and location of the trees to be removed and replaced.

2.     Replacement. Replacement of trees shall be required for trees removed and for trees severely and improperly trimmed and shall be as specified below in Table 17.48.060-1 (Tree Replacement Schedule). Replacement may be satisfied by relocation.

 

TABLE 17.48.060-1

TREE REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE

 

Size of Damaged/Removed Tree

Replacement Tree Required

2—6 inches

24-inch box

6 inches or greater

36-inch box

 

E.     Landscape Replacement. All plant material removed from a multi-family or nonresidential project in which the Community Development Department has approved the landscape plan shall be replaced.

Replacement shrubs shall be a minimum 5-gallon size. Ground cover shall be a minimum size of a full flat.

F.     Irrigation Schedule. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

1.     Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

 

2.     Irrigation shall be scheduled as outlined below. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing, system maintenance, and a period of 21 days after installation of a new landscape.

a.     Residences and businesses with odd-numbered addresses may water on Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday but not between noon and 6:00 p.m.

b.     Residences and businesses with even-numbered addresses may water on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday but not between noon and 6:00 p.m.

c.     Every address is prohibited from watering on Monday.

3.     For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the Estimated Total Water Use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

4.     Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

a.     The plant establishment period;

b.     The established landscape; and

c.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

5.     Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

a.     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

b.     Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

c.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

d.     Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

e.     Application rate setting;

f.      Root depth setting;

g.     Plant type setting;

h.     Soil type;

i.      Slope factor setting;

j.      Shade factor setting; and

k.     Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.

G.    Landscape Irrigation Maintenance Schedule

1.     Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the Landscape Certificate of Completion.

2.     A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning, weeding in all landscape areas, and removing any obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

3.     Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents.

4.     A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally-friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.48.070 Special Report and Design Plan Requirements
A.    Landscape Documentation Package. The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following six elements:

1.     Project information containing:

a.     Date;

b.     Name of project applicant;

c.     Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

d.     Total landscape area (square feet);

e.     Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

f.      Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identification of the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;

g.     Checklist of all documents in Landscape Documentation Package;

h.     Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

i.      Applicant’s signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the City of Manteca’s water efficient landscape requirements and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.”

2.     Water-Efficient Landscape Worksheet containing the following information, consistent with Subsection 17.48.070(C) (Water-Efficient Landscape Worksheet):

a.     Hydrozone information table;

b.     Water budget calculations including:

i.      Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA),

ii.     Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU);

c.     Soil management report (see Subsection 17.48.070(D));

d.     Landscape design plan (see Subsection 17.48.070(E));

e.     Irrigation design plan (see Subsection 17.48.070(F)); and

f.      Grading design plan (see Subsection 17.48.070(G)).

B.     Certificate of Completion. The Certificate of Completion shall include the following information and documents:

1.     Date, project name, project address, applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;

2.     Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

3.     Certification by either the signer of the Landscape Documentation Package, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape package;

4.     Scheduling parameters used to set the irrigation controller (see Subsection 17.48.060(F));

5.     Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Subsection 17.48.060(G));

6.     Irrigation audit report (see Subsection 17.48.070(H)); and

7.     Soil analysis report, if not initially submitted with the Landscape Documentation Package and documentation verifying implementation of soil management report recommendations.

C.     Water-Efficient Landscape Worksheet. The water-efficient landscape worksheet shall contain the following information:

1.     A project applicant shall complete the water-efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections (sample worksheet shall be obtained from the City):

a.     A hydrozone information table for the landscape project; and

b.     A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water Use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in Subsection 17.48.070(I).

2.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

a.     The plant factor used shall be from the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species (WUCOLS) published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources, and the Bureau of Reclamation (2000). The plant factor ranges from zero (0.0) to three tenths (0.3) for low-water-use plants, from four tenths (0.4) to six tenths (0.6) for moderate-water-use plants, and from seven tenths (0.7) to one (1.0) for high-water-use plants.

b.     All water features shall be included in the high-water-use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low-water-use hydrozone.

c.     All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below.

d.     ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed one (1.0).

3.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance shall be calculated using the equation:

MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

Where:

MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)

ETo  = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches per year) as listed in the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in Section 17.48.070.I.

0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons)

0.7 = ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF)

LA = Landscape Area including SLA (square feet)

0.3 = Additional Water Allowance for SLA

SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)

4.     Estimated Total Water Use. The Estimated Total Water Use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the Estimated Total Water Use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA.



Where:

ETWU = Estimated Total Water Use per year (gallons)

ETo  = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches)

PF = Plant Factor from WUCOLS

HA = Hydrozone Area [high-, medium-, and low-water-use areas] (square feet)

SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)

0.62 = Conversion Factor

IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71)

 

D.    Soil Management Report. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:

1.     Submit soil samples to the laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

a.     Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

b.     Soil analysis may include:

i.      Soil texture;

ii.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil infiltration rate table;

iii.    pH;

iv.    Total soluble salts;

v.     Sodium;

vi.    Percent organic matter; and

vii.   Recommendations.

2.     The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following:

a.     If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the Planning Department as part of the Landscape Documentation Package; or

b.     If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the Landscape Certificate of Completion.

3.     The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

4.     The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the City with the Landscape Certificate of Completion.

E.     Landscape Design Plan. The landscape design plan shall, at a minimum:

1.     Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method.

2.     Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low-water-use hydrozone for the water budget calculation.

3.     Identify recreational areas.

4.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.

5.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.

6.     Identify type of mulch and application depth.

7.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity.

8.     Identify type and surface area of water features.

9.     Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious).

10.   Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to:

a.     Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground;

b.     Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants; and

c.     Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g. permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns).

12.   Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria established by the City in MMC Chapter 17.48 and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan.”

13.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape.

F.     Irrigation Design Plan. The irrigation design plan shall comply with the following:

1.     Requirements. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.

a.     System Requirements

i.      Dedicated landscape water meters are required on landscape areas larger than 5,000 square feet and encouraged for landscape areas smaller than 5,000 square feet.

ii.     Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

iii.    The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

(A)   If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

(B)   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

iv.    Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

v.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

vi.    Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

vii.   High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are recommended.

viii.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

ix.    Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

x.     The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

xi.    The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Subsection 17.48.070(C) regarding the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.

xii.   Irrigation systems shall be designed based on 35 psi static pressure. Additional loss is dependent on flow and performance curve for meter, backflow size, and length of piping.

xiii.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low-volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

xiv.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

xv.   Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

xvi.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.

xvii. Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.

xviii. Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than 8 feet in width in any direction, shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low-volume irrigation system.

xix.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low-flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

(A)   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

(B)   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.

xx.   The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Subsection 17.48.070(F). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

xxi.  Slopes greater than 25 percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding seventy-five hundredth inches (0.75″) per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation Package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

2.     Hydrozone Requirements

a.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

b.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

c.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf.

d.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

i.      Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

ii.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

e.     Individual hydrozones that mix high- and low-water-use plants shall not be permitted.

f.      On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

3.     Design Plan Contents. The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

a.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

b.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

c.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

d.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

e.     Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Subsection 17.48.040.H.4;

f.      The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of MMC Chapter 17.48 and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

g.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system.

G.    Grading Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement.

1.     The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

a.     Height of graded slopes;

b.     Drainage patterns;

c.     Pad elevations;

d.     Finish grade; and

e.     Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

2.     To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

a.     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto non-permeable hardscapes;

b.     Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

c.     Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

3.     The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of MMC Chapter 17.48 and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law.

H.    Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis

1.     For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter:

a.     The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the Landscape Certificate of Completion to the City Planner that may include, but is not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

b.     The City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.

2.     All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

I.      Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table. The following table describes the adopted reference evapotranspiration values for use in calculating water efficiency as required by this Chapter.

 

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

0.9

1.7

3.4

5.0

6.5

7.5

8.0

7.1

5.2

3.3

1.6

0.9

51.2

 

(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.50 LIGHTING
17.50.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate lighting to balance the safety and security needs for lighting with the City’s desire to preserve dark skies and to ensure that light trespass and glare have negligible impact on surrounding property (especially residential) and roadways. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.020 Applicability
The provisions of this Chapter apply to all new and existing land uses, including permanent and temporary uses in all Zoning Districts. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.030 Permit Required
Unless otherwise exempt by Section 17.50.040 (Exempt Lighting), all outdoor lighting fixtures for new multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, mixed use, and public/quasi-public uses require Site Plan and Design Review approval by the designated Approving Authority pursuant to Section 17.10.060 (Site Plan and Design Review). Any retrofit or amendment to an existing site and/or building lighting that would have a measurable impact on abutting property or views from street right-of-way as determined by the Community Development Director shall require Site Plan and Design Review approval. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.040 Exempt Lighting
The following items shall be exempt from Design Review requirements:

A.    All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene lanterns or gas fixtures.

B.     Temporary lights used for holiday decorations.

C.     Emergency lighting erected for official purposes by local, state, or federal agencies.

D.    Lighting for temporary uses and special events permitted consistent with this Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.050 Prohibited Lighting
The following types of lighting are prohibited:

A.    Neon tubing or band lighting along buildings and/or structures as articulation, except as approved through Design Review and/or Master Sign Program.

B.     Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light, except for emergency use by police or fire personnel or at their discretion, or for approved temporary lighting for a special event approved by the City.

C.     Lighting fixtures operated in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or danger to persons or to safe vehicular travel.

D.    Illumination of entire buildings.

E.     Roof-mounted lighting except for security purposes.

F.     Moving, flashing, or animated lighting.

G.    Light poles that obstruct pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.060 General Lighting Standards
The following standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting.

A.    Nuisance Prevention. All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, installed, directed downward or toward structures, shielded, and maintained in order to prevent glare, light trespass, and light pollution.

B.     Maintenance. Fixtures and lighting shall be maintained in good working order and in a manner that serves the original design intent.

C.     Shielding. Except as otherwise exempt, all outdoor lighting shall be constructed with full shielding and/or recessed to reduce light trespass to adjoining properties. Each fixture shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way, so that no light fixture directly illuminates an area outside of the site. Fixtures located higher than 6 feet above the ground shall have shielding that limits to angle of the cone of direct illumination to 60 degrees or less.

 

FIGURE 17.50.060-1: SHIELDING PROVISIONS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING

 



 

                           * Outdoor lighting shall be constructed with full shielding and/or recessed to reduce light trespass to adjoining properties.

 

D.    Level of Illumination. Outdoor lighting shall be designed to illuminate at the minimum level necessary for safety and security and to avoid the harsh contrasts in lighting levels between the project site and adjacent properties. Illumination standards are as follows:

1.     Parking lots, driveways, trash enclosures/areas, public phones, and group mailboxes shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained 1 foot-candle of light and an average not to exceed 4 foot-candles of light. The illumination shall not exceed 10 foot-candles in any one location.

2.     Pedestrian walkways shall be illuminated with a minimum maintained 0.5 foot-candle of light and an average not to exceed 2 foot-candles of light.

3.     Entryways and exterior doors of nonresidential structures shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness with a minimum maintained 1 foot-candle of light, measured within a 5-foot radius on each side of the door at ground level.

4.     In order to minimize light trespass on abutting residential property, illumination measured at the nearest residential structure or rear yard setback line shall not exceed the moon’s potential ambient illumination of one-tenth foot-candle.

E.     Maximum Height of Freestanding Outdoor Light Fixtures. The maximum height of freestanding outdoor light fixtures shall be 20 feet. Height shall be measured from the finish grade, inclusive of the pedestal, to the top of the fixture.

F.     Energy-Efficient Fixtures Required. Outdoor lighting shall utilize energy-efficient (high-pressure sodium, metal halide, low-pressure sodium, hard-wired compact fluorescent, or other lighting technology that is of equal or greater efficiency) fixtures and lamps. All new outdoor lighting fixtures shall be energy efficient with a rated average bulb life of not less than 10,000 hours.

G.    Accent Lighting. Architectural features may be illuminated by uplighting, provided that the lamps are low intensity to produce a subtle lighting effect and no glare or light trespass is produced. Where ever feasible, solar-powered fixtures shall be used.

H.    Signs. Lighting of signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property) of this Code.

I.      Sports Fields/Outdoor Activity Areas. Where playing fields or other special activity areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be mounted, aimed, and shielded so that the light falls within the primary playing area and no significant off-site light trespass is produced. Additionally, the lights shall be turned off within one hour after the end of the event.

J.      Telecommunications Towers. Telecommunication towers and related equipment shall be unlit except as provided below:

1.     A manually operated or motion-detector-controlled light above the equipment shed door may be provided, except that the light shall remain off except when personnel are present at night; and

2.     The minimum tower lighting required under FAA regulation; and

3.     Where tower lighting is required, said lighting shall be shielded or directed downward to the greatest extent possible to ensure that such light does not spill over onto abutting properties, especially residential Zoning Districts or uses.

K.    Alternative Designs, Materials, and Installations. The designated Approving Authority may grant approval of alternatives to this Section as part of a Site Plan and Design Review permit. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.50.070 Outdoor Lighting Plans Required
A.    When Required. A preliminary outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted as part of each Site Plan and Design Review application, and a final plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a building permit for a new structure or an addition of 25 percent of the gross floor area, seating capacity, or parking spaces. A final outdoor lighting plan is required for all new outdoor lighting installations on commercial, mixed-use, multi-unit residential, industrial, and institutional properties. The Community Development Director may request outdoor lighting plans from applicants for other types of projects due to location, size, or proposed use, as necessary.

B.     Plan Content. At a minimum, an outdoor lighting plan shall include the following:

1.     Manufacturer specifications sheets, cut sheets, and other manufacturer-provided information for all proposed outdoor light fixtures to show fixture diagrams and outdoor light output levels.

2.     The proposed location, mounting height, and aiming point of all outdoor lighting fixtures.

3.     If building elevations are proposed for illumination, drawings of all relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the elevations to be illuminated, the illumination level of the elevations, and the aiming point for any remote light fixture.

4.     Photometric data including a computer-generated photometric grid showing foot-candle readings every 10 feet within the property or site and 10 feet beyond the property lines. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.52 PARKING
17.52.010 Purpose
This Chapter establishes standards for the amount, location, and development of motor vehicle parking, bicycle parking, and on-site loading areas. The purpose of the standards is to provide for safe vehicular parking, circulation, and loading requirements supportive of a variety of uses in an increasingly pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly and transit-oriented community. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.020 Applicability
Off-street parking and loading provisions of this Chapter shall apply as follows:

A.    New Development. For all buildings or structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of this Title, parking for vehicles and bicycles, and loading facilities shall be provided as required by this Chapter.

B.     Change in Use or Occupancy. When the use or occupancy of any building, structure, or premises is changed, resulting in an increase of more than 30 percent in the required number of off-street parking spaces, additional off-street parking shall be provided consistent with Table 17.52.050-1 (Required Minimum Vehicle Parking Ratios), and the parking lot design shall comply with the requirements of this Code. New parking shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director.

C.     Modification to Existing Structures. Whenever an existing building or structure is modified such that it creates an increase of more than 10 percent in the number of off-street parking spaces required, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.030 Permit Requirements and Exemptions
New parking lots and modifications or expansions to existing parking lots require the following permits:

A.    Building Permit. New parking lot design and modifications to existing parking lots in conjunction with a substantial change in use to an existing structure shall be reviewed in conjunction with the building permit and any other land use or development permit required for the project.

B.     Exempt Activities. Parking lot improvements listed below shall be considered minor in nature in that they do not alter the number or configuration of parking stalls. Such improvements shall be exempt from permit requirements.

1.     Repairing any defects in the surface of the parking area, including holes and cracks;

2.     Resurfacing, slurry coating, and restriping of a parking area with identical delineation of parking spaces;

3.     Repairing or replacing in the same location damaged planters and curbs; and

4.     Working in landscape areas, including sprinkler line repair, replacement of landscape materials, or refurbishment. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.040 General Parking Requirements
A.    All vehicular parking areas shall be maintained by the owner of the property, such as being kept free of damage to asphalt or concrete surface, damage to landscape areas or curbing, garbage, and debris.

B.     Required off-street parking spaces and parking areas shall be used only for parking operable vehicles of residents, employers, employees, customers, and visitors as appropriate to the allowed uses of the applicable zone.

C.     Required off-street parking space shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or materials, or for the parking of trucks used in conducting business. Parking spaces not needed to meet the minimum requirement may be used for alternative uses subject to the provisions of this Title (e.g., Temporary Use Permit, semi-permanent display of merchandise). Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, outdoor sales and storage, recycling collection facilities, dismantling, or servicing.

D.    All required off-street parking shall be kept clear of temporary or permanent obstructions.

E.     Existing parking shall not be reduced below the requirements of this Section.

F.     For residential tenant and guest parking, the spaces must be marked per the required minimum standards for tenant and guest parking.

G.    Required off-street parking spaces shall not be located within any required front yard or required street side yard setback of any parcel.

H.    Parking may not occur within any required clear visibility triangle area on a corner lot.

I.      Parking spaces shall not preclude direct and free access to stairways, walkways, elevators, any pedestrian access way, or fire safety equipment. Such access shall be a clear minimum width of 44 inches, no part of which shall be within a parking space. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.050 Number of Parking Spaces Required
A.    Minimum Requirements. Minimum vehicle and parking space requirements are listed in Table 17.52.050-1 (Required Minimum Vehicle Parking Ratios). Except as otherwise specifically stated, the following rules apply to Table 17.52.050-1:

1.     “Square feet” means “gross square feet” and refers to building area unless otherwise specified.

2.     Where the number of seats is listed to determine required parking, seats shall be construed to be fixed seats. Where fixed seats provided are either benches or bleachers, such seats shall be construed to be not more than 18 linear inches for pews and 24 inches for dining, but in no case shall seating be less than determined as required by the City-adopted Building Code.

B.     Calculations

1.     If the calculation for parking needs results in the requirement for a fraction of a parking space, the value shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as provided in Section 17.04.030(G) (Calculations–Rounding).

2.     For the purpose of calculating parking ratios in all districts, the following types of parking are considered outdoor storage and are not consider parking:

a.     Fleet vehicle parking.

b.     Parking for vehicles that are for sale, lease, or rent.

C.     Similar Use. For a use not listed in Table 17.52.050-1 (Required Minimum Vehicle Parking Ratios), the required vehicle parking shall be the same as for the most similar use listed, as determined by the Community Development Director.

D.    Regulations are Minimum Requirements. The number of off-street parking spaces required in Table 17.52.050-1 (Required Minimum Vehicle Parking Ratios) shall be considered the minimum necessary for each use, except that as provided in Section 17.52.060 (Reductions in Parking), the requirements may be modified as part of Site Plan and Design Review. In conjunction with discretionary development permits, the designated Approving Authority may increase these parking requirements if it is determined that these requirements are inadequate for a specific project.

 

TABLE 17.52.050-1

REQUIRED MINIMUM VEHICLE PARKING RATIOS

 

Land Use Type

Required Parking Spaces

Residential Uses

Single-Family Dwelling Unit

2 covered spaces/dwelling

Secondary Residential Units

1 space/secondary unit

Small-Lot Single-Family

1 covered space/dwelling

Townhome, Condominium, and Apartment

1 covered space/dwelling unit plus 0.25 space/studio, 0.5 space/one bedroom, and 1 space per 2 or more bedrooms

Boardinghouses and Group Quarters

1 space/sleeping room or 1/100 sf sleeping area

Residential Care Home

1 space/3 beds

Agriculture, Resource, and Open Space Uses

Kennels, Commercial

4 spaces/1,000 sf gfa

Recreation, Education, and Public Assembly Uses

Assembly Uses

1 space/3 fixed seats, or 1 space/50 square feet of primary assembly area

Cemeteries and Crematories

1/4 seats

Golf Courses

10/hole

Indoor Amusement/Entertainment Facility

4/1,000 sf

Indoor Fitness and Sports Facility

4/1,000 sf

Libraries and Museums

3/1,000 sf

Outdoor Commercial Recreation

1/400 sf active recreation area

Schools, Elementary, Middle, Junior High

1.5/classroom plus 1/300 sf of office area

School, High

1/150 sf of classroom floor area plus 1/300 sf of office area

School, College, Professional, Trade, Vocational, Specialty

1/50 sf of classroom floor area plus 1/300 sf of office area

Retail, Service, and Office Uses

All other commercial uses not otherwise listed

4/1,000 sf gfa

Banks and Financial Institutions

1/250 sf gfa

Call Centers

7 spaces/1,000 sf gfa

Child Day Care Center

3.2/1,000 sf

Hotels, Motels, and Bed and Breakfast Inns

1/guest room plus 4 additional spaces

Medical Services, Extended Care

1/2 beds

Medical Services, General

1 space/200 sf gfa

Medical Services, Hospitals

2/bed or 2/1,000 sf, whichever is greater

Mortuaries and Funeral Homes

1/50 sf of assembly area or 1/4 fixed seats

Personal Services

1/200 sf gfa

Plant Nursery

1/250 sf sales floor area plus 1/2,000 sf of outdoor sales and storage

Restaurants, Table-Service and Other Eating and Drinking Establishments

7/1,000 sf

Restaurants, Quick-Service

1/100 sf

Grocery Stores/Supermarkets

3/1,000 sf

Retail, General

4/1,000 sf

Automobile and Vehicle Uses

Vehicle Services

4/1,000 sf

Car Washes

3 spaces, plus 2 per bay

Motor Vehicle and Implement Sales, Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle Rental

3.5/1,000 sf

Service Stations

1 space/pump island, plus 1 space/service bay

Industrial Uses

Manufacturing Plants, Research or Testing Laboratories, Bottling Plants, Processing Plants, and Packaging Plants

1/500 sf; or 100 spaces plus 1/1,000 sf for area between 50,000 to 100,000 sf; or 150 spaces plus 1/2,000 sf for area over 100,000 sf

Self-Storage Facilities

1/50 storage units or 5 spaces, whichever is greater

Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution

0.5/1,000 sf

(Ord. O2018-17 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.060 Reductions in Parking
A.    Reductions through Site Plan and Design Review. Commercial, office, or industrial project may request a reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces required, provided they include facilities, programs, or services that reduce the overall parking demand for the site, contingent upon approval from the Approving Authority.

1.     Facilities and Programs. A proponent of an office, commercial, or industrial project may provide alternative facilities or programs which serve to reduce parking demand in return for a reduction in vehicle parking requirements. Vehicle parking requirements may be reduced in accordance with the following provisions:

a.     Shower/Locker Facilities. Developments with 100 or more employees may reduce their parking requirement by providing shower and clothing locker facilities for bicycle commuting employees. Maximum reduction: 2 percent of required parking.

b.     Secure Bicycle Parking. Developments which provide additional secure bicycle parking facilities over and above the minimum requirement may reduce their parking requirement by one vehicle space for every three additional bicycle spaces provided. Maximum reduction: 2 percent of required parking.

2.     Preferred Carpool/Vanpool Parking Spaces. Office or industrial developments which guarantee preferred parking spaces (e.g., covered, shaded, or near building entrance) to employees who participate regularly in a carpool or van-pool may reduce their parking requirement by one vehicle space for every one space which is marked and reserved for carpools/vanpools at a preferred location. Maximum reduction: 2 percent of required parking.

3.     Special Circumstances. Off-street vehicle parking reductions may also be granted when the applicant for a single or combined use can prove to the designated Approving Authority that the nature of the proposed use(s) or the proximity of the facility to alternative modes of transportation justify the requested parking reduction. This Chapter includes shared parking reductions due to variation in peak demands.

4.     Vehicle Park-and-Ride Lot Requirements at Shopping Centers. Up to 10 percent of the required number of parking spaces for retail stores/shopping centers may be contractually committed to be used for park-and-ride purposes without affecting the total parking requirement of the center, provided that the contracted spaces meet applicable current parking lot design standards and that the center meets or exceeds its calculated parking requirement.

B.     Reductions Through Joint Use of Parking Facilities

1.     Requirements for the provision of parking facilities, with respect to two or more establishments on the same or different sites may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use in a common parking facility, located not farther than 300 feet measured along the shortest available route of pedestrian access from the site of any such participating use.

2.     When off-street parking facilities are provided in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter on a site other than the site on which the use to be served, an indenture shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder designating the off-street parking facility and the use to be served, with legal descriptions of all sites involved, and certifying that the off-street parking facility shall not be used for any other purpose unless the restriction is removed by resolution of the City Council. An attested copy of the recorded indenture shall be filed with the Public Works Director. Upon submission of satisfactory evidence that other off-street parking facilities have been provided in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or that the use has ceased or has been altered so as no longer to require the off-street parking facility, the City Council shall by resolution remove the restriction.

C.     Shared Parking. The Approving Authority may approve a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for a mixed use development or for uses which are located near one another and which have different peak parking demands and operating hours. Shared parking arrangements shall be subject to the following requirements.

1.     Application. An application for shared parking shall include a description of the use, a development plan complying with the requirements of Section 17.08.020, a trip generation report, and a parking study and other information deemed necessary by the Planning Manager.

2.     Location. All shared parking shall be located in an area providing reasonable accessibility to all uses which it is intended to serve.

3.     Agreements. In cases where the uses for which shared parking is requested are located on lots under different ownership, proof of a long-term lease agreement shall be required and shall be subject to review by the City Attorney.

4.     Standards. In determining whether to approve a reduction for shared parking, the following shall be considered:

a.     Characteristics of each use and projected peak parking demand, including hours of operation;

b.     Potential reductions in vehicle movements afforded by multi-purpose use of spaces by employees, customers or residents; and

c.     Potential improvements in access, design, open space preservation and circulation. (Ord. O2018-17 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.070 Parking Required for the Disabled
A.    Number of Spaces, Design Standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with Uniform Building Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

B.     Reservation of Spaces Required. The number of disabled accessible parking spaces required by this Chapter shall be reserved by the property owner/tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use.

C.     Upgrading of Markings Required. If amendments to state law change standards for the marking, striping, and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces shall be upgraded in the time and manner required by state law. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.080 Compact Car Requirement
A.    Up to 30 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be sized for compact cars.

B.     Compact car parking spaces shall be at least 8 feet in width and 16 feet in length, and shall be clearly marked, “COMPACT CARS ONLY,” “COMPACT,” or “C.”

C.     Compact car spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking lot. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.090 Parking and Driveway Design and Development Standards
A.    General Location. All vehicular parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the main structure they serve, on an abutting lot, or within 300 feet, subject to the following requirements:

1.     There is a safe, direct, attractive, lighted, and convenient pedestrian route between the vehicle parking area and the use being served.

2.     There is an assurance in the form of deed, lease, contract, or other similar document that the required spaces will continue to be available for off-street parking use according to the required standards.

B.     Single-Family Residential Parking

1.     Driveways on residential corner lots shall not be located closer than 20 feet to the radius return.

2.     Driveways providing direct access from a public street to a garage or carport shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.

3.     Vehicles shall only be parked on designated driveways and shall not be parked on landscape areas within required actual front or street side yard areas.

4.     Curb cuts must comply with City street improvement standards.

C.     Nonresidential and Multi-Family Parking Lot Design and Parking Access

1.     Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located at the rear of sites in commercial and industrial zones; street frontages shall be devoted to building architecture and landscaping where possible.

2.     Surfacing and Striping. Areas used for parking and maneuvering of vehicles shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or equivalent surface. Structural design of pavement shall be per a geotechnical or soils report and in no case less than 2.5 inches for asphalt. All parking areas shall be appropriately striped, marked, and signed.

3.     Curb Cuts/Access Points. Street access points shall be the minimum necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe circulation and carrying capacity of the street. Curb cuts must comply with City street improvement standards.

4.     Driveways/Driveway Approach Width and Grade. The minimum driveway width shall comply with public improvement and fire safety standards.

5.     Access. Access to each off-street parking space shall be from a driveway or aisle that is sufficient for readily turning and maneuvering vehicles.

6.     Back-Out Parking. With the exception of duplexes and single-family residences, all parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles are not permitted to back out of the parking area onto a public street.

 

7.     Driveway/Drive Aisle Width. Driveways shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet for two-way circulation and 12 feet for one-way circulation.

8.     Turnaround Areas. Parking spaces shall be provided with adequate drive aisles or turnaround areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner.

9.     Setback Restrictions for Parking Spaces and Drive Aisles. Parking areas including spaces, aisles, and turnaround and maneuvering areas shall not occupy the required setbacks.

10.   Connect Parking Lots. Auto parking areas shall be designed to connect with auto parking areas on adjacent sites to eliminate the necessity of utilizing the public right-of-way for cross movements. Joint or shared access, internal circulation, or parking is encouraged with adjacent uses.

11.   Minimum Clearance. Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas, and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet for the entire length and width, but such clearance may be reduced in parking structures.

12.   Clear Visibility Triangle. Parking shall not be permitted within the clear visibility triangle as defined in Section 17.100.060 (Universal Definitions).

13.   Maneuverability. Parking spaces, other than parallel parking spaces, shall be designed such that no more than two turning movements are necessary to access the space.

14.   Tandem Parking. Tandem parking, except for single-family residential, is prohibited.

15.   No parking space shall be located so that a vehicle is required to maneuver within 10 feet of a vehicular entrance to the property.

16.   Pedestrian walkways and landscape planters shall be designed to allow vehicles to overhang up to 2 feet. Wheel stops are not permitted.

 

D.    Space and Aisle Standards for Surface Parking Lots

1.     Generally. All surface parking lots shall be designed in accordance with City standards for stalls and aisles as set forth in Table 17.52.090-1 (Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions) and Figure 17.52.090-1 (Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions) below.

2.     Spaces Adjacent to Walls. Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall be widened an additional 2 feet.

3.     Residential Spaces. Residential parking spaces required to be covered shall be not less than 20 feet in length and 10 feet in width.

 

TABLE 17.52.090-1

PARKING SPACE AND DRIVE AISLE DIMENSIONS

 

Stall Type

Minimum Stall Width

Minimum Stall Length

Minimum Drive Aisle Width

One-Way

Two-Way

Parallel

9 ft

24 ft

12 ft

24 ft

45⁰

9 ft

19 ft

14 ft

24 ft

60⁰

9 ft

21 ft

18 ft

24 ft

90⁰

9 ft

18 ft

20 ft

24 ft

Compact Stalls,

all angles

8 ft

16 ft

Per stall angle

Notes:

1.      As part of Design Review, the Fire Department will review drive aisle widths. In The main drive aisle to the buildings shall be 26 feet.

2.      Can be reduced up to 2 feet if a sidewalk or planter with a minimum width of 6 feet is adjacent to the stall.

 

FIGURE 17.52.090-1: PARKING SPACE AND DRIVE AISLE DIMENSIONS

 

Graphics\tiffs\fig17_29_parkspace.tif

Key:

a = Stall width

b = Stall length

c = Drive aisle width

E.     Landscaping of Parking Lots. See Chapter 17.48 (Landscaping).

F.     Pedestrian Circulation/Walkways. Sidewalks shall be designed to ensure that vehicles that overhang or intrude into the sidewalk system do not reduce the minimum required sidewalk width.

G.    Lighting of Parking Lot. See Chapter 17.50 (Lighting).

H.    On-Site Circulation

1.     Parking lots shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can provide service without backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements.

2.     Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems should be provided where possible. Pedestrian access to multi-family residential development of five or more units shall not utilize driveways. Large commercial developments that are required to provide 100 or more parking spaces shall include distinct and dedicated pedestrian access from parking areas to the commercial use.

I.      Marking. All parking spaces, except in a garage or carport containing two or fewer parking spaces, shall be striped in a manner clearly showing the layout of the intended parking stalls. Such striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.

J.      Maintenance. Parking lots must be maintained free of potholes, fading of striping, and other similar defects. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.100 Loading Area Requirements
A.    The off-street loading facilities, in all cases, shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve.

B.     The off-street loading facilities shall be designed and located so that loading vehicles are not parked in required setbacks, driveways, or required parking spaces during loading activities.

C.     No loading space shall be located so that a vehicle using such loading space projects into any public street, nor so that they must back into a public street for ingress or egress.

D.    Loading spaces shall be provided with access to an alley when alley access is available.

E.     Loading docks shall be located outside of public view. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.110 Required Bicycle Parking
A.    Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-family projects and nonresidential uses in compliance with this Chapter.

B.     Bicycle parking shall be located on a paved surface, in proximity to a building entrance, and in a visibly secure location adjacent to the building.

C.     Bicycle parking shall consist of a stationary bicycle rack.

D.    Except as otherwise specified, required bicycle parking shall not be located within required setback yard areas.

E.     Bicycle parking is required for multi-family, public and civic facilities, and retail commercial, office, and industrial uses in accordance with Table 17.52.110-1 (Bicycle Parking Requirements by Land Use) below. In no case shall there be fewer than two employee bicycle spaces and two patron spaces, unless specifically exempt.

TABLE 17.52.110-1

BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE

 

Total Parking Spaces

Minimum Number of Bicycle Spaces Required

1 to 29

2

30 to 59

4

60 to 74

5

75 to 99

6

100 to 199

7

200 to 299

8

300 to 399

9

≥400

10

(Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.120 Parking and Storage of Mobile Vehicles and Accessories on Post-July 19, 1978, Parcels
A.    General Prohibition for Properties Built After July 19, 1978. No person shall place, keep, maintain, or permit to be placed, kept, or maintained, a personal recreational vehicle, recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, oversized boat, or oversized vehicle upon any lot or parcel of land within a residential zoned district on which a building permit for a main building was issued after July 19, 1978, except in a recreational vehicle park, properly approved storage or sales yard, or recreational vehicle park.

B.     Limitation on Number of Recreational Vehicles. Under no condition shall more than one recreational home, or one oversized vehicle, or one oversized boat be parked or stored on any property in a residential Zoning District at any given time, except as provided for by Subsection 17.52.120(I).

C.     Limitation on Number of Mobile Transport Vehicles or Personal Recreational Vehicles. There shall be no limit on the number of mobile transport vehicles and/or personal recreational vehicles parked or stored in the side yard or rear yard if all of the requirements of Subsections 17.52.120(B), (E), (F) and (G) are complied with at all times.

D.    Prohibition in Required or Actual Front Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat shall be parked or stored in the required or actual front yard of any residence or on any public roadway, except as follows:

1.     A recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized boat, or oversized vehicle may be placed in the required or actual front yard of the owner’s residence or on the public roadway directly in front of the owner’s residence for the sole purposes of loading or unloading the vehicle or washing the vehicle. In no case shall the vehicle be in the required or actual front yard or public roadway in front of the owner’s residence for more than 24 hours within any consecutive 72-hour period unless the owner has obtained a permit from the Police Department.

2.     No vehicle permitted in the required or actual front yard pursuant to Subsection 17.52.120(D)(1) shall be permitted to block a sidewalk or obstruct the view of street traffic from any adjoining property.

E.     Parking and Storage in Side Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat shall be parked or stored in a side yard (required or actual) unless:

1.     Said recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat maintains not less than 3 feet from all buildings or side yard appurtenances on the property. Said clearances shall be kept clear of all obstacles at all times for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare.

2.     Said recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat is behind a permitted screening along all adjoining property lines.

F.     Parking and Storage in Rear Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat shall be parked or stored in a rear yard (required or actual) except as provided for herein.

1.     Such recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat may be kept wholly enclosed within a structure lawfully existing on the premises; or

2.     Such recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat is parked or stored on an approved impervious surface. The impervious surface shall not exceed 25 percent of the net rear yard area, and shall be located at least 3 feet from any property line.

3.     Prior to any parking or storage pursuant to this Subsection 17.52.120(F), the property owner shall submit to the City a site plan showing the proposed area of impervious surface and all other structures in the rear yard, and an indication of the type of impervious materials proposed.

4.     All necessary permits that may be required shall be obtained for the construction of the impervious surface.

G.    Prohibition on Permanent Occupancy. Except as provided for in Subsection 17.52.120(I), no recreational home covered under this section shall be occupied for human habitation while parked at the residential property.

H.    Permitted Temporary Occupancy

1.     A recreational home may be located in the rear yard or side yard, if it meets the requirements of Subsections 17.52.120(E) and (F), for the purpose of temporary accommodation of occupants or visitors of the premises, provided that a permit for such use has first been obtained from the City Police Department in the manner provided for in Sections 10.46.090 though 10.46.100 of the Municipal Code, and the recreational vehicle is removed from the premises at the end of seven consecutive days. One extension not exceeding four consecutive days may be allowed upon obtaining a permit extension from the Police Department. The temporary occupancy permitted by this Subsection 17.52.120(H) shall be allowed only once in any consecutive six-month period.

2.     Under no condition shall the recreational vehicle be located in the front yard or the street side yard of a corner lot.

I.      Temporary Parking of Second Recreational Home. A second recreational home, not used for a permitted temporary occupancy, may be parked on a property providing that all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The recreational home is parked in the side yard or rear yard as required by Subsections 17.52.120(E) and (F); and

2.     The recreational home is not owned or leased by the owner of any other recreational home that is parked or stored on the property; and

3.     The recreational home shall not be parked on the property for more than 14 consecutive days in any calendar year; and

4.     A permit shall have been first obtained from the Police Department in the same manner as required by Sections 10.46.090 through 10.46.100 of the Municipal Code; and

5.     Not more than one such permit shall be issued for any parcel in any calendar year.

J.      Prohibition of Driving or Parking on Sidewalks. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized boat, or oversized vehicle shall be parked on, stored on, or driven over any public sidewalk at any time, except as such sidewalk has been integrated in an approved driveway. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.130 Parking and Storage of Mobile Vehicles and Accessories on Pre-July 19, 1978, Parcels
A.    Limitation on Parking in Front Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized boat, or oversized vehicle shall be parked or stored in the front yard of a property on which a building permit for a main building was issued prior to July 19, 1978, unless:

1.     It is parked or stored on an impervious surface; and

2.     It does not extend into any sidewalk; and

3.     It does not obstruct the view of street traffic from any adjoining property.

B.     Parking and Storage in Side Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized boat, or oversized vehicle shall be parked or stored in a side yard unless:

1.     Said recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat maintains not less than 3 feet from all buildings or side yard appurtenances on the property. Said clearances shall be kept clear of all obstacles at all time for the protection of public health, safety and welfare;

2.     Said recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat is behind a permitted screening along all adjoining property lines.

C.     Parking and Storage in Rear Yard. No recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat shall be parked or stored in a rear yard except as provided for herein:

1.     Such recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat may be kept wholly enclosed within a structure lawfully existing on the premises; or

2.     Such recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, personal recreational vehicle, oversized vehicle, or oversized boat is parked or stored on an approved impervious surface. The impervious surface shall not exceed 25 percent of the net rear yard area, and shall be located at least 3 feet from any property line.

3.     Prior to any parking or storage pursuant to Subsection 17.52.130(C)(2), the property owner shall submit to the City a site plan showing the proposed area of impervious surface and all other structures in the rear yard, and an indication of the type of impervious materials proposed.

4.     All necessary permits that may be required shall be obtained for the construction of the impervious surface.

D.    Requirement for Permitted Screening. If any recreational home, mobile transport vehicle, or personal recreational vehicle is parked or stored in the side yard or rear yard, the property shall be screened with permitted screening.

E.     Ban on Inoperative Vehicle in Front Yard or Side Street Yard. No inoperative vehicle, as defined in Section 8.20.010 of the Municipal Code, shall be parked or stored in the front yard or side street yard for a period of more than five calendar days. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.140 Construction or On-Site Field Office
No person shall place, keep, or maintain, or permit to be placed, kept, or maintained, any mobile office or recreational home upon any lot or parcel of land within any nonresidential zone in the city, other than in a recreational vehicle park or in a properly approved storage or sale yard, except as follows:

A.    A use permit may be granted for a mobile office (designed solely for such purposes) to be used as a temporary office for a period not exceeding one year. Thirty days prior to the expiration time, the applicant may request and be granted one extension of time of one additional year. Thirty days after the expiration of the use permit, or any extension thereof, such use shall be removed from the premises.

B.     A recreational home may be used on the site for occupancy by a night watchman or security guard for not more than 90 days in total.

C.     A trailer used as a construction shack or as an on-site field office at a construction site within a developing subdivision. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.52.150 Overweight Truck or Truck Trailer
No person shall place or permit to be placed any commercial truck, tractor cab, or truck trailers with a weight limit over 8,000 pounds in any residential Zoning District in the city, except for pickup or delivery service, or to carry out a service function or as part of the operation of a legally existing nonconforming use, provided that in no case shall such truck or truck trailer be parked at any location in any residential Zoning District longer than required for such pickup or delivery service or service function, other than within the grounds of a legally existing nonconforming use located within the residential Zoning District and of which operation of the truck or truck trailer is a part. For the purpose of this section, “commercial” shall not include passenger cars or pickups designed and intended for personal use. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.54 SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
17.54.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulation of signs in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to harmonize the legitimate private purposes of signs to safeguard and enhance property values; to protect public and private investment in buildings and open space; to preserve and improve the appearance of Manteca as a place in which to live and work; to preserve and enhance the attractiveness of Manteca to nonresidents who come to visit and trade; to encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business and for the information of the public; to prevent excessive and confusing sign displays; and to reduce hazards to motorist and pedestrians. This Chapter is intended to regulate signs, recognizing the need for adequate business and noncommercial identification, advertising, and communication. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.020 Policies for Sign Regulations
A.    Regulatory Interpretations. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be interpreted to nullify any easements, covenants, or other private agreements which provide for more restrictive sign regulations than are required by this Chapter.

B.     Enforcement. The Community Development Director is authorized and directed to enforce and administer the provisions of this Chapter. Whenever the application of this Chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the issue shall be referred to the Community Development Director for an interpretation, and such interpretation shall be made by the Community Development Director within ten business days. Any decision made by the Community Development Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 17.08.070 (Appeals) of this Title.

C.     Message Neutrality. It is the City’s policy and intent to regulate both commercial and noncommercial signs in a viewpoint-neutral or content-neutral manner. The message of the sign shall not be reviewed except to the minimum extent necessary to identify the type of sign.

D.    Message Substitution. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted in whole or in part for the message displayed on any sign for which the sign structure or mounting device is authorized pursuant to this Code, without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. In addition, any on-site commercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any other on-site commercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is authorized pursuant to this Code, without consideration of message content. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot, or land; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; and does not allow for the substitution of an off-site commercial message in the place of an on-site commercial or noncommercial message.

E.     On-Site/Off-Site Distinction. Within this Chapter, the distinction between on-site and off-site signs applies only to commercial messages.

F.     General Prohibition. Permanent signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter are prohibited. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.030 Sign Requirements and Review Procedures
A.    Permits Required

1.     Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for all permanent signs (building-attached or freestanding) not specifically exempted by this Chapter, prior to erection, relocation, alteration, or replacement of a sign. A building permit for a sign shall be reviewed in the same manner as any other building permit as established in Section 17.10.030 (Zoning Conformance Approval). Unless otherwise required by the City-adopted Building Code, a building permit shall not be required for general maintenance of existing signs or the replacement of a sign face (including message) when the area of the sign is not being changed.

2.     Master Sign Program Required. To ensure compliance with the regulations of this Chapter and except as otherwise exempted, a Master Sign Program shall be required for all new nonresidential developments of three or more separate tenant spaces that (a) share either the same parcel or structure and (b) use common access and parking facilities. The process for application, review, and decision regarding a Sign Program shall be as established in Section 17.10.090 (Master Sign Program).

B.     Method of Application. Applications for a building permit for a sign, a Master Sign Program, or Site Plan and Design Review shall be made on the form(s) prescribed by the Community Development Department. The application shall be accompanied by any fees as specified by City Council resolution. The required contents of the application shall be as specified in Chapter 17.10 (Entitlements).

C.     Application Review Procedures and Decisions. The application and review procedures for building permits for Master Sign Programs, and Site Plan and Design Review for signs shall be as provided in Chapter 17.10 (Entitlements).

D.    Variances. Applications for a Variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission according to the Variance procedures set forth in Section 17.10.120 (Variance).

E.     Appeals. Appeal procedures shall be as provided in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.040 Exempt Signs
The following sign types are expressly exempted from the permit requirements of this Chapter and Title but still must satisfy any and all other applicable City of Manteca permit requirements when necessary (e.g., building, electrical, plumbing, grading, encroachment). Any exception to the limitations for exempt signs listed herein shall require a Variance pursuant to Section 17.10.120 (Variance). However, consideration of the variance request shall not evaluate the message or graphic design of the sign.

A.    Exempt Signs without Limitations. The following signs are exempt from Sign Permit and City review requirements:

1.     All devices which are excluded from the definition of a sign as set forth in this Code.

2.     Official traffic signs or other municipal governmental signs, legal notices, advertisements prescribed by law and placed by governmental entities, and signs indicating the location of buried utility lines or any notice posted by a governmental officer in the scope of his or her duties.

3.     Direction, warning, or information signs or structures required or authorized by law, or by Federal, State, County, or City authority, including, but not limited to, traffic control signs (e.g., stop, yield), highway route number signs, and construction zone signs.

4.     Utility company signs identifying cables, conduits, danger, and so forth.

5.     Street address signs consistent with the City-adopted Building Code or relevant provisions of the City Municipal Code. Notwithstanding anything in this Section, street address signs may be illuminated and may contain reflective paint or material.

6.     Historical and/or memorial tablets and identification plaques installed by or on behalf of a recognized governmental historical agency.

7.     Time and temperature signs containing no advertising copy.

8.     Signs and advertising for the California State Lottery as authorized by California Government Code, Section 8880 et seq.

9.     Change of copy that does not alter the size, location, or illumination of a sign.

10.   Signs prohibiting trespassing or hunting.

B.     Exempt Signs with Limitations. The following signs are exempt from Sign Permits and as such do not require City review. However, they shall be consistent with the size, height, duration, and/or maximum number limitations listed.

1.     A-Frame Signs. Each commercial business location shall be permitted one A-frame sign per street frontage. The sign may have two faces, and shall not exceed four feet in height or a width of three feet. The sign shall be unlighted. A multiple-occupancy building shall constitute one business location for the purposes of determining the number of permitted signs. A frame signs shall not obscure or visually impair vehicular traffic and shall not be placed within a public right-of-way or on publicly owned property without first obtaining a Portable Sign Permit (see Section 17.54.100, Allowed Off-Site Signage).

2.     Permanent window signs (e.g., hanging on the interior of the window or stenciled on the inside or outside of the window) not exceeding four square feet per street frontage shall be permitted. Such signs should be encouraged to promote business identification, hours of operation, and address information. Such signs may not be illuminated.

3.     Construction signs not to exceed one sign per street frontage, a maximum of 50 square feet in area each, and a maximum height of 10 feet. Construction signs may not be illuminated. Such signs shall only be permitted during the period of actual construction after the building permit has been issued.

4.     Garage, yard, estate, and other home-based sale signs advertising the one-day sale of items from a garage, yard, estate, or other home-based sale. A maximum of four signs, each a maximum of six square feet, may be allowed. Such signs shall not be affixed to any utility pole or street sign pole.

5.     Real estate signs are allowed on private property out of any required clear visibility triangle, with the following limitations:

a.     For single-family residential property, one sign with a maximum sign area of 10 square feet (each side) and a maximum height of five feet, unless placed in a window, and shall be unlighted.

b.     For multi-family and commercial property, one on-site sign per street frontage. The sign may be attached flat against the building or freestanding to a maximum height of six feet. The sign shall not project above the eave line or top of the parapet of the building and shall be unlighted.

For unimproved acreage, one real estate sign shall be permitted per street frontage.

c.     Removal. All real estate signs must be removed not later than 15 days after the close of the transaction proposed by the sign.

6.     On-Site Directional Signs. Exit, entrance, or other on-site traffic directional signs are permitted. The maximum height of any directional sign shall be 36 inches, and the maximum size shall be 12 square feet. No advertising or message other than for traffic direction shall be displayed.

7.     Noncommercial signs on private property (e.g., political signs, fundraising signs for non-profit corporations and charitable organizations), each sign having a maximum size of 32 square feet. All signs exempted by this subsection shall be removed within seven days following an election/event.

8.     Gas pricing signs, as required by state law, which identify the brand, types, octane rating, etc., of gasoline for sale within the City, and in compliance with sign allowance in applicable zoning district. (Ord. 1557 §§ 1, 2, 2015; Ord. 1511 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.050 Prohibited Signs
It is unlawful to erect, and no permit shall be issued for, any of the following signs:

A.    Any sign not specifically in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

B.     Signs painted or mounted on roofs or placed above the roofline (except for mansard roofs).

C.     Animated signs or flashing signs, with the exception of time and temperature signs and electronic message signs permitted under a use permit as part of a Regional Recreation/Hospitality Center as defined in Section 17.100.040 (Sign Definitions).

D.    Pennants, banners, balloons, or other paraphernalia composed of paper, cloth, or other flexible material, except as otherwise permitted.

E.     Signs which rotate, move, reflect, blink, or incorporate elements that do so, except time and temperature signs and electronic reader signs.

F.     Signs placed on the public right-of-way or affixed to an element or structure on the public right-of-way, or located on a publicly owned tree, fence, or utility pole, or otherwise posted on public property, except where required by a governmental agency or permitted as part of kiosk sign program, or as provided in Section 17.54.100 (Allowed Off-Site Signage), or as provided in Chapter 17.56 (Signs on City Property).

G.    Inflatable balloon signs, including, but not limited to, individual balloons, balloon strings, and other inflatable objects made of a flexible material and inflated so as to be lighter than air.

H.    Signs affixed to vehicles where the primary purpose of the vehicle is advertising. This does not apply to signs maintained on vehicles when such advertising is incidental to the primary purpose for which the vehicle is being used (e.g., delivery service) or is required by state or federal law (e.g., contractor’s license number) as exempted in the definition of a sign. Signs included in this definition include, but are not limited to, cars parked showing signs or vehicles that drive around the city with the express intent of communicating a message displayed on the vehicle (e.g., “rolling billboards”).

I.      Signs attached to light standards, unless part of a Master Sign Program or Street Banner Program.

J.      Off-site signs, except as otherwise permitted, including those permitted with a portable sign permit, or under a use permit as part of a Regional Recreation/Hospitality Center, within the Public/Quasi-Public Zoning District, or City-controlled property pursuant to the provisions outlined in Chapter 17.56.

K.    On-site signs that identify an activity, product, or service no longer conducted or available at the site on which the sign is located.

L.     Pole signs.

M.    Abandoned signs.

N.    Signs on fences. (Ord. 1557 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1511 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.060 General Development, Maintenance, and Removal Provisions
A.    Construction of Signs. Every sign and all parts, portions, and materials thereof shall be manufactured, assembled, and erected in compliance with all applicable State, Federal, and City laws and regulations, including the City-adopted Building Code. All signs shall comply with the following criteria:

1.     All transformers, equipment, programmers, and other related items shall be screened and/or painted to match the building or shall be concealed within the sign.

2.     All permanent signs shall be constructed of quality, low-maintenance materials such as metal, concrete, natural stone, glass, and acrylics. Techniques shall be incorporated during construction to reduce fading and damage caused by exposure to sunlight or degradation due to other elements.

3.     All freestanding signs that incorporate lighting shall have underground utility service.

4.     All temporary signs, portable signs, and banners shall be made of a material designed to maintain an attractive appearance for as long as the sign is displayed.

B.     Maintenance of Signs. Every sign and all parts, portions, and materials thereof shall be maintained and kept in proper repair. The display surface of all signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from rust and corrosion. Any cracked, broken surfaces, malfunctioning lights, missing sign copy, or other non-maintained or damaged portions of a sign shall be repaired or replaced within 30 days following notification by the City. Noncompliance with such a request will constitute a nuisance condition and zoning violation and will be enforced as such.

C.     Determination and Measurement of Sign Area

1.     General Area Calculation. Generally, the area of a sign shall be measured as the overall length of the sign times the overall height of each segment of copy or logo exclusive of background, with the exception of those signs without a distinctive background (e.g., channel letters) see definition for Void Rule in Section 17.100.040. See Figure 17.54.060-1 (Sign Area).

FIGURE 17.54.060-1: SIGN AREA

 

Sign Area

 

2.     Awning or Canopy Signs. Sign copy which is applied to an awning or canopy shall be computed at 100 percent of the area within a single rectangle enveloping the sign copy.

3.     Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are to be computed as total height by the total length of the sign excluding framework (e.g., post, masonry column, or beam). The base of a monument sign is not part of the sign. See Figure 17.54.060-2 (Freestanding Sign Area). For double-faced (two-sided) freestanding signs, only one side of the sign shall be used to determine sign area.

 

FIGURE 17.54.060-2: FREESTANDING SIGN AREA



4.     Three-Dimensional Objects. Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional objects (e.g., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculptures, or statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall be measured at their maximum projection upon a vertical plane, as viewed from a position in the public right-of-way which produces the largest visual projection. See Figure 17.54.060-3 (Area of Three-Dimensional Objects).

FIGURE 17.54.060-3: AREA OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL OBJECTS

 



 

D.    Measurement of Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured from the uppermost part of the sign used in determining the area of the sign to the lowest elevation at the base of the sign.

E.     Setback and Spacing of Freestanding Signs

1.     The minimum setback distance for freestanding signs shall be measured from the property line. All freestanding signs shall be located outside of the present or future public right-of-way and any required clear visibility triangle.

2.     The minimum spacing distance between permanent freestanding signs, excluding on-site directory signs, should be 50 feet. The designated Approving Authority will review a proposed sign location on a case-by-case basis to ensure the sign is located outside the required clear visibility triangle and does not otherwise inhibit motorist safety.

F.     Sign Removal or Replacement. When a sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that support the sign shall also be removed. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the structure. This provision does not apply to routine maintenance. (Ord. 1557 § 4, 2015; Ord. 1511 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.070 Design Standards
The following criteria shall be utilized for permanent advertising displays and signs, and shall not be construed to govern the design of temporary signs.

A.    General Design Standards

1.     Architectural Style. Each sign shall be designed to be compatible with and relate to the architectural style of the main building or buildings upon the site where such sign is located. Signs located on commercial sites but in a predominantly residential area shall be unobtrusive and designed to be compatible with such residential area.

2.     Relationship to Buildings. Signs located upon a lot with one main building or several buildings shall be designed to incorporate at least one of the predominant visual elements of such building or buildings, such as the type of construction materials, color, or other design detail.

3.     Color. The color(s) of a sign should be harmonious and complementary to the colors of the building on or near which it is to be located. Fewer colors will generally produce the most attractive sign.

4.     Letter Style. The letter style to be used on a sign should be compatible with the architectural style of the building on or near which it is to be located. For example, simple block letters are generally most compatible with Spanish-style buildings. For those buildings that have been recently constructed and have no particular architectural style, simpler letter styles are desirable.

5.     Sign Materials. The goal of sign design is to maintain moderate, attractive, and compatible styling so as not to conflict or detract from the architectural character of the area. The choice of materials shall be left to the discretion of the applicant, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and the approval of the City.

6.     Relationship to Other Signs. Where there is more than one sign on a site or building, all permanent signs displaying a commercial message shall have designs that similarly treat or incorporate the following design elements to the extent feasible:

a.     Letter size and style of copy;

b.     Shape of total sign and related components;

c.     Type of construction materials;

d.     Sign/letter color and style of copy;

e.     Method used for supporting sign (e.g., wall or ground base); and

f.      Location.

7.     Sign Illumination. The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to minimize negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs:

a.     External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of an object other than the sign;

b.     The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will create glare or other negative impacts on residential properties in direct line of sight to the sign;

c.     Unless otherwise permitted by another provision of this Chapter, signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illumination devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color;

d.     Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or constructed as traffic control devices;

e.     Reflective-type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so that the face of the bulb or lamp is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property; and

f.      Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible and shall comply with Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (California Building Standards Code).

8.     The maximum coverage of copy allowed on a sign shall be 80 percent of the sign face.

B.     Design Standards for Special Sign Types

1.     Awning and Canopy Signs. Awning and canopy signs may be permitted only as an integral part of the awning or canopy to which they are attached or applied, as follows:

a.     Lettering shall be allowed on awning valances only and shall not exceed 18 inches in height. Logos, symbols, and graphics that do not include text may be allowed on the shed (slope) portion of an awning and shall not exceed 4 square feet in area for each awning. See Figure 17.54.070-1 (Awning and Canopy Sign).

FIGURE 17.54.070-1: AWNING AND CANOPY SIGN

 



 

b.     Lettering shall be located within the middle 70 percent of the valance area.

c.     Only permanent signs that are an integral part of the awning or architectural projection shall be allowed. Temporary signs shall not be placed on awnings.

d.     Awning signs shall only be allowed for first- and second-story occupancies.

e.     Awnings shall not be lighted from under the awning (backlit) so that the awning appears internally illuminated. Lighting directed downwards that does not illuminate the awning is allowed.

f.      Awnings shall be regularly cleaned and kept free of dust and visible defects.

g.     The style of the awning/canopy shall complement the architectural style of the building to which it is attached. Awnings should generally have a simple horizontal valance if located over rectangular or square window/door openings. Domed or barrel-shaped awnings are appropriate for buildings with arched window/door openings.

h.     Awnings and canopies shall be made of durable, long-lasting materials that minimize fading and tearing. Ideal materials are canvas and other tightly woven fabrics.

2.     Bracket Signs and Under-Canopy Signs

a.     Location. Blade or under-canopy signs shall be placed only on ground-floor façades, except for businesses located above the ground level with direct exterior pedestrian access.

b.     Height. The lowest point of a blade or under canopy sign shall be a minimum of 8 feet above grade.

c.     Projection. The sign may project a maximum of 4 feet from the building.

d.     Sign Structure. Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible with the design and scale of the sign.

e.     Encroachment. Blade or under-canopy signs may not encroach into the public right-of-way or be located above it, or into City-owned property except with an encroachment permit.

3.     Wall Signs

a.     Wall signs shall be compatible with the predominant visual architectural elements of the building façade.

b.     Wall signs shall be placed to establish façade rhythm, scale, and proportion where such elements are weak. For many existing buildings that have a monolithic or plain façade signs can establish or continue appropriate design rhythm, scale, and proportion.

c.     Wall signs shall utilize a consistent proportion of signage to building scale, such as 1/3 text to 2/3 wall area or 1/4 text to 3/4 wall area. See Figure 17.54.070-2 (Text Scale).

 

FIGURE 17.54.070-2: TEXT SCALE



d.     Wall sign raceways shall be concealed from public view (e.g., within the building wall or painted to match the exterior color of the building where the sign is located) or otherwise integrated with the design of the sign and building so as to not detract from the architectural character of the building.

e.     Direct and indirect lighting methods are allowed for wall signs, provided that they are not harsh or unnecessarily bright. Light shall either be directed down or in such a way that it does not cause light trespass or glare onto adjoining properties or public rights-of-way.

f.      Can signs are discouraged. Channel letters, reverse channel letters, and pushpin letters are preferred. Letters may not utilize gold-colored (or a shade of gold) trim cap.

g.     If a tenant’s signage on one façade comprises multiple elements (e.g., logo and text), the elements shall be located and scaled with relationship to each other.

4.     Freestanding Signs

a.     In an effort to promote full architectural integration of signs, voids between the sign face and the sign structure are prohibited. Either the sign face shall utilize the full width of the sign structure or coverings that are architecturally consistent with the rest of the sign shall be used to fill any voids.

b.     Materials and design for freestanding signs shall be complementary to the materials and design of the buildings for the related development. For example, if the façade of the building is made of brick or brick veneer, a complementary freestanding sign would also include brick.

c.     Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the sign equal to the area of the sign and proportionate to the height of the sign, consisting of groundcover, shrubs and/or trees. Landscaping shall be complementary to and designed in concert with the landscaping for the overall site. The design of the landscaping shall be such that natural growth will not obscure the sign from the public right-of-way. Said landscaping shall be in addition to the minimum landscaping standards for the particular use and for location.

d.     Freeway-oriented freestanding signs shall be “monumental-style”, the supporting structure a minimum width of the message area, and well-proportioned, height versus width, with a minimum of 50 percent of the supporting structure enclosed. Architectural elements such as columns, pilasters, cornices, trellises, and similar details shall be provided on the sides and top to frame the sign panel and add design interest. Said sign shall incorporate the text “Manteca” in the design.

5.     Monument Signs. Monument signs may be used in conjunction with other freestanding signs on sites 1 acre or more in size. On sites less than 1 acre in size, only monument signs shall be permitted or may be used in conjunction with a freeway-oriented freestanding sign. Monument signs shall comply with the setback and spacing standards for freestanding signs in Subsection 17.54.060(E).

6.     Changeable Copy Sign. These types of signs shall be considered to be the same as any other type of sign and shall be regulated based on their location; i.e., if located on a wall, they shall be deemed wall signs. The maximum allowed size for a changeable copy sign shall be 24 square feet per display face. The sign area shall count toward the maximum allowed sign area for the property. Such signs may be internally illuminated.

7.     Electronic Message Signs. Electronic message signs shall only be permitted under a Major Use Permit as part of a regional recreation/hospitality center use. The illumination level shall be regulated such that the intensity of the illumination is appropriate based on the level of lighting of the surrounding environment (e.g., illumination by the sun or moon during day, dusk, night time, and dawn) through the use of such means as light meters and programmed illumination regulation or LEDs that are designed to limit the spread of light.

8.     Projecting Sign. Projecting signs shall project no closer than 2 feet to the outside edge of the curb. Signs projecting more than two-thirds the distance to the curb shall be no lower (bottom edge of sign) than 12 feet above the sidewalk; signs projecting less than two-thirds the distance shall be no lower than 8 feet above the sidewalk.

9.     Window signs. Window signs may not exceed 50 percent of the total window area of any window. Further,

a.     Permanent window signs shall count toward the total sign area allowed; and

b.     Temporary window shall not count toward the total sign area allowed. (Ord. 2018-16 § 1; Ord. 1557 § 5, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.080 Allowed Permanent On-Site Sign Standards
A.    On-Site Signs Generally. Table 17.54.080-1 (Allowed Permanent On-Site Sign Standards) lists the development standards for all permanent on-site signs based on use type and Zoning District, as well as allowed sign type. As identified in Section 17.54.030 (Sign Requirements and Review Procedures), a building permit is required before any of the sign types listed herein are installed, erected, or otherwise established. Only those signs that may be permitted are listed. Regulations for temporary promotional on-site signs are listed in Table 17.54.090-1 (Temporary Sign Standards). Regulations for off-site signs are listed in Section 17.54.100 (Allowed Off-Site Signage). The following general rules/standards apply to permanent signs regulated in this Section.

B.     Illumination. Generally, any permanent on-site sign may be illuminated; however, signs located within residential Zoning Districts shall not be illuminated. Where illumination of a sign is allowed, such illumination may be achieved by any method that minimizes glare onto neighboring or abutting property, such as from behind the sign (e.g., light source behind the face of the sign, such as with the opaque, non-transparent face of channel letters; silhouette halo illumination behind letters) or by a low-level spotlight.

C.     Freestanding Sign Setback. All permanent freestanding on-site signs shall comply with the setback and spacing requirements of Subsection 17.54.060(E).

D.    Sign Area Allowance. Allowable sign area is either a set square footage per establishment or is based on a ratio of sign area to primary building frontage. Sign area is calculated as described in Subsection 17.54.060(C) (Determination and Measurement of Sign Area). Where a ratio is described, it applies up to the listed maximum. Where a ratio is prescribed to a specific building frontage, it shall be calculated using just the frontage length of that façade (e.g., rear façade, ratio applied to length of rear façade).

E.     Collective Sign Area. The total sign area allowed herein for each sign type may be distributed among the maximum number of signs permitted for that sign type. For example, the total allowed area for wall signs for a particular establishment may be distributed among the maximum number of wall signs allowed for that same establishment.

TABLE 17.54.080-1

ALLOWED PERMANENT ON-SITE SIGN STANDARDS

 

Sign Type

Maximum Number Permitted

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts

Permanent subdivision identification sign, freestanding sign

Monument or on fence or wall

2/entrance

25 sq. ft.

6 ft.

Multi-Family Residential Zoning Districts

Freestanding sign, project identification

Monument or on fence or wall

1/entrance

25 sq. ft.

6 ft.

Commercial Zoning Districts

Freestanding signs, generally

Monument sign
(site <1 acre)

1/entrance

25 sq. ft. per sign face3

6 ft.

Monument sign
(site >1 acre)

1/entrance

50 sq. ft. per sign face3

8 ft.

Pylon sign
(site >1 acre)

1 per 10 acres

100 sq. ft. per sign face3

20 ft.

Freestanding sign, freeway-oriented1

Pylon sign

1/site within 1,000 ft. of a state highway

500 sq. ft. per sign face3

75 ft.

Attached signs for building/tenants ≥5k sq. ft.

Wall sign

No maximum

2.5 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, max 200 sq. ft. per elevation

Roofline

Window sign

—

Attached signs for building/tenants <5k sq. ft.

Wall sign

No maximum

1.5 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, max 100 sq. ft. per elevation

Roofline

Window sign

—

Central Business District

Attached signs2

No maximum

2 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, no max.

Roofline

Industrial Zoning Districts

Attached signs for building/tenants >10k sq. ft.

Wall sign

No maximum

2.5 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, max 200 sq. ft. per elevation

Roofline

Window sign

—

Attached signs for building/tenants <10k sq. ft.

Wall sign

No maximum

1.5 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, max 100 sq. ft. per elevation

Roofline

Window sign

—

Freestanding signs, generally

Monument sign (site < 1 acre)

1/entrance

25 sq. ft. per sign face3

6 ft.

Monument sign (site > 1 acre)

1/entrance

50 sq. ft. per sign face3

8 ft.

Pylon sign (site > 1 acre)

1 per 10 acres

100 sq. ft. per sign face3

20 ft.

Open Space and Public/Quasi-Public Zoning Districts

Freestanding sign

Monument

1/entrance

25 sq. ft. per sign face3

10 ft.

Attached signs for building/tenants

Wall or window sign

No maximum

1.5 sq. ft./1 lineal ft. of primary building/tenant frontage, max 100 sq. ft. per elevation

Roofline

 

Notes:

1.      Requires the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.

2.      Establishments in the central business district are permitted no more than one of each of the following attached signs: awning, projecting, under-canopy, wall, or window.

3.      Maximum sign area allowance is based on a two-sided sign.

 

(Ord. O2018-16 § 1; Ord. 1577 § 6, 2015; Ord. 1511 § 4, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.090 Allowed Temporary On-Site Sign Standards
This Section describes standards for temporary promotional on-site signs. These signs require the issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit from the Community Development Director. Temporary signs may include, but are not limited to, commercial signs for grand openings, special product, sale, or event advertising. The development standards for temporary signs are listed in Table 17.54.090-1 (Temporary On-Site Sign Standards). The following general rules/standards apply to temporary promotional signs:

A.    Time Duration. Each sign shall be permitted for only a specific time as listed in Table 17.54.090-1 (Temporary Sign Standards).

B.     Illumination. Temporary signs may not be illuminated.

C.     Message. Temporary signs displaying a commercial message shall be limited to on-site signage only. Temporary off-site signage displaying a commercial message is prohibited; however, portable off-site signage displaying a commercial message is regulated under Section 17.54.100 (Allowed Off-Site Signage).

D.    Encroachment. Temporary promotional signs shall not encroach on or above the public right-of-way or be attached to utility poles.

 

TABLE 17.54.090-1

TEMPORARY ON-SITE SIGN STANDARDS

 

Use Type

Maximum Temporary Number

Maximum Area

Maximum Height

Minimum Setback from ROW1

Maximum Time Duration

Temporary subdivision signs located within subdivision boundaries

1/perimeter street frontage of the subdivision

50 sq. ft./ sign face

10 ft.

5 ft.

Completion of subdivision

Temporary promotional sign2

No max.

No max.

No max.

5 ft.

30 days each 3 months

Notes:

1.      Must be located outside of the clear visibility triangle.

2.      Includes banners, streamers, flag, or other similar signs otherwise prohibited when part of a special event or sale, including, but not limited to, clearance sales, outdoor fairs and sales, and grand openings.

 

(Ord. 1557 §§ 7, 8, 2015; Ord. 1511 §§ 5, 6, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.100 Allowed Off-Site Signage
A.    Subdivision Directional Sign. Temporary off-site subdivision directional signs are permitted, subject to the issuance of a Sign Permit and require conformance with the following development standards:

 

1.     Location. The sign shall be located outside of the clear visibility triangle and subject to the setback regulations of the associated Zoning District. The sign shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from another freestanding sign. It shall only be located on streets classified as major collector, arterial, or expressway under the General Plan.

2.     Height. The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet.

3.     Area. The maximum area of one face of the sign shall be 32 square feet.

4.     Number of Faces. Subdivision directional signs may have up to two faces.

5.     Illumination. Subdivision directional signs may not be illuminated.

B.     Portable Sign. Portable signs displaying a commercial message on a public sidewalk are permitted subject to the issuance of a Portable Sign Permit (including proof of liability insurance), and conformance with the following development standards.

1.     Location. The sign shall be located outside of any clear visibility triangle. The sign shall allow at least four feet of clear passage along the sidewalk in compliance with Federal and State standards for disabled access and shall be set back at least one foot from the face of the curb. The sign shall be placed to avoid obstructing access to the sidewalk from parked vehicles. The signs shall be located on sidewalks adjacent to the business being advertised and only within commercial zones. Signs shall not be located in landscaping islands or medians within the public right-of-way, and are only allowed if the business is not part of a shopping center, or office complex. In addition, flags may be placed in the “Flags Over Manteca” flag holes except on days specified by the “Flags Over Manteca” program.

2.     Height. The maximum height of the sign shall be four feet with the exception of flags having a maximum height of 15 feet.

3.     Width. The maximum width of the sign shall be three feet. The maximum width of a flag is two feet.

4.     Area. The maximum area of one face of a two-sided sign shall be 12 square feet. The maximum area of one face of a two-sided flag shall be 15 square feet.

5.     Number of Signs. One sign or one flag, per 50 linear feet of business frontage.

6.     Illumination. Portable signs shall not be illuminated.

7.     Time of Day. Portable signs shall be allowed during business hours.

C.     Human Sign. Human signs displaying a commercial message are permitted subject to the issuance of a Portable Sign Permit (including proof of liability insurance), and conformance with the following development standards.

1.     Location. Human signs shall not interfere with pedestrians, cyclists or vehicular traffic. Human signs shall not be located in areas required for clear visibility triangle at intersections or otherwise block motorist, cyclist or pedestrian view of traffic and/or control devices.

2.     Area. Signs worn, carried or held shall be no larger than 12 square feet.

3.     Number of Signs. One per business location.

4.     Time of Day. Human signs shall be allowed during the daytime, which is the period of time between sunrise and sunset.

5.     General. Human signs shall not utilize any type of illumination, animation, flashing, blinking, rotating light or mirrors. Human signs shall not shout or generate any noise that would disrupt traffic or endanger pedestrian or traffic safety. Bull horns or amplified sound are prohibited. (Ord. 1557 § 9, 2015; Ord. 1511 § 7, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.110 Murals
Murals may be placed on nonresidential buildings upon issuance of a building permit, provided the mural is noncommercial in nature. The area of the mural shall not be counted toward the total sign area of the site or building/establishment. Murals that display a commercial message shall be regulated as on-site commercial message wall signs under Section 17.54.080 (Allowed Permanent On-Site Sign Standards). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.115 Electronic Display Signs
A.    Permit. The City may allow for electronic display signs as part of a Regional Recreation/Hospitality Center (as defined in Section 17.100.040, Sign Definitions) under an approved Conditional Use Permit approved by the City Council after a recommendation by the Planning Commission.

B.     Standards

1.     If found by the City Council to aid in the generation of revenue and/or promote the City of Manteca in a positive manner, the City Council may permit the sign to include off-site advertising. Unless specifically permitted by the City Council, all related signage and advertisements included on the electronic display sign shall be on-site.

2.     The sign will be maintained in such a manner that the screen is in full functioning order at all times. If the screen does develop areas with no or improper illumination that affect the overall quality of the images, the screen shall be turned off until necessary repairs have been made. The Community Development Director has the authority to make this determination.

C.     Notice. A minimum 10-day notification and review period of the proposed electronic display sign must be completed prior to any required noticing for the use permit. Notification shall include the general design and detail of the proposed sign, map with the proposed location, and hours of operation. All comments received within the 10-day review period shall be forwarded to both the Planning Commission and City Council for consideration.

D.    Findings for Approval. The City Council may approve the Conditional Use Permit for Electronic Display Signs as part of a Regional Recreation/Hospitality Center if the City Council can make all of the following findings in addition to the findings for a Conditional Use Permit provided in Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit):

1.     The sign shall not violate any section of Chapter 17.54 (Signs) and shall meet all applicable requirements of the Outdoor Advertising Act, California Business and Professional Code, and any applicable codes relative to signage.

2.     The sign shall not exceed a height or sign area that would create a nuisance to neighboring properties, or to motorist.

3.     The sign shall be constructed of quality materials and of similar design and architecture as adjacent uses.

4.     The hours of operation, illumination of the sign and changing images on the electronic display will not create a nuisance to surrounding uses, the vicinity, or traffic. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.54.120 Removal of Signs, Nonconforming Signs, and Abandoned Signs
A.    Removal of Signs. Upon the closure and vacation of a business activity, the owner of said business or activity, or property owner, if different from business owner, shall, within 90 days, remove from public view wall signs and sign structures.

B.     Nonconforming Signs

1.     Except as otherwise provided by this Section, all existing signs which do not meet the requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed nonconforming signs and shall either be removed or brought into compliance with the City’s Municipal Code when a substantial alteration to the sign is made. For purposes of this Section, a “substantial alteration” shall be defined as repair or refurbishing of any sign that alters its physical dimensions or height, or replaces any integral component of the sign including, but not limited to, alterations to exterior cabinets, bases, or poles. In addition, substantial alteration shall also include any repair or refurbishing of a sign that exceeds 50 percent of the depreciated value of the sign and structure, but excepting customary maintenance. “Customary maintenance” shall be defined as any activity or work performed for the purpose of actively maintaining the sign in its existing approved physical configuration and size dimensions at the specific location approved by the City and includes the following:

a.     Repainting the sign text, cabinet, or other component of the sign without changing the advertising message; or

b.     Routine maintenance with substantially the same colors and materials.

2.     A nonconforming sign may remain in use provided no additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural alterations are made therein, except as permitted for customary maintenance in Subsection (B)(1) of this Section. If said nonconforming sign is destroyed or removed, every future sign at the same location must be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.

C.     Abandoned Signs. Abandoned signs may be abated by the City. For regulatory purposes, any factors indicating abandonment shall not begin occurring until 120 days after this Chapter first goes into effect. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.56 SIGNS ON CITY PROPERTY
17.56.010 Purpose and Proprietary Capacity
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the process and standards for establishing signage on City property. In adopting this Chapter, the City Council acts in its proprietary capacity as to City property, as defined herein, within the city. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the City’s general powers, property rights, Government Code Sections 65850(b), 38774, and 38775, Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq., and Penal Code Section 556 et seq. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.020 Intent as to Public Forum
The City declares its intent that not all City property shall function as a designated public forum, unless some specific portion of City property is designated herein as a public forum of one particular type. In such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly and only to the specified area and for the specified time period. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.030 General Prohibition
Unless specifically authorized by this Chapter, no signs may be displayed on City property by private parties. Any sign posted on City property in violation of this Chapter may be summarily removed by the City as a trespass and a public nuisance. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.040 Signs Allowed on City Property
The following signs may be erected and displayed on City property:

A.    Traffic control and traffic directional signs erected by the City or another governmental unit;

B.     Signs required by law;

C.     Signs erected and maintained by a public agency on public property;

D.    Safety and emergency signs, including identification and warning signs concerning potential hazards or hazardous conditions, utility installations, flood hazards or flood control facilities, emergency conditions or services, and crime and accident scene control;

E.     Signs allowable under Section 17.56.050 (Temporary Signs Displaying Noncommercial Message) of this Chapter;

 

F.     Signs authorized under Section 17.56.060 (Street Banner Program); and

G.    Signs authorized under Section 17.54.100 (Allowed Off-Site Signage). (Ord.. 1511 § 8, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.050 Temporary Signs Displaying Noncommercial Message
In areas qualifying as traditional public forums, private persons may display noncommercial message signs thereon, provided that such signs conform to all of the following:

A.    The signs must be personally held by a person or personally attended by one or more persons. “Personally attended” means that a person is physically present within 5 feet of the sign at all times.

B.     The signs may be displayed only during the time period of sunrise to sunset, except on occasions when the City Council and/or the Planning Commission are holding public hearings or meetings; on such occasions, the display period is extended to 30 minutes after such meeting is officially adjourned.

C.     The maximum aggregate size of all signs held or personally attended by a single person is 6 square feet. For purposes of this rule, apparel and other aspects of personal appearance do not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area.

D.    The maximum size of any one sign which is held or personally attended by two or more persons is 50 square feet, measured on one side only.

E.     The sign must have no more than two display faces and may not be inflatable or air-activated.

F.     In order to serve the City’s interests in traffic flow and safety, persons displaying signs under this Chapter may not stand in any vehicular traffic lane when a roadway is open for use by vehicles, and persons displaying signs on public sidewalks must give at least 5 feet width clearance for pedestrians to pass by. Persons holding signs may not obstruct the clear visibility triangle, as defined in this Title.

G.    The message substitution policy of the Sign Ordinance applies only to traditional public forum areas. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.060 Street Banner Program
This section is reserved for future use. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.56.070 Community Directional Signs
A.    In an effort to encourage, facilitate, and assist visitors and residents to find points of interest in Manteca, the City hereby establishes a directional wayfinding program known as the Community Directional Signs program.

B.     The design, location, and installation standards for Community Directional Signs shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

C.     Permission to erect a community directional sign on public streets or public right-of-way shall be obtained from the City Engineer or designee. The design and location of Community Directional Signs shall be consistent with the adopted Community Directional Signs program. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.58 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.58.010 Purpose and Intent
The performance standards established in this Chapter are intended to ensure that uses and activities shall occur in a manner to protect the public health and safety and that do not produce adverse impacts on surrounding properties nor on the community at large. The standards contained in this Chapter apply to all Zoning Districts. If necessary, the City will retain a professional expert or designated regulatory agency to assist in assessing possible impacts, and the applicant or business owner will pay any cost incurred. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.020 General Requirements
Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in a manner creating any dangerous injurious, noxious, fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, electrical, or other disturbance; glare, refuse, or wastes; or other substances, conditions, or elements which would adversely affect the surrounding area. All uses shall conform to the regulations of this Chapter in addition to the regulations set forth for the Zoning District in which the use is situated. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.030 Points of Measurement
Measurements necessary for enforcement of performance standards set forth in this Chapter shall be taken at the following points:

A.    Generally, at the lot line of the establishment or use; or

B.     In the M-1 and M-2 districts, at a point 500 feet from the exterior wall of the use or at the lot line of the use, whichever is less. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.040 Hazardous Materials
The following standards are intended to ensure that the use, handling, storage, and transportation of hazardous materials comply with all applicable state laws (Government Code Section 65850.2 and Health and Safety Code Section 25505, et seq.) and that appropriate information is reported to the Fire Department as the regulatory authority.

A.    Reporting Requirements. All businesses required by state law (Health and Safety Code, Section 6.95) to prepare hazardous materials release response plans and hazardous materials inventory statements shall, upon request, submit copies of these plans, including any revisions, to the Fire Department.

B.     Underground Storage. Underground storage of hazardous materials shall comply with all applicable requirements of state law (Health and Safety Code, Section 6.7, and Articles 679 and 680 of the California Fire Code, or as subsequently amended). Businesses that use underground storage tanks shall comply with the following procedures:

1.     Notify the Fire Department of any unauthorized release of hazardous materials prescribed by City, county, state, and federal regulations;

2.     Notify the Fire Department and the San Joaquin County Health Department of any proposed abandoning, closing, or ceasing operation of an underground storage tank and actions to be taken to dispose of any hazardous materials; and

3.     Submit copies of the closure plan to the Fire Department.

C.     Aboveground Storage. Aboveground storage tanks for hazardous materials and flammable and combustible materials may be allowed subject to the approval of the Fire Department.

D.    New Development. Structures adjacent to a commercial supply bulk transfer delivery system with at least 6-inch pipes shall be designed to accommodate a setback of at least 100 feet from that delivery system. The setback may be reduced if the Planning Director, with recommendation from the Fire Department, can make one or more of the following findings:

1.     The structure would be protected from the radiant heat of an explosion by berming or other physical barriers;

2.     A 100-foot setback would be impractical or unnecessary because of existing topography, streets, parcel lines, or easements; or

3.     A secondary containment system for petroleum pipelines and transition points shall be constructed. The design of the system shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Department.

E.     Notification Required. A subdivider of a development within 500 feet of a pipeline shall notify a new/potential owner before the time of purchase and the close of escrow of the location, size, and type of pipeline. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.050 Noise Standards
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:

1.     Establish standards to provide a high quality of life for all residents by ensuring a safe community, free from manmade and natural hazards;

2.     Implement goals and policies of the General Plan Noise Element;

3.     Provide community noise control regulation and standards that are consistent with or exceed the guidelines of the State Office of Noise Control and the standards adopted by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), or other government or regulatory agencies.

B.     Noise Standards. The maximum sound level generated by any use or activity as measured at the point of measurement as defined in Section 17.58.030 (Points of Measurement) shall not exceed the levels established in Table 17.58.050-1 (Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels) based on the use that is receiving the noise (e.g., residential use receiving noise generated by an industrial use).

 

TABLE 17.58.050-1

MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS

 

Receiving Land Use Category

Time Period

Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (Ldn/CNEL, dB)

Single-Family and Limited Multiple-Family

10 pm – 7 am

50

7 am – 10 pm

60

Multiple-Family, Public Institution, and Neighborhood Commercial

10 pm – 7 am

55

7 am – 10 pm

60

Medium and Heavy Commercial

10 pm – 7 am

60

7 am – 10 pm

65

Light Industrial

Anytime

70

Heavy Industrial

Anytime

75

 

C.     Calculation. Calculation. Exterior noise levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer meeting the American National Standards Institute’s standards S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment that will provide equivalent data. When measuring the noise level, the corrections provided in Table 17.58.050-2 (Noise Level Corrections) shall be applied.

 

TABLE 17.58.050-2

NOISE LEVEL CORRECTIONS

 

Category

Correction (decibels)

Daytime operation only (7 a.m. – 7 p.m.)

+5

Noise source operates less than

 

20% of any one-hour period

+5

5% of any one-hour period

+10

1% of any one-hour period

+15

Noise of impulsive character (e.g., hammering)

-5

Noise rising or falling in pitch or volume (e.g., hum, screech)

-5

 

D.    Exempt Activities. The following are not subject to the noise limitations of this Chapter.

1.     Emergency Exemption. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

2.     Warning Device. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety (e.g., police, fire and ambulance sirens, properly operating home and car burglar alarms, and train horns).

3.     Railroad Activities. The operation of locomotives, rail cars, and facilities by a railroad that is regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.

4.     State or Federal Preempted Activities. Any activity, to the extent the regulation of it has been preempted by state or federal law.

5.     Public health and safety activities, including, but not limited to: all transportation, flood control, and utility company maintenance and construction operation at any time on public rights-of-way, public property and those situations that may occur on private property deemed necessary to serve the best interest of the public and to protect the public’s health and well-being, including debris and limb removal, removal of damaged poles and vehicles, removal of downed wires, repair of traffic signals, repair of water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines, and sewers, restoration of electrical service, street sweeping, unplugging sewers, vacuuming catch basins, municipal well borehole drilling, municipal well casing installation. The regular testing of motorized equipment and pumps shall not be exempt.

6.     Solid Waste Collection. Noise sources associated with the authorized collection of solid waste (e.g., refuse and garbage).

7.     Maintenance of Residential Real Property. Noise sources associated with the minor maintenance of residential real property, provided the activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

8.     Construction activities when conducted as part of an approved Building Permit, except as prohibited in subsection (E)(1) (Prohibited Activities) of this section.

9.     Emergency Generators. Sound resulting from the operation of any stationary emergency generator in any zoning district shall be considered restoration of electrical service and are exempt from the sound rating values set forth in Table 17.58.050-1 (Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels). This exemption only applies when operated during power outages; provided however, the generator motor must be enclosed in a sound absorbing encasement and in no event shall the sound rating value of generators in any district exceed 76 dBA at 23 feet or 7 meters. Stationary emergency generators operating in all districts may be operated for testing purposes one time for a period not to exceed thirty minutes in any seven-day period. Testing of stationary emergency generators in all districts is permitted between the hours of 11:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

a.     For purposes of this subsection, stationary emergency generator means any stationary or nonportable internal combustion engine located at a facility or residential home/development that serves solely as a secondary source of mechanical or electrical power when the primary source is disrupted or discontinued during a period of emergency due to a situation beyond the control of the owner/operator of the facility or residential home/development. A stationary emergency generator shall operate only during emergency situations or for standard performance testing procedures as required by law or by the engine manufacturer. A stationary emergency generator that serves as an energy or power source in circumstances other than emergency situations or for standard testing, such as load shedding or peak shaving, shall not be considered a stationary emergency generator.

b.     Emergency situation is defined as loss of primary power due to power outage, on site disaster, area-wide natural disaster, or circumstances beyond the control of the owner/operator. Emergency situation shall not include power interruptions pursuant to an interruptible power service agreement, engine testing or scheduled maintenance.

E.     Prohibited Activities. The following acts shall be a violation of this Chapter.

1.     Construction Noise. Operating or causing the operation of tools or equipment on private property used in alteration, construction, demolition, drilling, or repair work daily between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so that the sound creates a noise disturbance across a residential property line, except for emergency work of public service utilities.

2.     Loading and Unloading Activities. Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects on private property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner to cause a noise disturbance.

3.     Sweepers and Associated Equipment. Operating or allowing the operation of sweepers or associated sweeping equipment (e.g., blowers) on private property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in, or adjacent to, a Residential Zoning District.

4.     Places of Public Entertainment. Operating or allowing to be operated, any loudspeaker, musical instrument, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment that exceed 95 dBA at any point normally occupied by a customer.

5.     Stationary Non-Emergency Signaling Devices. Sounding or allowing the sounding of an electronically amplified signal from a stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended for non-emergency purposes, from a private property for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period.

6.     Public Nuisance Noise. Public nuisance noise is noise that is generally not associated with a particular land use but creates a nuisance situation by reason of its being disturbing, excessive, or offensive. Examples would include excessively loud noise from alarms, animals, and fowl in nonagricultural districts, horns, musical instruments, stereos, tape or CD players, televisions, vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing, and similar noise as measured in Table 17.58.050-2 (Noise Level Corrections). (Ord. O2019-09 § 1; Ord. 1597 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.060 Odor, Particulate Matter, and Air Containment Standards
A.    Sources of odorous emissions, particulate matter, and air containment standards shall comply with the rules and regulations of the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District and the California Health and Safety Code.

B.     Noxious odorous emissions in a manner or quantity that is detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare are declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful, and shall be modified to prevent further emissions release, except for agricultural operations in compliance with this Title. No emission of odors shall be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean air at the points of measurement specified in Section 17.58.030 (Points of Measurement) of this Chapter. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.

C.     No dust or particulate matter shall be emitted that is detectable by a reasonable person without instruments.

D.    Exhaust air ducts shall be located or directed away from abutting residentially zoned properties. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.070 Vibration
Uses that generate vibrations that may be considered a public nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property shall be cushioned or isolated to prevent generation of vibrations. Uses shall be operated in compliance with the following provisions:

A.    No vibration shall be produced that is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at the points of measurement specified in Section 17.58.030 (Points of Measurement) of this Chapter, nor shall any vibration produced exceed 0.002g peak at up to 50 CPS frequency, measured at the point of measurement specified in Section 17.58.030 (Points of Measurement) of this Chapter, using either seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment. Vibrations occurring at higher than 50 CPS frequency of a periodic vibration shall not induce accelerations exceeding 0.001g. Single impulse periodic vibrations occurring at an average interval greater than five minutes shall not induce accelerations exceeding 0.01g.

B.     Uses, activities, and processes shall not generate vibrations that cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endanger the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents whose property abuts the property line of the parcel.

C.     Uses shall not generate ground vibration that interferes with the operations of equipment and facilities of adjoining parcels.

D.    Vibrations from temporary construction/demolition and vehicles that leave the subject parcel (e.g., trucks, trains, and aircraft) are exempt from the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.080 Heat
Heat emitted at any point shall not at any time cause a temperature increase on any property in excess of 10 degrees Fahrenheit, whether such change be in the air or on the ground, in a natural stream or lake, or in any structure on such adjacent property. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.090 Radioactivity or Electric Disturbance
No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.58.100 Liquid or Solid Wastes
No discharge of any matter shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage system, or stream or into the ground, except in accordance with standards approved by the state and county departments of health and local ordinances. There shall be no accumulation outdoors of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects, unless stored in closed containers. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

Article IV STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
Chapter 17.70 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
17.70.010 Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult-oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment or adult-oriented materials to their intended market. In addition, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.70.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to the establishment of any adult-oriented businesses as defined by Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions) in the city and shall be in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere within this Zoning Code. The establishment of any adult-oriented business shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of such a business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any adult-oriented use. Note that additional definitions relative to adult-oriented businesses are listed in Section 17.100.020 (Adult Business Definitions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.70.030 Permit Requirements
Adult-oriented businesses regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.70.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. These requirements are in addition to other permits of certificates required by law. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.70.040 Special Standards
Prior to the establishment of an adult-oriented business, the following requirements shall be met:

A.    Location Standards. For the purposes of this Chapter, all distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where said adult-oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of any lot or premises of uses specified in Section 17.70.040(A)(3), or to the nearest point of any building or structure used as part of the premises of any other adult-oriented business.

1.     Adult-oriented business shall be more than 300 feet from any area zoned for residential use.

2.     Adult-oriented business shall be more than 1,000 feet from any other adult entertainment business located inside or outside of city limits.

3.     Adult-oriented business shall be more than 500 feet from any public or private school, day care, park, playground, library, museum, government office, or assembly use.

B.     In any adult theater, the entire interior of the premises where the pictures are to be viewed shall be visible upon entrance to such premises; in addition, no viewing booths or areas shall be partially or fully enclosed or concealed.

C.     No person shall place, maintain, display, or exhibit any material in a manner which exposes to public view photographs or illustrations of specified sexual activities or of poses which emphasize or direct the viewer’s attention to specified anatomical areas. As used herein, exposes to public view means exposes to the view of persons outside the building on which said material is placed, maintained, or displayed.

D.    Adult-oriented businesses shall be operated consistent with the requirements of Chapter 9.08 (Adult Entertainment) of this Municipal Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.72 DENSITY BONUS AND OTHER INCENTIVES
17.72.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low, low, and moderate income, special needs, and senior households in accordance with Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. In enacting this Chapter, it is the intent of the City Council to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan Housing Element. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.020 Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses
The City of Manteca shall grant one density bonus, with concessions or incentives, as specified in Section 17.72.040 (Number and Types of Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses Allowed), when the applicant for the housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this Chapter, that will contain at least one of the following:

A.    Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower-income households;

B.     Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households;

C.     A senior citizen housing development or age-restricted mobile home park; or

D.    Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.030 General Provisions for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses
The following general provisions apply to the application and determination of all incentives and bonuses:

A.    Rounding. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number, except that the percentage of total units proposed to qualify the development for a density bonus shall not be rounded up. For example, for a 200-unit project that proposes 21 lower-income units (or 10.5%), the allowed density bonus would be based on 10% lower-income units, not 11%.

B.     Relation to General Plan, Zoning. The granting of a density bonus, or a concession or incentive, shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan Amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

C.     Density Bonus Excluded in Calculation. The density bonus shall not be included when calculating the total number of housing units that qualifies the housing development for a density bonus.

D.    Parking. Upon request by the applicant, the City shall not require that a housing development meeting the requirements of Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses) provide a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds the following:

1.     Zero (studio) to one bedroom: one on-site parking space per unit.

2.     Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces per unit.

3.     Four or more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces per unit.

If the total of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this Subsection, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

E.     Waived or Reduced Development Standards

1.     The City shall not apply any development standard that would have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the requirements of Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses) at the densities or with the incentives or concessions permitted by this Chapter.

2.     An applicant may submit to the City a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards, when standards would have the effect of physically precluding the proposed development, and may request a meeting with the City. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards if:

a.     The waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the California Government Code, upon health and safety or the physical environment and for which the City determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact; or

b.     This would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

c.     The waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law.

3.     A proposed waiver or reduction of development standards shall neither reduce nor increase the number of allowable incentives or concessions under Section 17.72.040 (Number and Types of Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses Allowed).

F.     Multiple Zoning Districts. If the site of a development proposal is located in two or more Zoning Districts, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development is the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the Zoning Districts based on the site acreage within each Zoning District. The permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed within the development without regard to the zone boundaries.

G.    Affordable Housing Requirements. For projects subject to Chapter 17.32 (Affordable Housing Requirements) of this Title, the affordable housing units required by that Chapter may be counted toward the affordable units required to qualify for a density bonus per Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses).

H.    Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the City to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development.

I.      Agreement Required

1.     Prior to the award of a density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City to ensure the continued affordability of all target units.

2.     For all target units, the agreement shall specify the household-income classification, number, location, size, and construction scheduling and shall require target units in a project and phases of a project to be constructed concurrently with the construction of non-target units. The agreement shall include such other provisions as necessary to establish compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

J.      Reports. The applicant shall submit financial or other reports along with the application for the project to establish compliance with this Chapter. The City may retain a consultant to review any financial report (pro forma). The cost of the consultant shall be borne by the applicant; except if the applicant is a nonprofit organization, the cost of the consultant may be paid by the City upon prior approval of the City Council.

K.    CEQA Review. Any residential development that qualifies for a density bonus shall not be exempt from compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.040 Number and Types of Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses Allowed
A.    General Project Density Bonus. A housing development that satisfies the eligibility requirements in Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses) of this Chapter shall be entitled to the following density bonus:

1.     For developments providing 10 percent lower-income target units, the City shall provide a 20 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application, plus a 1.5 percent supplemental increase over that base for every 1 percent increase in low-income target units above 10 percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is 35 percent.

2.     For developments providing 5 percent very low-income target units, the City shall provide a 20 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application, plus a 2.5 percent supplemental increase over that base for every 1 percent increase in very low-income target units above 5 percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is 35 percent.

3.     For senior citizen housing developments, a flat 20 percent of the number of senior units.

4.     For common interest developments providing 10 percent moderate-income target units, the City shall provide a 5 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density as of the date of application, plus a 1 percent increase in moderate-income units above 10 percent. The maximum density bonus allowed including supplemental increases is 35 percent.

B.     Number of Incentives or Concessions. In addition to the eligible density bonus percentage described in this Section, an applicant may request specific incentives or concessions in connection with its application for a density bonus as follows:

1.     One incentive or concession for projects that include at least 10 percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least 5 percent for very low-income households, or at least 10 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

2.     Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 20 percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least 10 percent for very low-income households, or at least 20 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

3.     Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 30 percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least 15 percent for very low-income households, or at least 30 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

4.     The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless it makes a written finding of either of the following:

a.     The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in subdivision (c).

b.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

c.     The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.

C.     Available Incentives and Concessions. The following incentives and concessions are available for compliance with this Chapter:

1.     A reduction in the site development standards or a modification of Zoning Code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 Section 18907 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in ratio of vehicle parking spaces that would otherwise be required and that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

2.     Approval of mixed-use development in conjunction with the housing development if the nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and surrounding existing development in the area in which the housing development will be located.

3.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or that the City determines that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

4.     Priority processing of a housing development that provides income-restricted units.

D.    Additional Density Bonus and Incentives and Concessions for Donation of Land to the City. The following incentives and concessions are available for compliance with this Chapter:

1.     When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City and agrees to include a minimum of 10 percent of the total units before the density bonus for very low-income households, the applicant shall be entitled to a 15 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density, plus a 1 percent supplemental increase for each additional percentage of very low-income units to a maximum density bonus of 35 percent for the entire development.

2.     The density bonus provided in this subsection shall be in addition to any other density bonus provided by this Chapter up to a maximum combined density bonus of 35 percent.

3.     The applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this subsection if all of the following conditions are met:

a.     The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

b.     The developable acreage and zoning designation of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than 10 percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

c.     The transferred land is at least 1 acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units, has the appropriate General Plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 65583.2 of Government Code, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

d.     The transferred land shall have all of the entitlements and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land, not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application, except that the local government may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision (i) of Section 65583.2 of Government Code if the design is not reviewed by the local government prior to the time of transfer.

e.     The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with the requirements of this Chapter, which shall be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer.

f.      The land is transferred to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City.

g.     The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the City agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

h.     A proposed source of funding for the very low-income units shall be identified no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.

4.     Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the City to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development.

E.     Additional Density Bonus and Incentives and Concessions for Development of Child Care Facility. The following density bonus incentives and concessions are available for compliance with this Chapter:

1.     Housing developments meeting the requirements of Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses) and including a child-care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development shall receive either of the following:

a.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square footage in the child-care facility.

b.     An additional incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child-care facility.

2.     The City shall require the following as conditions of approving the housing development:

a.     The child-care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable, pursuant to Subdivision (c) of Section 65915 of the Government Code; and

b.     Of the children who attend the child-care facility, the children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or persons or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of target units that are required pursuant to Section 17.72.020 (Eligibility for Incentives and Concessions and Density Bonuses).

3.     Notwithstanding any other requirements of this Section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a child-care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child-care facilities.

F.     Condominium Conversion Incentives for Low-Income Housing Development. The following incentives and concessions are available for compliance with this Chapter:

1.     An applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project may submit to the City a preliminary proposal pursuant to this Section prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map approvals. The City shall, within 90 days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which it will comply with this Section.

2.     When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to the following, the City shall grant either a density bonus of 25 percent over the number of apartments (to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion) or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value.

a.     Provide at least 33 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income, or provide at least 15 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower-income households; and

b.     Agree to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the City.

3.     For purposes of this Subsection, “other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the City to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the City might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval.

4.     Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to require the City to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.

5.     An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this subsection if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentive was previously provided. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.050 Location of Density Bonus Units
As required by state law, the location of density bonus units within the housing development may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the target units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development and when feasible shall contain, on average, the same number of bedrooms as the non-target units in the development, and shall be compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials, and quality finish. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.060 Continued Availability
A.    In a housing development providing low- or very low-income target units to qualify for a density bonus, the target units must remain restricted to low- or very low-income households for a minimum of 30 years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official, or longer if required by the project financing.

B.     In the case of a common interest housing development providing moderate-income target units to qualify for a density bonus, the initial occupant of the target unit must be a person or family of moderate income. Upon resale, the seller of the target units shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation, the City shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the California Health and Safety Code that promote homeownership. The City’s “proportionate share” shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sale price to the moderate-income household was less than the fair market value of the home at the time of the initial sale. The local City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

C.     Where there is a direct financial contribution to a housing development pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the City shall assure continued availability for low- and moderate-income units for 30 years. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.72.070 Process for Approval or Denial
A.    Process for Approval. The density bonus and incentive(s) and concession(s) request shall be considered in conjunction with any necessary development entitlements for the project. The designated Approving Authority for density bonuses, incentives, and concessions shall be the City Council. In approving the density bonus and any related incentives or concessions, the City and applicant shall enter into a density bonus agreement.

B.     Approval of Density Bonus Required. The City shall grant the density bonus requested by the applicant provided it is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and state law.

C.     Approval of Incentives or Concessions Required Unless Denial Findings Made. The City shall grant the incentive(s) and concession(s) requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following:

1.     The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rent for the target units.

2.     The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the California Government Code, upon public health and safety or physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which the City determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

3.     The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.74 DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
17.74.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for drive-in and drive-through businesses to address vehicle circulation, pedestrian access and circulation, and noise. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.74.020 Applicability
The regulations contained in this Chapter shall apply to all new drive-in and drive-through sales and service facilities as defined in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions) and shall be in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere within this Zoning Code (e.g., lighting). Drive-in and drive-through sales and service facilities shall only be authorized in conjunction with the permit requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.74.030 Permit Requirements
Pursuant to Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards), a Minor Use Permit is required for all drive-in and drive-through sales and services. The Minor Use Permit process is outlined in Section 17.10.070 (Minor Use Permit). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.74.040 Development and Design Standards
The following standards shall be the minimum requirements for all drive-in and drive-through sales and service facilities. Modifications to these provisions may be considered in conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit application.

A.    Drive Aisles. The minimum standards for drive-through and remote teller aisles are as follows:

1.     On Curves. Aisles shall have a minimum 10-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum 12-foot width.

2.     On Straight Sections. Aisles shall have a minimum 11-foot minimum width on straight sections.

3.     Aisles shall provide at least 180 feet of stacking space for each facility, as measured from the service window or unit to the entry point into the drive-up lane. Non-food and/or non-beverage businesses may reduce the stacking space to a minimum of 60 feet. Exceptions may be granted by the designated Approving Authority when an applicant demonstrates that the required stacking space is unnecessary.

4.     Aisle entrances and exits shall be at least 25 feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way, measured at the closest intersecting curbs, and at least 25 feet from the curb cut on an adjacent property. When an aisle encroaches into the front yard and side street setbacks, 25 feet of landscaping shall be provided with at least 10 feet of landscaping between the aisle and right-of-way. Exceptions may be granted by the designated Approving Authority when aisle pullout spaces are provided.

5.     Aisles shall be separated from the site’s ingress and egress routes or access to a parking space.

6.     Landscaping of Drive-Through Aisles. Landscaping of drive-through aisles shall be consistent with the requirements of Section 17.48.050 (Design Requirements for Specific Types of Landscaping) for screening for drive-through aisles.

B.     Pedestrian Access and Crossings. Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-through aisles, but where they do the walkways shall have clear visibility and shall be delineated by textured and colored paving and shall be clearly signed to alert vehicles in the drive-through aisles.

C.     Parking. Drive-up windows, remote tellers, and drive-through aisles shall be designed and constructed to be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.52 (Parking). The placement of drive-through aisles shall not be considered as justification for reducing the number of parking spaces which are otherwise required.

D.    Noise. Drive-up windows and their order stations with amplified sound shall be 300 feet from residential structures. Drive-up windows or remote tellers without amplified sound may reduce the separation distance to a minimum of 75 feet from residential structures. These minimum separation standards may be reduced where an applicant produces a noise analysis by a qualified acoustical professional to demonstrate that the proposed noise source will meet all of the City’s adopted noise standards for nearby residences.

E.     Signs. Signage for drive-up windows and remote tellers shall be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.74.050 Required Findings
In addition to standard Conditional Use Permit findings, all of the special findings below shall be made in order for the designated Approving Authority to approve a Conditional Use Permit for drive-in or drive-through sales and service facilities.

A.    The design and location of the facility and lane will not contribute to increased congestion on public or private streets adjacent to the subject property.

B.     The design and location of the facility and lane will not impede access to or exit from the parking lot serving the facility nor impair normal circulation within the parking lot.

C.     The design and location of the facility will not create a nuisance for adjoining properties. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.76 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
17.76.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing the provision of emergency housing for vulnerable members of the community while protecting and upholding the general public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1558 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.76.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to the establishment and operation of emergency shelters, as defined by Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions), in the City. (Ord. 1558 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.76.030 Permit Requirements
Emergency shelters regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.76.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law. (Ord. 1558 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.76.040 Special Standards
Prior to the establishment of an emergency shelter, the following requirements shall be met:

A.    Outdoor Activities. All functions associated with the shelter, except for children’s play areas, outdoor recreation areas, parking, and outdoor waiting, must take place within the building(s) proposed to house the shelter. Adequate facilities shall be provided for any clients waiting outdoors, if any. Such facilities shall include, but are not limited to, benches or other shaded seating areas. Such areas shall not be in the public right-of-way, must be physically separated from the public right-of-way, and must be large enough to accommodate the expected number of clients.

B.     Physical Characteristics.

1.     The maximum number of beds for emergency housing shall be 100 unless a Conditional Use Permit is applied for and approved.

2.     The maximum number of beds does not apply in situations of City-designated or statewide designated disasters or catastrophic conditions.

3.     Smoke detectors, approved by the Fire Department, must be provided in all sleeping and food preparation areas.

4.     The facility shall have adequate private living space, shower and toilet facilities, and secure storage areas for its intended residents.

5.     The size of an emergency facility shall be in character with the surrounding neighborhood.

6.     The facility shall have at least one bedroom that has 120 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have an area not less than 70 square feet. When more than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two.

C.     Operational Standards

1.     Emergency shelter facilities shall comply with all federal and state licensing requirements.

2.     Emergency shelter facilities shall comply with all applicable Uniform Building and Fire Codes, including maximum occupancy restrictions.

3.     If the facility is proposed for location in an area developed as a residential area, all intake and screening shall be conducted off-site.

4.     If a program includes a drug or alcohol abuse counseling component, appropriate state and/or federal licensing shall be required.

5.     The program shall provide accommodations appropriate for a minimum stay of 28 days and a maximum of 180 days per client/family.

6.     The program shall identify a transportation system that will provide its clients with a reasonable level of mobility including, but not limited to, access to social services, housing, and employment opportunities.

7.     Emergency shelters shall provide specific mechanisms for residents to contact social services.

8.     The program shall include clear and acceptable arrangements for facility residents, such as on-site meal preparation or food provision or disbursement.

9.     The program, where applicable, shall provide child-care services and ensure that school-aged children are enrolled in school during their stay at the facility.

10.   The emergency shelter provider shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents.

11.   Shelters may establish written expectations of residents—behavioral, medical, and religious, etc. Expectations of residents will be available to each resident at entry to the shelter and to the public (upon request).

12.   Shelters shall have infection control policies in accordance with guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control covering, but not necessarily limited to, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, and tuberculosis.

13.   Domestic violence shelters shall maintain a record of clients and visitors at all times. Clients will have immediate 24-hour access to shelter staff, and no walk-in services shall be provided at any time in the safe house itself.

14.   Emergency shelters shall provide on-site management and support staff at all times during shelter use.

15.   A management plan shall be submitted for approval by the Community Development Director. Such plan shall address all issues identified by the Community Development Director including, but not limited to, the following:

a.     On-site circulation;

b.     Program for client supervision and staffing procedures;

c.     Security provisions;

d.     Client services offered on-site; and

e.     Measures to address compatibility with surrounding uses. (Ord. 1558 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.78 HOME OCCUPATIONS
17.78.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations to allow limited business activity to occur at residences where the business activity is clearly incidental to the primary residential use and will not change the neighborhood’s residential character or integrity. Regulations in this Chapter are intended to reduce impacts of home occupations to the degree that its effects on the neighborhood are not detectable from normal and usual residential activity. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.78.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to all home occupations, as defined by Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions), in the City. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.78.030 Permit Requirements
Home occupations regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.78.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter as determined through administrative Zoning Conformance. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.78.040 Special Standards
In general, a home occupation shall be located and conducted such that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would be unaware of its presence. All home occupations shall continuously meet the following regulations in addition to any conditions imposed by the business license for home occupation issued by the City. Prior to the establishment of any home occupation, the following requirements must be met:

A.    Occupancy by Operator. The residence where the home occupation is located shall be the primary residence for the operator of the home occupation.

B.     Business License. A business license from the City is required for any home occupation consistent with the requirements of this Municipal Code.

C.     Advertising and Display. Signs pertaining to home occupations shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property). There shall be no display of products produced by occupants of the dwelling which are visible in any manner from the outside of the dwelling unit.

D.    Number of Home Occupations. One home occupation is allowed at a home where customers may visit the business. Otherwise, there is a limit of one additional home occupation for the residence where no customers may visit the business.

E.     On-Site Sales. The home occupation shall not involve sale of merchandise other than that produced on the premises (e.g., artist’s originals or products individually made to order), or directly related to and incidental to the services offered. Products which are not produced on the premises may be constructed on-site, using equipment normally found in a residence; however, these products may only be sold off-site at a permitted commercial location.

F.     Primary Residential Use. The use of the residential dwelling for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes.

G.    Operation and Off-Site Effects. No process shall be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, or welfare. The home occupation shall produce no evidence of its existence upon or beyond the premises such as external alterations creating nonresidential or unsightly appearance of a structure, noise, smoke, fumes, odors, light, electrical interference, dust, glare, liquid or solid waste, or vibrations. Noise levels shall comply with the City’s Noise Ordinance. There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes.

H.    Visitors and Customers. Generally, business visitors and customers of the home occupation are prohibited from visiting the residence. However, this provision does not apply to home occupations of an educational nature, including, but not limited to, tutoring, music instruction, swimming lessons, and art. Such uses are limited to not more than one business visitor per hour and no more than one at any given time.

I.      Storage and Waste Materials. There shall be no outside storage of material, equipment, products, or supplies. Hazardous materials may only be stored in amounts below the thresholds as established by the local Fire Department which do not require any special permits or licenses. The home occupation shall dispose of all waste materials or byproducts on a regular, timely basis in conformance with applicable garbage collection, fire protection, and public health regulations.

J.      Structure. The home occupation shall be confined completely within a legal structure and shall not occupy more than one room, or the equivalent of 25 percent of the floor area of a dwelling, whichever is greater, or 200 square feet of a permitted accessory building. No internal or external alterations for the home occupation shall be made to the dwelling unit that are not customarily found in or to serve residents. Conversion or alteration of a portion of the interior of the residence, garage, or accessory structure that does not result in a loss of off-street parking or adversely alter the exterior appearance of the structure may be allowed through approval of appropriate entitlements and issuance of a building permit.

K.    Traffic, Vehicles, and Deliveries. The home occupations shall not generate deliveries, pedestrian, or vehicular traffic beyond that which is normal in a residential district. No vehicles not normally found or parked for extended periods of time in a residential area shall be located at a home occupation, including, but not limited to, tool trucks, dump trucks, semis, and vehicles for hire (e.g., taxicab, limousine, pedicab).

L.     The Approving Authority may limit the length of time in order to effect periodic review of the home occupation operations or establish reasonable conditions on the operation of any home occupation to meet the intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.78.050 Permit Revocation
A.    Upon failure to comply with the home occupation regulations of this Chapter, the Community Development Director (or designee) may after notice revoke the home occupation approval and/or business license. Such revocation may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the appeal procedure provided in Section 17.08.070 (Appeals) of this Title.

B.     Violation of City ordinances, including any conditions imposed upon the home occupation, shall be investigated by the Community Development Director. If the use is found not to be in full compliance with the Zoning Code or conditions of approval, the Community Development Director shall have cause to suspend or revoke the home occupation or amend operational conditions.

C.     Once a home occupation has been revoked, continued practice of the home occupation at that location is no longer permitted, and subsequent applications shall not be filed within one year from the date of revocation. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.80 OUTDOOR SALES, DISPLAY, STORAGE, AND SEATING
17.80.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate permanent and temporary outdoor sales, display, and storage, and permanent outdoor seating uses. Regulations herein are intended to encourage outdoor displays and activities that are compatible with associated and nearby uses and do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle circulation or create an unsightly appearance of unrestricted clutter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.80.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to the establishment and operation of any permanent and temporary outdoor sales, display, and storage, and permanent outdoor seating as defined by Section 17.100.060 (Universal Definitions) within the city. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.80.030 Permit Requirements
The following outdoor activities shall be subject to the permit requirements as listed below.

A.    Permanent Outdoor Display and Sales. Permanent outdoor displays and sales are subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.80.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. When identified as part of the initial permit (e.g., Site Plan and Design Review, Use Permit), outdoor displays and sales shall be allowed; otherwise, administrative Zoning Conformance shall be required. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

B.     Temporary Outdoor Display and Sales

1.     Temporary outdoor display and sales are permitted upon issuance of a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses) and Section 17.10.080 (Temporary Use Permit), and shall be subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.80.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

2.     Exempt from Permit. Garage sales  shall be exempt from the requirement for a Temporary Use Permit, except for provisions in Section 17.84.050 (Exemptions).

C.     Permanent Outdoor Storage. Permanent outdoor storage subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.80.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. When identified as part of the initial permit (e.g., Site Plan and Design Review, Use Permit), outdoor storage shall be allowed; otherwise, administrative Zoning Conformance shall be required. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

D.    Temporary Outdoor Storage. Temporary outdoor storage shall require the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses) and Section 17.10.080 (Temporary Use Permit). Temporary outdoor storage shall be subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.80.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

1.     Exempt from Permit. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the requirement for a Temporary Use Permit:

a.     Storage of construction materials and equipment as part of an active construction site, provided a valid building permit or improvement permit is in effect and the materials and equipment are stored on the construction site pursuant to approved permit(s).

b.     Emergency facilities to accommodate emergency public health and safety needs and activities, compliant with the provisions of Chapter 17.76 (Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities).

E.     Outdoor Sidewalk Seating

1.     Permanent outdoor seating is subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.80.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter. When identified as part of the initial permit (e.g., Site Plan and Design Review, Use Permit), outdoor storage shall be allowed; otherwise, administrative Zoning Conformance shall be required. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law. Outdoor seating shall be subject to the following required findings for approval.

2.     Required Findings for Approval of Outdoor Seating. The following findings must be made prior to approval of permanent outdoor seating.

a.     The proposed outdoor seating area does not interfere with pedestrian mobility within designated pathways (e.g., sidewalk) or reduce the width of pathways to an amount less than that required under the Americans with Disabilities Act and the City-adopted Building Code;

b.     The proposed outdoor seating area does not interfere with access of public employees and utility workers to meters, fire hydrants, or other public utilities and facilities in the right-of-way; or

c.     The proposed outdoor seating area does not block or obstruct the view of necessary authorized traffic devices. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.80.040 Special Standards
A.    General Development Standards. The following development standards apply to all permanent and temporary outdoor display, sales, and storage activities, and all permanent outdoor seating:

1.     Location. Outdoor activities shall not be located within any public right-of-way (unless an Encroachment Permit has been issued), in required parking spaces or within designed vehicle drive aisles, or within required landscape planter areas. Outdoor activities may also not disrupt or impede pedestrian paths (pathways that meet the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) sidewalk width requirements of 4 feet) and enhanced pedestrian paths (pathways that exceed the ADA sidewalk width requirement and include amenities (e.g., seating, trash receptacles, and drinking fountains) or any additional requirements as listed in the Uniform Building Code).

2.     Hours of Operation. Except as otherwise provided, hours of operation for outdoor activities shall be consistent with those for the corresponding primary use.

3.     Noise. Any noise generated by the outdoor activity shall be consistent with the City’s Noise Ordinance.

4.     Signs. No additional business identification or advertising signs for the outdoor activity may be permitted above the maximum allowable sign area for the corresponding primary use as established in Chapter 17.54 (Signs on Private Property), except when the outdoor activity is the primary use (e.g., Christmas tree lot).

5.     Maintenance. Outdoor activity areas shall be kept free of garbage and other debris.

6.     Sidewalk Clearance. All outdoor activity areas shall leave a minimum horizontal clear space of 6 feet, or such greater amount of clear space as the Public Works Division finds necessary to protect and enhance pedestrian and vehicle traffic for public use in the sidewalk area, as that space is determined by the City Engineer or his/her designee.

B.     Standards for Outdoor Display and Sales. The following development standards shall apply to all permanent and temporary outdoor display and sales activities:

1.     Associated With the Primary Use. All outdoor display and sales activities shall be associated with the primary use of the property. Only those goods and services associated with the primary use may be stored, sold, or displayed. All outdoor display and sales activities that are independent of the primary use shall be considered their own primary use and regulated as such (e.g., seasonal sales as a temporary use requiring a Temporary Use Permit).

2.     Maximum Area. Unless otherwise approved in conjunction with development permits, the area used for permanent outdoor display and sales of materials shall not exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of the corresponding commercial building. Vehicle and equipment sales and rentals (e.g., automobile, boat, RV, construction equipment) are exempt from this limitation, provided storage and display is limited to vehicles offered for sale or rental only.

3.     Parking. Parking for permanent outdoor display and sales shall be provided as required for the primary use in Chapter 17.52 (Parking).

4.     Time Limit for Temporary Activities. See the provisions of Chapter 17.84 (Temporary Uses) for duration and permit requirements for temporary promotional sales.

C.     Standards for Outdoor Storage. The following development standards shall apply to all permanent and temporary outdoor storage activities:

1.     Location. Outdoor storage may not be located within any required front or street side yard for the underlying Zoning District within which the activity is located.

2.     Height Limitation. The height of stacked materials and goods shall be no greater than that of any building, wall, fence, or gate enclosing the storage area, unless specifically stated as a development standard associated with a use.

3.     Screening. Screening of outdoor storage shall be consistent with Section 17.46.070 (Special Fence and Wall Requirements).

4.     Parking. Parking for permanent outdoor storage shall be provided as required in Chapter 17.52 (Parking).

D.    Standards for Outdoor Seating. The following development standards shall apply to all permanent outdoor seating:

1.     Outdoor seating areas shall not extend into a continuous through pedestrian zone of less than 6 feet in width and shall not obstruct pedestrian and wheelchair access.

2.     Permit Posted. A permit approving the outdoor seating, or a copy thereof, shall be posted in plain view within the establishment for which the permit has been issued.

3.     Any authorized outdoor seating shall be subject to additional taxes, permits, or fees as required by law.

4.     Permittee’s Liability. The permittee explicitly agrees to hold the City, its officers, and employees harmless from any liability, claims, suits, or actions for any and all damages alleged to have been suffered by any person or property by reason of the permittee’s installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of outdoor seating.

5.     Permittee to Ensure Maintenance. The permittee shall be responsible for, and exercise reasonable care in, the inspection, maintenance, and cleanliness of the area affected by the outdoor seating, including any design requirements hereafter enacted, from the building frontage to the curb.

6.     Permittee to Ensure Compliance. The permittee shall restrict the outdoor seating to the approved location and ensure compliance with all applicable laws including laws against blocking the public right-of-way, health and safety laws, public cleanliness laws, and laws regulating sale and public consumption of alcohol.

7.     If conflict exists or is created between City improvements and outdoor seating areas. When any outdoor seating area is found to be in conflict with existing or proposed facilities or improvements owned, maintained, or operated by the City, or any existing or proposed City design plans, the seating shall, upon written demand of the City Manager or his or her designee, be removed or relocated in such a way as to eliminate the conflict. The removal or relocation shall be at the sole expense of the permittee. Should the permittee fail to comply with the written demand within a reasonable period of time, the City may cause such relocation of the seating area at the expense of the permittee. Any such noncompliance shall also be a violation of this Title.

8.     Parking. When the Community Development Director finds that the proposed additional seating would lead to new parking demand that exceeds available supply because of the amount of outdoor seating, the Community Development Director may require off-street parking for the outdoor area devoted for the outdoor seating at the rate required for interior floor area for food service establishments. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.82 SECOND DWELLING UNITS
17.82.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for reviewing the placement of second dwelling units in residential Zoning Districts consistent with state law and implement the General Plan policies which encourage more affordable rental housing, while maintaining the quality of existing residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.82.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to all new second dwelling units as defined in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions) in the city. For the purposes of this Title, second dwelling units are not considered accessory structures. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.82.030 Permit Requirements
A.    Second dwelling units regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.82.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter and other relevant provisions of this Title as determined through the administrative Zoning Conformance process. These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

B.     Application Requirements. All Zoning Conformance applications for second dwelling units shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     A completed building permit application;

2.     Proof of ownership of the property;

3.     A plot plan showing the location of any and all easements, structures, parking for both the primary and secondary dwelling units, and other improvements;

4.     Floor plan of the second dwelling unit showing total floor area;

5.     Elevations showing all sides of the second dwelling unit or changes being made to the single-family home in order to add a second dwelling unit, including materials and colors;

6.     Such other information which the Community Development Director determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.82.040 Special Standards
A second dwelling unit which conforms to the requirements of this Chapter shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which such unit is proposed to be established and shall be deemed a residential use which is consistent with the existing General Plan and zoning designations for the lot. Second dwelling units may be permitted, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, on any lot zoned residential on which there is a single-family house, subject to compliance with all of the following regulations:

A.    A maximum of one second dwelling unit may be allowed on a lot containing one larger single-family dwelling. No second dwelling units are allowed on lots having more than one residential unit or on lots where the existing residential unit is a nonconforming use.

B.     The second dwelling unit is not intended for sale but may be rented. Owner occupancy of one unit is required; no more than one dwelling unit on a single-family residential parcel with a second residential dwelling unit may be rented at one time. The second dwelling unit may not be sold separately from the residential dwelling on the lot.

C.     The second dwelling unit shall meet all of the applicable zoning regulations for the specific Zoning District in which it is located. The second dwelling unit shall be located on a lot which was legally created and conforms to the applicable standards and requirements of the Zoning District. Requirements for building height, setbacks, yards, and similar design standards that apply to the single-family dwelling unit shall apply to the second dwelling unit, except as provided for within this Chapter.

D.    Second dwelling units are permitted on lots with a minimum area of 5,000 square feet.

E.     The second dwelling unit may either be within the living area of the existing dwelling, attached to the existing dwelling, or detached from the existing dwelling.

F.     The addition of the second dwelling unit is compatible with the existing house as to height, style, materials, and colors.

G.    Development Standards

1.     Attached second dwelling units shall not to exceed 1,200 square feet in floor space, excluding any attached garage area, and shall conform to the setback and height requirements for the primary dwelling.

2.     Detached second dwelling units shall comply with the following standards:

a.     Have minimum interior side and rear setbacks of 5 feet and front and street side setbacks of 10 feet.

b.     Be set back from other structures on the parcel consistent with the City-adopted Building Code.

c.     Not exceed one story or 15 feet in height, except that a detached second unit may be constructed above a detached garage to a maximum height of 30 feet.

d.     Be constructed at the rear or interior side of an existing single-family residence, or otherwise appear secondary in nature, and not be constructed in front of the primary structure.

H.    A second dwelling unit shall consist of complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for sleeping, living, eating, cooking, and sanitation. The second dwelling unit shall include independent HVAC controls, its own kitchen and sink and standard built-in or freestanding appliances, its own bathroom with bath or shower, and a separate exterior entrance.

I.      The second dwelling unit shall utilize the same vehicular access which serves the existing dwelling unit.

J.      Parking shall be provided in addition to the required parking spaces for the existing single-family dwelling and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.52 (Parking). The parking spaces required for the second dwelling unit can be in tandem to the required parking of the main residential structure, may be uncovered, and can be located within the front setback as long as all other yard requirements are met.

K.    Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit, the property owner shall record an owner occupancy agreement stating, under penalty of perjury, that the owner of the property shall live in one of the two units as their principal residence. The permit will be revoked if the agreement is found to have been breached. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.84 TEMPORARY USES
17.84.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations for uses of private property that are temporary in nature. These provisions place restrictions on location and duration, and create standards to minimize potential impacts of the temporary use on surrounding property and ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of persons residing within the community. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.84.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to the establishment and operation of the following temporary uses within the city.

A.    Expositions, concerts, carnivals, clinics, amusement rides, and flea markets may be conducted for a period not to exceed 10 days within a calendar year (either consecutive or intermittent).

B.     Certified farmers’ markets as defined by the California Department of Food and Agriculture.

C.     Outdoor sales and display of goods, including promotional sales.

D.    Seasonal sales (e.g., Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales).

E.     Temporary dwellings, including mobile homes, when a primary dwelling is being constructed or remodeled, provided a valid building permit has been issued for the primary dwelling.

F.     Temporary sales and construction offices used for the sale of lots and/or homes as part of a new residential subdivision. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.84.030 Permit Requirements
Temporary uses regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.84.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter and other relevant provisions of this Title. Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Ordinance, the temporary uses listed in this Chapter shall require the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit from the designated Approving Authority prior to establishment of the use. The process for accepting, reviewing, and approving or denying a Temporary Use Permit shall be as described in Section 17.10.080 (Temporary Use Permit).

A.    Option for Conditional Use Permit. Applicants seeking a Temporary Use Permit for a time period longer than otherwise allowed by this Chapter may submit for a Conditional Use Permit for said activity, provided that it complies with all other relevant development and operational standards (other than time duration) for the use as provided in this Chapter. Approval of the Conditional Use Permit shall be in accordance with Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit).

B.     Temporary Uses Not Listed. When a temporary use is not specifically listed in this Chapter, the Community Development Director shall determine whether the proposed temporary use is similar in nature to permitted use(s) in Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) in accordance with Section 17.10.040 (Similar Use Determination). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.84.040 Special Standards
These requirements are in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance and any other permits or certificates required by law.

A.    General Development Standards. The designated Approving Authority may impose conditions on the approval of a temporary use consistent with the standards of Section 17.10.080 (Temporary Use Permit).

B.     Expositions, Concerts, Carnivals, Clinics, Amusement Rides, and Flea Markets. All expositions, concerts, carnivals, clinics, amusement rides, and flea markets, which are to be conducted for a period not to exceed 10 days within a calendar year (either consecutive or intermittent),  must be located in a district other than residential or shall be under the direction/supervision of a public agency or an organization, church, or school use in any district.

C.     Certified Farmers’ Markets. The following development standards shall apply to all certified farmers’ markets:

1.     The use must be located in a commercial Zoning District.

2.     The farmer’s market must qualify as a certified farmers’ market, and all producers/vendors must qualify as certified producers as defined by the California Department of Food and Agriculture. Proof of certification shall be provided.

3.     The market must be located outside of the required setbacks for the underlying Zoning District.

4.     Conditions limiting length of the permit, days and hours of operation, and other factors as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Director.

D.    Outdoor Sales and Display of Goods, Including Promotional Sales. The following development standards shall apply to all outdoor sales and display of goods, including promotional sales.

1.     May be conducted as part of an otherwise lawfully permitted or allowed permanent commercial use, provided that all activities are conducted within the buildable portion of the lot.

2.     Businesses shall be limited to 14 days within a given year.

3.     Sales and displays may not occupy more than 10 percent of the parking area for that business and shall not substantially alter the existing circulation pattern of the site.

4.     Temporary sales and displays shall not obstruct any existing disabled accessible parking space or paths of travel.

E.     Seasonal Sales. The following development standards shall apply to all seasonal sales (e.g., Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales):

1.     The use must be located in a nonresidential Zoning District.

2.     The term of the Temporary Use Permit shall not exceed 45 days per calendar year.

F.     Temporary Dwellings. The following development standards shall apply to all temporary dwellings, including mobile homes, when a primary dwelling is being constructed or remodeled. In addition to these standards, see related regulations for recreational vehicles in Section 17.52.120 (Parking and Storage of Mobile Vehicles and Accessories on Post-July 19, 1978, Parcels) and Section 17.52.130 (Parking and Storage of Mobile Vehicles and Accessories on Pre-July 19, 1978, Parcels).

1.     A valid building permit has been issued for the primary dwelling.

2.     The use of the temporary dwelling shall be limited to a maximum of one year or 30 days from the issuance of the occupancy permit for the new home, except that all dwellings included in the definition of transitional housing shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 17.76 (Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities).

G.    Temporary Sales Offices. The following development standards shall apply to all temporary sales offices used for the sale of lots and/or homes as part of a new residential subdivision: conditions limiting the days and hours of operation, landscaping, and other aspects of operation as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Director. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.84.050 Exemptions
The following temporary uses are exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter, provided that they comply with the development standards listed herein.

A.    Garage sales are permitted on any parcel where the garage sale operator resides. Garage sales may not exceed 3 sales per calendar year and 2 consecutive days for each garage sale.

B.     Fireworks stands, provided that the necessary permit(s) are obtained from the Fire Department and/or other regulatory agencies and a valid business license has been issued, consistent with the requirements of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.86 MASSAGE THERAPY
17.86.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations to allow massage therapy business activity to occur. Regulations in this Chapter are intended to reduce impacts to the degree so as to minimize any potential adverse effect such uses have on surrounding commercial or industrial uses. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.86.020 Applicability
The regulations and standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to the establishment of any massage therapy businesses as defined by Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions) in the city and shall be in addition to any other development standards and regulations contained elsewhere within this Zoning Code. The establishment of any massage therapy business shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of such a business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any massage therapy use. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.86.030 Permit Requirements
Massage therapy businesses regulated by this Chapter shall only be permitted in accordance with Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) and subject to the special regulations outlined in Section 17.86.040 (Special Standards) of this Chapter as determined through administrative Zoning Conformance. These requirements are in addition to other permits of certificates required by law. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.86.040 Special Standards
Prior to the establishment of massage therapy businesses, the following requirements shall be met.

A.    Employee Registration Required. In accordance with Section 9.28.110 of the Manteca Municipal Code, all employees must be registered by the Massage Therapist Organization. The operator of such establishment must maintain a register of all persons so employed and their certification number, which register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours.

B.     Permit Posted. In accordance with Section 9.28.120 of the Manteca Municipal Code, a permit approving the massage therapy business, or a copy thereof, shall be posted in plain view within the establishment for which the permit has been issued.

C.     No person who is granted a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business under any designation not specified in his or her permit. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

Chapter 17.88 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
17.88.010 Purpose and Intent
This Chapter establishes standards for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities within the city and regulates the installation of antennas and other wireless communication facilities consistent with federal law. This Chapter is intended to promote and protect the public safety and public welfare of residents as well as containing regulations to minimize potential impacts of the installation of wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.88.020 Applicability
Wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the following regulations in this Chapter to the extent that such requirements (1) do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, or (2) do not have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services, as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.88.030 Permit Requirements
Wireless telecommunication facilities (major and minor, as defined in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions)) shall be subject to the permit requirements identified in Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards) for the underlying Zoning District. Regardless of any permit requirements listed in Article II, all telecommunication facilities shall comply with the applicable development standards of this Chapter. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.88.040 Collocation of Major Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
As identified in Article II (Zoning Districts, Allowed Uses, and Development Standards), the establishment of collocation facilities for major wireless telecommunication facilities is not subject to Conditional Use Permit approval, provided the facility satisfies all requirements set forth in Section 65850.6 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.88.050 Application Requirements
An application for the approval of a wireless communication facility shall include the following information, in addition to all other information required by the City for a Conditional Use Permit application as established in Section 17.10.130 (Conditional Use Permit):

A.    Visual simulations showing what the proposed facility will look like from the surrounding area as viewed from residential properties and public rights-of-way at varying distances, to assist the Approving Authority and the public in assessing the visual impacts of the proposed facility and its compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

B.     A map or description of the service area of the proposed wireless communication facility and an explanation of the need for the facility.

C.     A map showing the locations and service areas of other wireless communication facility sites operated by the applicant and those that are proposed by the applicant that are close enough to affect service within the city. A written explanation of why adjacent existing wireless communication facilities could not be used for collocation shall be required.

D.    Description of proposed approach for screening all wireless communication facilities from public view including plans for installation and maintenance of landscaping, sample exterior materials, and colors. Where applicable, a plan showing existing surrounding landscaping, proposed landscaping, a landscape protection plan for construction, and a maintenance plan including an irrigation plan.

E.     Narrative description and map showing the coverage area and location of the provider’s existing wireless communication facilities and the proposed coverage area of the specific site that is the subject of the application.

F.     Technical information explaining the reasons that a permit is being sought (e.g., whether a new antenna is necessary to accommodate increased demand or to fill a “dead zone” in the provider’s coverage area), the reasons that the subject site is considered necessary to accomplish the provider’s coverage objectives, and the reasons that the proposed site is the most appropriate location under existing circumstances. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.88.060 Development Standards
A.    General Development Standards. The following general development standards shall apply to all wireless telecommunication facilities:

1.     All wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the City-adopted building code and shall be consistent with the General Plan and this Title, as well as other standards and guidelines adopted by the City, and all applicable state and federal law.

2.     Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be collocated with existing facilities, with other planned new facilities, and with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility structures whenever feasible and aesthetically desirable. To facilitate collocation when deemed appropriate, conditions of approval for Conditional Use Permits shall require all service providers to cooperate in the siting of equipment and antennas to accommodate the maximum number of operators at a given site when found to be feasible and aesthetically desirable. The applicant shall agree to allow future collocation of additional antennas and shall not enter into an exclusive lease for the use of the site.

3.     All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the City’s Noise Ordinance.

4.     No wireless communication facility shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination with other such wireless communication facilities, a potential threat to public health. To this end, no wireless communication facility or combination thereof shall produce, at any time, power densities in any inhabited area that exceed the Federal Communication Commission’s Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) limits for electric and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters or any more restrictive standard adopted or promulgated by the City or by the county, state, or federal government.

5.     Removal Provisions. In the event that one or more wireless communication facility or any component thereof, including, but not limited to, antennas, towers, or related equipment, are not operated for the provision of wireless telecommunication services for a continuous period of three months or more, such wireless communication facility or component thereof shall be deemed abandoned. The owner, operator, or other person or entity responsible for the wireless communication facility or component thereof shall remove such items within 30 days following the mailing of written notice from the City that removal is required. If two or more providers of wireless telecommunication services use the wireless communication facility or any component thereof, the period of non-use under this Section shall be measured from the cessation of operation at the location by all such providers. Failure to remove shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforced as such.

B.     Development Standards for Antennas (Excluding Amateur Radio Antennas). The following development standards shall apply to receive-only antennas (ground- and building-mounted), parabolic antennas, and satellite earth stations as defined in this Title.

1.     Antenna Location. Parabolic antenna and SES shall be ground-mounted in residential Zoning Districts. In all nonresidential Zoning Districts, building-mounted antennas are preferred. No antenna shall be located in the required front or street side yard of any parcel unless entirely screened from pedestrian view on the abutting street rights-of-way (excluding alleys). In all Zoning Districts, ground-mounted antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as feasible to reduce visual impact without compromising function, and all portions of the antenna shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line.

2.     Height Limit. The height limit for ground-mounted antenna is 6 feet. However, the height may be increased to a maximum of 12 feet if the setback distance from all property lines is at least equal to the height of the antenna and if the structure is screened in accordance with Subsection 17.88.060(B)(3) (Screening) below. Building-mounted antenna shall not extend above the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen or project beyond a maximum of 18 inches from the face of the building or other support structure.

3.     Screening. Ground-mounted antennas shall be screened with a fence, wall, and dense landscaping so that the antenna is not visible from the public right-of-way. Building-mounted antennas shall be screened as follows:

a.     Wall-mounted antennas and ancillary equipment shall be flush-mounted and painted or finished to match the building with concealed cables.

b.     Roof-mounted antennas and ancillary equipment shall be screened from view of public rights-of-way by locating the antenna below the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen and by locating the antenna as far away as physically feasible and aesthetically desirable from the edge of the building.

c.     Color. Antennas shall have subdued colors and comprise non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area or building.

C.     Development Standards for Amateur Radio Antennas. Amateur radio antenna structures provide a valuable and essential telecommunication service during periods of natural disasters and other emergency conditions. As such, amateur radio antennas may exceed the height limit and/or the setback provisions of the underlying Zoning District only when such provisions will result in unreasonable limitations on, or prevent, reception or transmission of signals from the amateur radio antennas.

1.     Height Limits. Amateur radio antennas in any district may extend to a maximum height of 75 feet, provided that the tower is equipped with a lowering device (motorized and/or mechanical) capable of lowering the antenna to the maximum permitted height when not in operation.

2.     Location Parameters. All antenna structures shall be located outside of required front and street side yard areas. Antenna structures shall also be set back a minimum distance of 5 feet from interior property lines.

3.     Tower Safety. All antennas shall be located within an enclosed fenced area or have a minimum 5-foot-high tower shield at the tower base to prevent climbing. All active elements of antennas shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 8 feet.

D.    Development Standards for Tower. The following development standards shall apply to towers (including collocation facilities).

1.     Site Design. All wireless communication facilities (including related equipment) shall be designed to minimize the visual impact to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening, camouflage, to be compatible with existing architectural elements, landscape elements, and other characteristics of the site on which they are located. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas feasible to accomplish the owner/operator’s coverage objective. A visual impact analysis is required to demonstrate how the proposed facility will appear from public rights-of-way (including public trails).

2.     Safety Design. All facilities shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight, or attractive nuisances.

3.     Location. Towers shall not be located in any required front or street side yard in any Zoning District. The setback distance from any abutting street right-of-way, residential property line, or public trail shall be equal to the height of the facility (tower and related equipment). Otherwise, the minimum setback distance from all other property lines shall be at least equal to 20 percent of the height of the tower. In order to facilitate collocations, setback distance will be waived for placement of antennas on existing towers when there is no increase in the overall height of the tower.

4.     Height Limit. The height limit for towers shall be compatible with existing development and surrounding land uses. There is no height limit specified for collocations on existing structures, provided wireless communication facilities are screened from view of abutting street rights-of-way or camouflaged by matching the color(s) and/or material(s) of the structure to which it is attached.

5.     Lighting. Towers and related equipment shall be unlit except as provided below:

a.     A manually operated or motion-detector-controlled light above the equipment shed door may be provided. Such light shall remain off except when personnel are present on site at night.

b.     The minimum tower lighting required under Federal Aviation Administration regulation.

c.     Where tower lighting is required, such lighting shall be shielded or directed downward to the greatest extent possible to ensure that such light does not spill over onto abutting properties, especially residential Zoning Districts or uses.

6.     Landscaping

a.     Where appropriate, wireless communication facilities shall be installed in a manner that maintains and enhances existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage, and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted around the tower and related equipment to buffer abutting residential Zoning Districts or uses, and to buffer public trails in accordance with the following standard.

b.     Perimeter of Leased Area of the Wireless Communication Facility. Landscaping around the perimeter of the facility (e.g., leased area) shall include dense tree and shrub plantings with necessary irrigation. Wireless communication facilities shall be developed with an immediate landscape screen. Trees shall be fast-growing evergreen species, a minimum of 24-inch box in size. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 15-gallon size covering a minimum planter area depth of 5 feet around the facility. Trees and shrubs shall be planted no further apart on center than the mature diameter of the proposed species.

7.     Design/Finish. New towers shall be camouflaged whenever possible. If not feasible to camouflage, then the tower and related equipment shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend with the colors and materials of surrounding areas.

8.     Advertising. The tower and related equipment shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other required seals or signs. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

Article V GLOSSARY
Chapter 17.100 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
17.100.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide general definitions of the terms and phrases used in the Code that are technical or specialized in an effort to ensure consistency in the interpretation of the Zoning Code. Definitions are organized alphabetically. Additional definitions for allowed uses are listed in Chapter 17.24 (Allowed Use Definitions). (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.100.020 Adult Business Definitions
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which has 25 percent or more of its stock-in-trade or 25 percent or more of its floor space devoted to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:

•       Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassette tapes, DVDs, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

•       Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.

Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, theater, concert hall, auditorium, bar, or other similar establishment which regularly features live or media presentations of performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Establishment. Includes any of the following:

•       The opening or commencement of any such adult entertainment business as a new business.

•       The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any of the adult entertainment businesses defined in this Title.

•       The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined in this Title to any other existing adult entertainment businesses.

•       The relocation of any such adult entertainment business.

Adult Motel. A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which:

•       Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, DVDs, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, or television.

•       Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than 10 hours.

•       Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than 10 hours.

Adult News Rack. Any coin-operated machine or device which dispenses material substantially devoted to the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Theater. An enclosed or unenclosed building to which the public is permitted or invited, used for presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Viewing Area. An area in any adult book and/or novelty store, cabaret, theater, motion picture arcade, or other adult entertainment business, where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned for the purpose of viewing or watching a performance, picture show, or film.

Public Nudity. Offensive nakedness in public. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.100.030 Density Bonus Definitions
Affordable Housing Costs. Housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities (30 percent of gross monthly income), for owner-occupied target units reserved for the following income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

•       Extremely low-income households: 30 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Very low-income households: 50 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Lower-income households: 70 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Moderate-income households: 110 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

Affordable Rent. Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities (30 percent of gross monthly income), for rental target units reserved for the following income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

•       Extremely low-income households: 30 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Very low-income households: 50 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Lower-income households: 60 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

•       Moderate-income households: 110 percent of the area median income for San Joaquin County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by 30 percent

Affordable Sales Price. A sales price at which lower- or very low-income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development.

Appraiser, Certified. A person certified by the State of California Office of Real Estate Appraisers to estimate the value of a particular real property.

Density Bonus. A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable Zoning District and Land Use Element of the General Plan.

Density Bonus Housing Agreement. A legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of Chapter 17.72 (Density Bonus and Other Incentives) are satisfied.

Density Bonus Units. Those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.72 (Density Bonus and Other Incentives) which exceed the otherwise maximum residential density for the development site.

Equivalent Financial Incentive. A monetary contribution, based upon a land cost per dwelling unit value, equal to one of the following:

•       A density bonus and an incentive or concession; or

•       A density bonus, where an incentive or concession is not requested or is determined to be unnecessary.

Incentive and Concession. Such regulatory concessions as specified in subdivision (I) of Government Code Section 65915 which include, but are not limited to, the following:

•       The reduction of site development standards or a modification of Zoning Code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

•       Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

•       Direct financial assistance.

•       Other regulatory incentives or concessions which result in identifiable cost reductions or avoidance.

Income, Area Median. The current median annual household income for San Joaquin County, as annually estimated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or, if such federal estimates are discontinued, as published by the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

Income, Low. An annual income for a family which does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income.

Income, Moderate. An annual income for a family which does not exceed 120 percent of the area median income.

Income, Very Low. An annual income for a family which does not exceed 50 percent of the area median income.

Lower-Income Household. Households whose income does not exceed the lower-income limits applicable to San Joaquin County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

Moderate-Income Household. Households whose income does not exceed the moderate-income limits applicable to San Joaquin County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

Nonrestricted Unit. All units within a housing development, excluding the target units.

Persons and Families of Moderate Income. Households whose income does not exceed the moderate-income limits applicable to San Joaquin County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

Qualifying Senior Resident. Senior citizens or other persons eligible to reside in a senior citizen housing development, as described in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code.

Special Category Tenants. Refers to persons or tenants who fall within one or more of the following categories:

•       Elderly means individuals 62 years of age or older.

•       Handicapped or permanently disabled as defined in Section 50072 of the California Health and Safety Code or 42 USC 423 and 24 C.F.R. 8.3.

•       Low income or very low income as defined in this Zoning Code.

Special Needs Population. Persons identified as having special needs related to any of the following:

•       Physical disabilities;

•       Developmental disabilities, including, but not limited to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism;

•       The risk of homelessness; or

•       Persons eligible for mental health services funded in whole or in part by the Mental Health Services Fund, created by Section 5890 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

Very Low-Income Household. Households whose income does not exceed the qualifying income limits for very low-income households applicable to San Joaquin County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.100.040 Sign Definitions
Abandoned Advertising Display or Abandoned Sign. Any display or sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of 90 days, which no longer identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the premises where the display or sign is located or where the building, business, or establishment to which the display or sign is related has ceased operation. For purposes of this definition, abandonment for the applicable period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of abandonment regardless of the property, business, or sign owner’s intent.

A-Frame Sign. A sign made of wood, cardboard, plastic, or other lightweight and rigid material having the capability to stand on its own support(s) and being portable and movable. See Figure 17.100.040-1 (A-Frame Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-1: A-FRAME SIGN



Animated Sign. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.

Attached Sign. A sign placed on a wall including, awning, canopy, bracket, painted, under-canopy or a window. Also see Wall Sign, Canopy Sign, Bracket Sign, Painted Sign, Under-Canopy or Window Sign.

Awning. A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.

Bracket Sign. A small, pedestrian-oriented sign that projects perpendicular from a structure (bracket sign). See Figure 17.100.040-2 (Bracket Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-2: BRACKET SIGN



Building Sign. A sign placed on a wall, awning, canopy, or parapet, or a projecting sign.

Canopy Sign. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover (excluding a marquee) over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.

Can Sign. A sign which contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet that is mounted to a wall or other surface. See Figure 17.100.040-3 (Can Sign).

 

FIGURE 17.100.040-3: CAN SIGN



Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged manually without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the message or characters change more than 12 times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Title. See Figure 17.100.040-4 (Changeable Copy Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-4: CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN



Channel Letter Sign. A sign comprising individual letters that are independently mounted to a wall or other surface and internally illuminated with a covered face. The “air space” between the letters is not part of the sign structure but rather of the building façade. A logo may also be considered a channel letter provided it is clearly distinguishable from other sign elements. See Figure 17.100.040-5 (Channel Letter Sign).

 

FIGURE 17.100.040-5: CHANNEL LETTER SIGN



Commercial Message. Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that names or advertises a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.

Community Directional Sign. An off-premises sign located on a public street or public way that is part of a City-sponsored and coordinated program for the purpose of providing tourists, travelers, and others of the public ways in the City of Manteca with information and guidance concerning public accommodations, facilities, commercial services, and points of scenic, cultural, historic, educational, recreational, religious interest, and other local community destinations as designated and recognized by a City Community Directional Signs Program.

Construction Sign. A temporary sign directly connected with a construction project; may include the construction company’s name, addresses, and/or telephone number.

Copy. The words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.

Directional Sign. Any sign intended to be permanently affixed and utilized only for the purpose of indicating the direction of any object, place, or area.

Directory Sign. A pedestrian-oriented sign that identifies or lists the names and locations of tenants at a multi-tenant site.

Electronic Message Sign. An electronic sign, typically comprising a liquid crystal diode (LCD), light-emitting diode (LED), plasma, or other digital illuminated display that contains one or more messages. An electronic message sign is different from an illuminated sign in that the illumination of the display creates the message, rather than an internal or external light source illuminating the message. See Figure 17.100.040-6 (Electronic Message Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-6: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN



Exempt Sign. A sign that is not subject to a Sign Permit.

Face Change (Sign). A change in color, material, copy, graphics, or visual image that requires the installation of a new or modified sign face, but which does not involve any change to an existing sign structure or mounting device.

Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign that is self-supporting in a fixed location and not attached to a building. A freestanding sign can be connected or attached to a sign structure, fence, or wall that is not an integral part of a building. Freestanding signs include, but are not limited to, monument signs, pole signs, and pylon signs.

Gas Pricing Signs. Signs identifying the brand, type, octane rating, etc., of gasoline for sale, as required by state law.

Human Sign. A sign held by or attached to a human for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service or product. This can also include a person dressed in costume for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service or product.

Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign; includes signs made from neon or other gas tube(s) that are bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes. An illuminated sign excludes electronic message signs, which are separately defined.

Inflatable Balloon Sign. A sign consisting of balloons and inflatables made of metallic and/or cloth material, regardless of the size that is used, for the purpose of attracting attention.

Logo. A proprietary graphic used as an identifying mark of a company, business, or organization. For purposes of this Title, logos shall be limited to registered trademarks.

Marquee. Any permanent roofed structure projecting over public property or right-of-way, attached to and supported by a building.

Monopole. A single pole support structure greater than 15 feet in height erected on the ground or on a structure to support antennas and related communications equipment.

Monument Sign. A freestanding sign that is detached from a building and having a support structure that is a solid-appearing base constructed of a permanent material, such as concrete block or brick. All other freestanding sign types not meeting the definition of a monument sign shall be either a pole sign or a pylon sign. See Figure 17.100.040-7 (Monument Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-7: MONUMENT SIGN



Mural. A painted or otherwise attached or adhered image or representation on the exterior of a building that is visible from a public right-of-way or neighboring property, does not contain commercial advertisement (is noncommercial in nature), and is designed in a manner so as to serve as public art, to enhance public space, and to provide inspiration.

Noncommercial Sign. A sign that displays noncommercial speech, e.g., commentary or advocacy on topics of public debate and concern.

Nonconforming Sign. A sign lawfully erected that does not comply with the provisions of this Title.

Off-Site or Off-Premises Sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than where the sign is located. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, billboards, posters, panels, painted bulletins, and similar advertising displays. An off-site sign meets any one of the following criteria and includes only commercial messages:

•       A permanent structure sign which is used for the display of off-site commercial messages;

•       A permanent structure that constitutes a principal, separate, or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use, of the parcel on which it is located; or

•       An outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, e.g., on which display space is made available to parties other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel (not including those who rent space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel or is the same development as the sign), in exchange for a rent, fee, or other consideration.

On-Site or On-Premises Sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the lot or parcel on which the sign is placed. In the case of multiple-tenant commercial or industrial development, a sign is considered on-site whenever it is located anywhere within the development. In the case of a duly approved Uniform Sign Program, a sign anywhere in the area controlled by the program may be considered on-site when placed at any location within the area controlled by the program.

Painted Sign. A sign that comprises only paint applied on a building or structure.

Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention.

Permanent Sign. A sign that is entirely constructed out of durable materials, is fixed in place, and is intended to exist for more than 120 days.

Permanent Window Sign. A sign painted, attached, glued, or otherwise affixed to a window or located within 3 feet of the interior side of a window or otherwise easily visible from the exterior of a building.

Pole Sign. A freestanding sign in excess of six feet in height that is detached from a building and is supported by one or more structural elements that are either: (a) architecturally dissimilar to the design of the sign; or (b) less than 1/4 the width of the sign face. See Figure 17.100.040-8 (Pole Sign).

 

FIGURE 17.100.040-8: POLE SIGN



 

Political Sign. A sign erected prior to (and may exist after) an election to advertise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition, or other related matters.

Portable Sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, A-frame signs, menu and sandwich board signs, and advertising flags. Clothing or other aspects of personal appearance are not part of this definition unless otherwise fitting the definition of a human sign.

Projecting Sign. A sign attached to and extending outward from the face of a building. Includes, but is not limited to, a blade sign, bracket sign, or marquee sign.

Pushpin Letter Sign. A sign comprising individual letters that are independently mounted to a wall or other surface. Such sign may be illuminated by an external light source, such as pendant lighting. The “air space” between the letters is not part of the sign structure but rather of the building façade. See Figure 17.100.040-9 (Pushpin Letter Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-9 PUSHPIN LETTER SIGN



Pylon Sign. A freestanding sign in excess of eight feet in height that is detached from a building and is supported by one or more structural elements which are architecturally similar to the design of the sign. See Figure 17.100.040-10 (Pylon Sign).

 

FIGURE 17.100.040-10: PYLON SIGN



Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign advertising the sale or lease of real property. The sign may include the identification and contact information of the person and/or company handling such sale, lease, or rent.

Regional Recreation/Hospitality Center. A commercial complex providing regional recreation and hospitality opportunities, zoned Public, Quasi-Public, or Commercial, and near Highway 99 or State Route 120. The complex shall provide unique commercial services that are not located in nearby communities and/or provide recreational-oriented activities of a size and scope to constitute a regional draw. Examples include, but are not limited to, water parks, outlet malls, conference facilities, horse racing tracks, professional sports team complexes, gaming casinos, or large-format retail.

Reverse Channel Letter Sign. A sign comprising individual letters that are independently mounted to a wall or other surface, with lights mounted behind the letters that face the wall behind. Lights illuminate the space around the channel letters rather than the channel letters themselves, creating a “reverse” lighting effect (e.g., halo effect). The “air space” between the letters is not part of the sign structure but rather of the building façade.

Roof Sign. A sign erected, constructed, painted, or placed upon or over a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partly supported by the building or roof structure.

Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard displaying graphics, symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of communicating with the public. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following do not fall within the definition of a sign:

•       Interior Signs. Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof or are located at least three feet from the window on the interior of the structure.

•       Architectural Features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks, or moving parts).

•       Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts, including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a building; the definition also includes foundation stones and cornerstones.

•       Personal Appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration, or appearance, including, but not limited to, tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, and masks (but not including human signs).

•       Manufacturers’ Marks. Marks on tangible products that identify the maker, seller, provider, or product and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale.

•       Fireworks, Candles, and Artificial Lighting. The legal use of fireworks, candles, and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this Title.

•       Mass Transit Graphics. Graphic images mounted on trains or duly licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the City.

•       Vehicle and Vessel Insignia. As shown on street-legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising), and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease, or exchange of the vehicle or vessel.

•       Gravestones and grave markers.

•       News racks and newsstands.

•       Shopping carts, golf carts, and horse-drawn carriages.

•       Vending machines that do not display off-site commercial messages or general advertising messages.

•       Graphic images that are visible only from above, such as those visible only from airplanes or helicopters, but only if not visible from the street surface or public right-of-way.

•       Holiday and cultural observance decorations that are on display for not more than 45 calendar days per year (per parcel or use) and which do not include commercial advertising messages.

Sign Face. That area or portion of a sign on which copy is intended to be placed.

Subdivision Directional Sign. A temporary or otherwise limited-term sign for the purpose of providing direction for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to the new home sale of multiple lots or dwelling units with a single builder within a master planned community, including both single-family and multifamily for-sale products. All other home sales signs are included in the definition of real estate sign.

Subdivision, Permanent Identification Sign. A sign located at the entrance to the subdivision for the purpose of a permanent identification of the subdivision. Such signs are of a permanent nature, usually constructed of long-lasting, weather-resistant materials such as stone or metal.

Temporary Promotional Sign. Any flag displaying a commercial/promotional message, pennant, streamer, banner, beacon, bunting material, or other similar non-permanent sign made of paper, cloth, canvas, lightweight fabric, or other non-rigid material, with or without frames, whether displayed as freestanding, wall-mounted, pole-mounted, window-mounted, or painted, or any other method of attachment, or beacon, which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.

Temporary Sign. A structure or device used for the public display of visual messages or images, which is easily installed with or without common hand tools and which is not intended or suitable for long-term or permanent display (e.g., less than 120 days), due to lightweight or flimsy construction materials. Examples include, but are not limited to, A-frame signs, banners, pennants, streamers, or similar non-permanent signs made of paper, cloth, canvas, lightweight fabric, or other non-rigid material, with or without frames.

Under-Canopy Sign. A pedestrian-oriented sign hung from underneath a canopy. See Figure 17.100.040-11 (Under-Canopy Sign).

FIGURE 17.100.040-11: UNDER-CANOPY SIGN



Void Rule. When the sign is composed of individual letters applied to the building without a distinctive background (e.g., channel letters), the area of the sign shall be measured as 75 percent of the area of the sign copy (height of the letters times the length of each line of letters, e.g., length x height x 75 percent). This practice shall be known as the void rule.

Wall Sign. A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of such wall.

Window Sign. Any sign, picture, letter, character, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed upon and/or inside and/or within 3 feet of a window for the purpose of being visible from the exterior of the window. (Ord. 1557 §§ 10, 11, 2015; Ord. 1511 §§ 9, 10, 2012; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.100.050 Wireless Telecommunication Definitions
Antenna. Any system of wires, poles, rods, panels, whips, cylinders, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure or is portable or movable. Includes devices having active elements extending in any direction and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna.

Antenna, Amateur Radio. Any antenna which is used for the purpose of transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.

Antenna, Directional (also known as a “panel antenna”). An antenna that transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.

Antenna, Façade-Mounted (also known as “building-mounted”). Any antenna directly attached or affixed to the elevation of a building, tank, tower, or other structure.

Antenna, Ground-Mounted. Any antenna with its base, whether consisting of single or multiple posts, placed directly on the ground or a single mast less than 15 feet tall and 6 inches in diameter.

Antenna, Parabolic (also known as “satellite dish”). Any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured which is shallow dish, cone, horn, bowl, or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication/signals in a specific directional pattern.

Antenna, Receive-Only. An antenna for the reception of radio and television signals, without transmitting capabilities; may include pole or dish types of antennas.

Antenna Structure. Any structure, including a pole, mast, or tower, whether freestanding or mounted on another building or structure, which supports an antenna or an array of antennas.

Collocation. A wireless telecommunication facility owned and operated by a communication service provider that is located on the same tower, building, accessory structure, or property as another telecommunication facility owned or operated by a different communication service provider.

Electromagnetic Wave. An electrical wave propagated by an electrostatic and magnetic field of varying intensity.

NIER. Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (e.g., electromagnetic radiation primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic spectrum).

Personal Wireless Services. Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

Satellite Antenna, Residential. An accessory structure capable of receiving, for the sole benefit of the principal use, television and radio signals from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, satellite receivers, satellite dish antennas, and satellite discs and may be of solid, open mesh, or bar configuration design.

Satellite Dish. A device that is designed to receive signals or communications from orbiting satellites.

Satellite Earth Station (SES). A facility consisting of more than a single satellite dish or parabolic antenna that transmits to and/or receives signals from an orbiting satellite.

Stealth Facility. Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not readily visible because it has been designed to blend into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. Examples may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas that are painted and treated as an architectural element to blend with the existing building, and monopoles that are disguised as flagpoles or public art, or camouflaged using existing vegetation. A pole or tower with antennas that are flush with or do not protrude above or out from the pole or antenna is not considered a stealth facility unless the pole or tower is an existing pole or tower, existing utility pole or tower, or existing light standard or streetlight, or a replacement thereof.

 

Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the content of the information as sent and received as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

Telecommunications Equipment. Equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services. Includes software integral to such equipment (including upgrades) that is not located, in whole or in part, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way, or other public property.

Telecommunications Service. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly or indirectly to any person as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

Telecommunications Tower or Structure. Any mast, pole, monopole, lattice tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. A ground- or building-mounted mast greater than 15 feet tall and 6 inches in diameter supporting one or more antennas, dishes, arrays, etc., shall be considered a telecommunications tower.

Tower. A mast, pole, monopole, lattice tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. Includes ground-mounted structures 12 feet or greater in height and building-mounted structures that extend above the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen with a mast greater than 6 inches in diameter supporting one or more antennas, dishes, arrays, or other associated equipment. (Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

 

17.100.060 Universal Definitions
Abut. To physically touch, adjoin, or border upon or share a common lot line. Adjoining and contiguous mean the same thing as abut.

Accent Trees. Trees used to supplement the required street trees.

Accessible Parking. Parking or a parking space or stall devoted to use by vehicles operated by or for persons with mobility impairments.

Accessory Building. A detached building that is smaller in size than the main building on the same lot, the use of which is incidental to the primary use of the lot.

Accessory Structure. A detached or attached, subordinate structure or building, the use of which is incidental to and subordinate to that of the main building, structure, or use on the same lot or to the use of the land. The types of accessory structures listed below shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

•       Accessory Structure. A detached or attached accessory structure that is either entirely enclosed by walls and a solid roof or is partially enclosed with a solid roof. Examples include, but are not limited to, garages, greenhouses, pool houses, sunrooms, workshops, storage sheds, barns, and other agricultural outbuildings, as well as carports, patio covers, gazebos, stables, and other agricultural outbuildings with solid roof construction. Accessory structures also include windmills, water towers, and other similar agricultural structures.

•       Landscape Feature. A detached or attached decorative structure typically used in conjunction with plant materials for aesthetic enhancement, including, but not limited to, patio trellis covers, pergolas and gazebos with non-solid roof construction, arched trellises, vertical lattice structures, statues, fountains, and similar features.

•       Pool/Spa. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 3 feet deep. Includes in-ground and aboveground structures and includes, but is not limited to, hot tubs, spas, portable spas, and non-portable wading pools.

Accessory Use. A use primarily incidental to, related, and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land, which accessory use does not alter said principal use nor serve property other than the lot or parcel of land on which the principal use is located.

Acres, Gross. The area of a lot or site, including easements of right-of-way to be dedicated but excluding existing public rights-of-way.

Acres, Net. The area of a lot or site remaining after dedication of all required rights-of-way.

Addition. The creation of any new portion of a building that results in a vertical or horizontal extension of the building or results in any new gross floor area which was not present in the building prior to construction of the addition. The creation of a mezzanine or loft, or a conversion of a previously unused attic or under-floor space to usable floor area, shall also be considered an addition for the purposes of this Title.

Adjoining. Two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other. Lots or parcels of land which touch at corners only shall not be deemed adjoining. Abut or abutting and contiguous mean the same as adjoining.

Adult Day Care Facility. State-licensed facility that provides nonmedical care and supervision for more than six adults for periods of less than 24 hours, with no overnight stays.

Adult Day Care Home. Defined by state law as the provision of nonmedical care to six or fewer adults, including seniors, in the provider’s own home, for a period of less than 24 hours at a time. Homes serving more than six adults are included in Adult Day Care Facility.

Agricultural Services. Services provided by a person, company, or other means to perform work or provide supplies of an agricultural nature to an unassociated agricultural land use.

Alley. Narrow drives serving commercial and residential development.

Alley Access Parking. Residential or commercial parking that is accessible from an alley.

Alter. To make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, which will prolong the life of the structure.

Ambient Noise Level. The composite of noise from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise. In this context, it represents the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location for a specified time of day or night.

Amusement Device. Any machine or device that may be operated for use as a game, contest, or amusement upon the insertion of a coin, slug, or token in any slot or receptacle attached to such machine or connected therewith, which does not contain a payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, checks, tokens, or merchandise.

Appeal Authority. The decision-making body or person that has the authority to hear an appeal of a decision or action and make subsequent, if any, decisions or actions.

Approving Authority. The decision-making body or person that has the authority to approve an entitlement application.

Arcade. A continuously covered public space open on the sides, except for structural columns or piers, adjacent to and extending along the façade of a building. The space may be located between the façade and a sidewalk or another public space, or it may replace a sidewalk along a private street where no building setback is present.

Area (Lot, Parcel, or Site). The horizontal area within the exterior lines of the lot, parcel or site, exclusive of any area in a public or private way open to public uses.

Articulation. The manner in which portions of a building form are expressed (materials, color, texture, pattern, modulation, etc.).

Attic. The area located between the ceiling of the top story of a building and the building’s roof and not usable as habitable or commercial space.

A-Weighted Sound Level. The sound level in decibels as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network (scale at slow meter response). The unit of measurement is referred to in this Title as dBA or DBA.

Backfilling. To refill an excavation, usually with excavated material.

Backflow Prevention Device. A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

Back Yard. That portion of a parcel from the rear of the primary building structure to the back lot line.

Balcony. A horizontal platform extending from the exterior wall of a building, accessible from the building’s interior and not directly accessible from the ground. A balcony is typically not covered by a roof or building overhang or enclosed on more than two sides by walls. However, railings shall not be considered enclosures.

Base District. A Zoning District that includes use, height, bulk, space, and development standards for the regulation of development in a particular area (e.g., R-1, C-G, M-1).

Basement. A portion of a building wholly underground or in which more than one-half the distance from the floor to the ceiling is below the average adjoining grade, and as otherwise defined in the Building Code currently in effect.

Bay Window. A portion of a building cantilevered so as to project out from a wall and containing windows which cover at least 50 percent of the projection’s surface.

Bedroom. That portion of a dwelling unit designed to be suitable for sleeping purposes, which may contain closets, may have access to a bathroom, and meets Uniform Building Code requirements for light and ventilation.

Block. An area designated on an official map of the city that is bounded on all sides by the public right-of-way, a railroad right-of-way, private streets, or a boundary line of unsubdivided acreage or any combination thereof.

Boarder. An individual other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling unit or a part thereof, who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration.

Buildable Portion of a Lot or Buildable Yard Area. That portion of a lot that is not in the required yard area. See Yard Area, Required, and Figure 17.100.060-4 (Yard Area).

Building. Any enclosed structure having a roof and supported by columns or walls.

Building Entry Space. A public space adjacent to a pedestrian building entrance.

Building Façade. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from the grade to the top of a parapet wall or eave and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.

Building Front. That portion of the main building which affords public entry. In the case of more than one public entry, the entrance with the assigned address shall be considered the main public entry for sign computation purposes.

Building, Multi-Tenant. Three or more separate uses or tenancies located in a single building on a single site.

Canopy. A permanent roofed structure or covering extended along part or all of a building façade.

Carport. A roofed structure for one or more automobiles that is enclosed by not more than two walls. A carport shall meet the minimum horizontal and vertical dimensions specified by the City’s Traffic Engineer in order to be used for one or more legal parking spaces required under this Chapter.

Change of Use. Any change in the nature or character of the use of a building or structure. A residential change of use includes, but is not limited to, the elimination of any dwelling unit, the reduction in the floor area or habitability of a dwelling unit, or the reduction in the floor area or habitability of bedroom or sleeping quarters in a group living accommodation or residential hotel, when a new use is to replace a previous use. A residential change of use does not include the establishment of a home occupation in compliance with this Title. A commercial change of use includes a change to a different category of commercial or manufacturing use but does not include changes between uses that are classified by the Uniform Building Code in the same category of commercial or manufacturing use.

Check Valve. A valve located under a sprinkler head or other location in the irrigation system to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from the sprinkler heads when the system is off. Also known as an anti-drain valve.

Child. A person who is under 18 years of age.

Child Care Facility. A facility installed, operated, and maintained for the nonresidential care of children as defined under applicable state licensing requirements for the facility. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, or school-age child care centers as defined in this Title.

City. The City of Manteca.

City Council. The City Council of the City of Manteca.

City Facility. Any building or property owned by the City of Manteca and open to the public. This definition includes, but is not limited to, City Hall and its various components.

City Manager. The City Manager of the City of Manteca or designee.

City Property. Land or other property in which the City of Manteca holds a present right of possession and control, plus all public rights-of-way and public parks, regardless of ownership. Schools, even if publicly owned or operated, are not within this definition.

Clear Visibility Triangle. The required clear cross-visibility area unobstructed by any structure or landscape between 30 inches and 7 feet above the surface of the public sidewalk at any corner formed by the intersecting streets. The cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having two sides 20 feet long and running along each curb line, said length beginning at their intersection, and the third side formed by a line connecting the two ends. See Figure 17.100.060-1 (Clear Visibility Triangle).

FIGURE 17.100.060-1: CLEAR VISIBILITY TRIANGLE

 

Clear Vision Triangle (<a href=4.29.2011).jpg" >

 

Columbarium. A structure of vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns for the ashes of cremated bodies.

Combining District. A Zoning District that modifies use, height, bulk, space, or other development standards of the base district with which it is combined.

Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Manteca.

Commonly Owned Property Maintenance Association. A mechanism for maintaining commonly owned areas within a residential project. Also known as a homeowners association.

Community Development Director. The Community Development Director of the City of Manteca.

Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). The average noise level during a 24-hour time period, in decibels, weighted to account for the lower tolerance of people to noise during evening (7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) and night (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) hours relative to daytime hours.

Compatible. That which is harmonious with and will not adversely affect surrounding buildings and/or uses.

Composting. The process whereby a mixture of decaying organic matter is reduced to material used for fertilizers, land conditioners, or landscape material through natural processes.

Concertina Wire. A type of barbed wire or razor wire that is formed into large coils that usually sits atop another type of fencing.

Condition. A requirement attached to a permit or entitlement, the satisfaction of which is necessary for the validity and effectiveness of the permit or entitlement.

Condition of Use. A development standard determined to be necessary to permit the harmonious classification of a use as listed in a district and therefore a prerequisite to place, or for application to place, such use as classified.

Conditionally Allowed. Allowed subject to approval of a Use Permit.

Condominium. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a lot of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real property such as an apartment, office, or store. May include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

Construction. The placing of construction materials and their fastening in a permanent manner to the ground or to a structure or building for the purpose of creating or altering a structure or building, or excavation of a basement.

Contracting Services. Services provided by a person, company, or other means through a contract to perform work or provide supplies on a large scale.

Conversion, Commercial. The physical change of a building’s walls separating lease spaces so as to change: (1) the number of separate, individual commercial lease spaces for commercial businesses; or (2) the number of square feet of leasable floor area of any lease space.

Conversion, Residential. The physical change of the floor area and/or walls of a building that is used for dwelling unit, group living accommodation, or residential hotel room purposes, so as to change the number of dwelling units, sleeping rooms, or residential hotel rooms, or reduce the floor area and/or habitable space of any residential living quarters.

Corner Arcade. A small covered space adjoining the intersection of two streets at the same elevation as the adjoining sidewalk or sidewalk widening and directly accessible to the public at all times.

County. The County of San Joaquin.

Court. An unoccupied open space on the same site with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by exterior building walls.

Coverage Area. All the area of a lot, as projected on a horizontal plane, that is enclosed by the exterior walls of buildings or enclosed accessory structures, or covered by decks, porches, stairs, and/or landings which cover an enclosed space or paved ground area. Eaves and uncovered decks located over a pervious surface, as well as paths, driveways, and improvements existing at grade only, do not constitute coverage of a lot.

Critical Gradient. The maximum stable inclination of an unsupported slope under the most adverse conditions that it will likely experience, as determined by current engineering technology.

Cumulative Period (Noise). An additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

Curbline. The line at the face of the curb nearest the roadway.

Decibel. A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.

Deck. An unenclosed structure, usually made of wood, built to provide a solid continuous surface for outdoor use and/or access to a door, which is accessible from the ground level directly or from a connecting stairway and separated from the ground by an air space.

Demolition. A building or enclosed structure shall be considered demolished for the purposes of this Chapter when, within any continuous 12-month period, such building or enclosed structure is destroyed in whole or in part or is relocated from one lot to another. For purposes of this Title, destroyed in part means 50 percent or more of the enclosing exterior walls and 50 percent or more of the roof are removed.

Density. The number of dwelling units per unit of land.

Depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side lot lines.

Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.

Diameter at Breast Height (DBH). A measurement calculation to determine diameter of a tree; measurement at 4.5 feet above ground level.

District. See Zoning District.

Driveway. A paved, vehicular access way connecting an off-street parking space or parking lot with a public or private street.

Dwelling, Primary Unit. In the context of second dwelling unit regulations, an existing single-family residential structure on a single parcel with provisions for living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities occupied and intended for one household.

Dwelling, Second Unit. In the context of second dwelling unit regulations, an attached or detached dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. This definition includes granny flats, and efficiency units as defined by Section 179581 of the Health and Safety Code.

Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.

Ecological Restoration. The environment in which the interrelationship of living things to one another and the environment is repaired, restored, changed, or created.

Emergency Situation. Fire or structural damage to the primary on-site structure(s), rendering same unsafe for human occupancy.

Erect. Construct, place, relocate, enlarge, substantially alter, attach, suspend, paint, post, maintain, or display.

Established Landscape. The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the site. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

Estimated Annual Water Use (EAWU). Estimated total water use per year.

Excavation for On-Site Construction. Earth-material-moving activities that are required to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements (such as excavation, grading, compacting, and the location of fills and embankments) or that in and of themselves constitute engineered works (such as dams, road cuts, fills, and catchment basins).

Façade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.

Family. One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. See Household.

Fence. A structure made of wood, metal, masonry, or other material forming a physical barrier which supports no load other than its own weight, or a hedge that is designed to delineate, screen, or enclose a lot, yard, open space area, or other land area.

Field. The part of the sign with no letters or logos.

Fixed Noise Source. A device or machine that creates sounds while fixed or stationary, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the horizontal areas of several stories of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or, in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. Gross floor area shall exclude basements and attics. The surface area of tennis courts, swimming pools, driveways, parking spaces, decks, and porches is not included in the total floor area.

Floor Area, Leasable. The total interior floor area of a commercial lease space available for use by a single business including all sales, customer, display, shelving, assembly, seating, counter, kitchen, storage, and office areas, but not including stairs, restrooms, and unenclosed walkways and those areas serving more than one lease space, including, but not limited to, common hallways, corridors, lobbies, maintenance areas, vestibules, and other common areas.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the building site area (see examples in Figure 17.100.060-2).

FIGURE 17.100.060-2: EXAMPLES OF FLOOR AREA RATIO

 



Foot-Candle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are 1 foot from a uniform point of one candle.

Freeway. State Route 99 and 120 bypass.

Frontage, Building. The exterior building wall of a ground-floor business establishment on the side or sides of the building fronting and/or oriented toward a public street or highway. Building frontage shall be measured continuously along such building wall for the entire length of the business establishment.

Frontage, Street. That portion of a lot or parcel of land that borders a public street other than the sideline of a corner lot. Street frontage shall be measured along the common lot line separating such lot or parcel of land from the public street, highway, or parkway.

Full Shielding. A technique or method of construction which causes all light emitted from an outdoor light fixture to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixtures from which light is emitted.

Future Tenant Identification Sign. A temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area that identifies a future use of a site or building.

Garage. Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the minimum parking space size. A garage is a completely enclosed attached or detached accessory structure with an operational door.

General Plan. The document of the same name, as prepared for and adopted by the City Council of the City of Manteca, and all elements thereof, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65300, et seq.

Glare. Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s ability to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness.

Grade, Existing. The elevation of the ground at any point on a lot as shown on the required survey submitted in conjunction with an application for a building permit or grading permit.

Grade, Finish. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior walls of a building and a point 5 feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than 5 feet distant from said wall. In the case of walls which are parallel to and within 5 feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way.

Graffiti. The unauthorized scratching, carving, spraying of paint, or marking of ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, and places.

Gravel Extraction Operations. All or any part of the process involved in the removal by any method of sand, gravel, rock, or other earthen material from streambeds or stream channel bars normally subject to inundation during water flows. Include, but are not limited to:

•       On-site processing of extracted material, including screening, washing, crushing, stockpiling, or batching.

•       The production and disposal of mining waste.

•       Prospecting and exploratory activities.

Ground Floor. The first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement.

Ground-Floor Street Frontage. The occupied floor space in a structure nearest to the public right-of-way and closest to sidewalk grade.

Habitable Space. Consistent with the Uniform Building Code, a space in a building which is used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking, but not including garages, bathrooms, utility, storage and laundry rooms, halls, or closets.

Heat. Thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive, or convective nature.

Hedge. Any line or row of plants, trees, or shrubs planted in a continuous line to form a dense thicket or barrier.

Heritage Tree. Any natural woody plant rooted in the ground and having a diameter of 30 inches or more measured at 2 feet above the ground.

Historical Significant Sites. Pursuant to Section 21084.1 of the Public Resources Code, a resource listed in, or determined to be eligible for listing in, the California Register of Historical Resources. Resources listed in a local register of historical resources as defined in Section 5020.1(k) and Section 5024.1(g) of the Public Resources Code are presumed historically or culturally significant.

Homeowners Association. See Commonly Owned Property Maintenance Association.

Household. One or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, sharing a dwelling unit in a living arrangement usually characterized by sharing living expenses, such as rent or mortgage payments, food costs, and utilities, as well as maintaining a single lease or rental agreement for all members of the household and other similar characteristics indicative of a single household.

Housing Development. One or more groups of projects for residential units constructed in the city. For purposes of density bonus, also includes a subdivision or common interest development as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, approved by the City, and consisting of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate or convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multi-family dwelling, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. For purposes of calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based on individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower-income households are located.

Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. May be irrigated or non-irrigated.

Illegal Nonconforming Building or Use. A building or use that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this Title and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable ordinances codified in this Title.

Impervious Surface. A solid and continuous ground covering that does not permit the seepage of liquid into the soil, including, but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, or brick.

Impulsive Noise. A noise of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.

Intersection, Street. The point or junction where two or more streets come together.

Intruding Noise Level. The sound level created, caused, maintained, or originating from an alleged offensive source, measured in decibels, at a specific location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.

Invasive Species. Non-indigenous species (i.e., plants or animals) that adversely affect the habitats they invade economically, environmentally, or ecologically.

Kitchen. Any room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

Landscaped Area. An area of ground within the boundaries of a lot that consists of living plant material including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers, gardens, and vines. A landscaped area shall not include off-street parking spaces, driveways, paved walkways and paths, patios, and other surfaces covered by concrete or asphalt.

Landscape Feature. A detached decorative structure typically used in conjunction with plant materials for aesthetic enhancement, including, but not limited to, patio trellis covers, pergolas and gazebos with non-solid roof construction, arched trellises, vertical lattice structures, statues, and similar features.

Landscaping. The installation of planting and related improvements on the front portion of the lot between the building and the street, except for necessary walks and driveways, and such other areas as may be determined through site plan review.

Lattice Tower. A support structure erected on the ground that consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment.

Light Pollution. Artificial light that causes a detrimental effect on the environment, astronomical research, or enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent property.

Light Trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.

Loading Facilities, Off-Street. A site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

Loading Space, Off-Street. A covered or uncovered space for trucks or other delivery vehicles for the loading or unloading of freight, cargo, packages, containers or bundles of goods, and/or bulky goods.

Loft. See Mezzanine.

Lot. A separate legal subdivision of land, as recorded with the County Recorder. Lots are categorized as follows. See Figure 17.100.060-3 (Lot Types).

Abutting Lot. A lot having a common property line or separated by a public path or alley, private street, or easement to the subject lot.

Confronting Lot. A lot whose front property line is intersected by a line perpendicular to and intersecting the front property line of the subject lot.

Corner Lot. A lot located at the junction of two or more intersecting streets, with a boundary line thereof bordering on each of such streets. The shortest such street frontage shall constitute the front of the lot.

Double Frontage Lot. A lot having a frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

Flag Lot. A lot so shaped that the main portion of the lot area does not have direct street frontage, other than by a connection of a strip of land which is used for access purposes.

Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot.

Key Lot. Any interior lot that abuts the rear lot line of a corner lot.

Reversed Corner Lot. A corner lot, the highway or street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of a lot or parcel of land that adjoins the rear lot line of such lot.

Through Lot. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel highways and/or streets.

FIGURE 17.100.060-3: LOT TYPES



 

Lot Area. The total horizontal area within a lot’s boundary lines. The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way.

Lot Coverage. That portion of a lot that is covered by roof area excluding eaves.

Lot Depth. The average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line measured in the general direction of the side lines.

Lot Frontage. The portion of a property that abuts one side of a public street which allows primary access to the property. The public street frontage for lots fronting on a curved street, or on the curved portion of a cul-de-sac street, shall be measured along an arc located within the front 50 feet of the lot and based on a center point coincidental with the center point of the street curve. If such arc is farther than 20 feet from the right-of-way line of the street, that arc will be considered the front yard setback line of the lot.

Lot, Infill. Vacant land or property adjacent to developed land or property on at least two sides or adjacent to developed land or property on one side and adjacent to an area zoned for open space or parks and recreation.

Lot Line. The boundaries between a lot and other property or the public right-of-way.

Lot Line, Front. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street or place. In the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. In the case of a square or nearly square-shaped corner lot, the owner may choose which street shall be designated as the front of the lot. Once the choice of frontage has been made, it cannot be changed unless all requirements for yard space are complied with.

Lot Line, Rear. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side. Any lot boundary line that is not a front line or a rear lot line.

Lot Width. The average distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth.

Low-Volume Irrigation. The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts. The pole, post, or bracket is not considered a part of the luminaire.

Maintenance of Building. Those activities which preserve an existing building including, but not limited to, cleaning, painting, and refurbishing (but not altering) exterior and interior walls, equipment, facilities, and fixtures.

Massage Therapy, Certified. A personal service for which an individual has fulfilled the requirements of and may practice the therapy of manipulation of tissues (as by rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping) with the hand or an instrument for remedial or hygienic purposes.

Master Plan. A plan for the overall utilization of a particular area, including its allocation of land uses and the corresponding environmental impacts.

Master Sign Program. An integrated, visual and/or written description of the signs to be placed on a building or grouping of buildings for the purpose of aesthetic uniformity in sign design, construction, and placement.

Maximum Allowable Residential Density. The maximum number of residential units permitted by the City’s Zoning Code at the time of application.

Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied water allowed for the established landscaped area.

Mezzanine. An intermediate level of a building interior containing floor area without complete enclosing interior walls or partitions, placed in any story or room and not separated from the floor or level below by a wall. The floor area of any mezzanine shall be counted as part of the total floor area for any floor area or floor area ratio limitation. In addition, when the total floor area of any such mezzanine exceeds 33.3 percent of the total floor area in that room, it shall constitute an additional story. No more than one continuous mezzanine may be permitted in any one room.

Mined Lands. The surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

Minerals. Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

Minimum Distance Between Buildings. The distance between the walls of buildings, measured at the nearest point to an adjacent building.

Mining Waste. The residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.

Mixed Use. The use of a lot or building with two or more different land uses, including, but not limited to, residential, commercial retail, office, or manufacturing, in a single structure or a group of physically integrated structures.

Mobile Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected, is 320 or more square feet in area, and that is built on a permanent chassis. The term “mobile home” includes manufactured housing units.

Mobile Noise Source. Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

Mobile Transport Vehicle. A trailer, horse trailer, utility trailer, or other mobile device licensed to be lawfully used on public streets and which attaches to and is pulled or pushed by a powered vehicle and used for transporting or carrying a personal recreational vehicle, recreational home, watercraft, off-road vehicle or any other similar device, or any other types of items such as wood, dirt, building materials, etc.

Municipal Code. The City of Manteca Municipal Code as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.

Musical Instruments Plating. A process whereby a thin coating of metal is permanently applied to musical instruments.

Nonconforming Lot. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Title, or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the Zoning District.

Nonconforming Site. A site that was legally developed to the standards and regulations existing and/or used at the time of development but which due to the adoption of this Code or any amendment thereto does not conform with the rules and regulations of the district in which located.

Nonconforming Use, Building, or Structure. A use, building, or structure that is not consistent with a provision or provisions of this Title but which was lawfully established or constructed prior to the effective date of the provision(s) with which it is inconsistent. A use shall not be considered nonconforming if it is only inconsistent with the Zoning Code with respect to the number of auto or bicycle parking spaces, their location on site, or screening.

Nuisance. Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use and enjoyment of property, or is a violation of this Title.

Occupied. Any full-time or part-time habitation for any purpose.

On-Site. Located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.

Open Space. Land and/or water areas retained for use as active or passive recreation areas or for resource protection in an essentially undeveloped state.

Open Space, Private. A usable Open Space adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.

Open Space, Project. The minimum useable Open Space within the area of a building site designed and reserved for outdoor living, indoor or outdoor recreation opportunities (i.e., pools, fitness center, etc.), pedestrian access and landscaping accessible by all occupants of the development. The calculation of Project Open Space shall be made by deducting from the total area of the building site:

•       Maximum Lot Coverage.

•       Paved parking areas, driveways and maneuvering areas.

•       Areas having a slope in excess of 20 percent.

•       Any Open Space less than 10 feet in its smallest dimension.

To this remainder should be added any indoor recreation opportunities and any rooftop or outside deck space more than 7 feet in its smallest dimension which is directly accessible, and safely useable, by all occupants of the development.

Operator. Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations him or herself or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his or her behalf.

Outdoor Dining. Any restaurant or other eating establishment, including food take-out, where the food and/or beverages are served, on private property, and where there is not a roof and walls on all sides.

Outdoor Seating. Tables and/or chairs (including benches) and umbrellas associated with lawfully operating food service establishments and similar uses, in the sidewalk or courtyard area, which are not physically or structurally attached to a building, retaining wall, or fence.

Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.

Overhead Sprinkler Irrigation Systems. A system that delivers water through the air (e.g., pop-ups, impulse sprinklers, spray heads, and rotors).

Oversized Boat. Any boat which exceeds 42 feet in length measured from the two farthest points on the boat structure itself, including any portion of the trailer, or exceeds 102 inches in width or 154 inches in height.

Oversized Vehicle. Any vehicle which exceeds 42 feet in length or exceeds 102 inches in width, exclusive of such projecting lights or devices as are expressly allowed pursuant to the California Vehicle Code as it now exists or hereafter may be amended.

Owner. Any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes, or the lessee, tenant, or other person having control or possession of the property.

Parapet. A low wall or railing not exceeding 42 inches above the roof and along its perimeter, usually for fire containment and/or architectural purposes.

Parcel. A term used by the San Joaquin County Tax Collector to describe a lot, portion of a lot, or group of lots for property tax purposes. Also see Lot.

Parking Space. Space on an area of land, covered or uncovered, designed and intended to be used for parking a motor vehicle, which space is improved with a durable dustless surface suitable for use under all weather conditions, and which space shall not be located in any required front yard or any required side yard adjacent to a street.

Paseo. A public space that is located within a block’s interior and that connects two streets that are parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel to each other.

Path. A right-of-way used or designed for pedestrian access.

Patio, Covered. An accessory structure, including carports, not exceeding 15 feet in height, and enclosed on not more than three sides except for posts necessary for roof support.

Paving. A surface such as concrete or asphalt or other material or combination of materials that is impervious.

Penthouse, Mechanical. A room or enclosed structure attached to the roof level for the uppermost story, for purposes of sheltering mechanical equipment, water tanks, and/or vertical openings for stairwell and elevator shafts. Such a structure shall be considered a story if it contains usable floor area or habitable space.

Permanent Foundation System. An assembly of materials constructed below or partially below grade and not intended to be removed from its installation site, which assembly is designed to support a structure and is engineered to resist the imposition of external natural forces as defined by Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, as such section may have been amended at the time of application of this Code.

Permanent Storage. The storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts thereof, or building materials for a period of 48 or more consecutive hours.

Permit. Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.

Permitted Screening. A solid wall or fence made from wood, brick, block, or other permitted material that is a minimum of 6 feet in height above the adjoining grade. Chainlink fencing with slat inserts is permitted only behind the front yard setback.

Permitted Use. Any use allowed in a Zoning District and subject to the restrictions applicable to that Zoning District.

Person. Any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization, or partnership, or any city, county, district, or state or any department or agency thereof.

Personal Recreational Vehicle. Any motorized, human-powered, electrical-powered, or wind-powered vehicle used primarily for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, such items as boats, sailboats, canoes, kayaks, motor bikes, off-road vehicles, or jet skis.

Physical Therapist. A person who treats physical dysfunction or injury by the use of therapeutic exercise and the application of modalities intended to restore or facilitate normal function or development. A physical therapist is not required to be a medical doctor by law.

Play Equipment. Structures and surfaces used for recreational purposes including play structures, jungle gyms, and sports courts such as tennis and basketball courts.

Plaza. An urban public space typically bounded by buildings, public rights-of-way, and other secondary public spaces.

Pool/Spa. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing greater than 120 square feet with at least 2,000 gallons of water and a minimum depth of 3 feet.

Porch. A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a building, a minimum 48 square feet in area and having a minimum depth of six (6) feet, which may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes, for the purpose of sheltering from the rays of the sun and from rain and weather, exclusive of vehicles, either persons or inanimate objects.

Processing. A series of operations, usually in a continuous and regular action or succession of actions, taking place or carried on in a definite manner.

Project. Any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this Title.

Property, Nonresidential. All nonresidential-zoned real property and any building located on such property.

Property, Residential. Front yards, the unfenced portions of side yards, the unfenced portion of back yards or corner lots, driveways, walkways, and sidewalks of all residential real property. Includes any building located on such property.

Public and Quasi-Public. Institutional, academic, governmental, and community service uses, either publicly owned or operated by nonprofit organizations.

Public Property. All real property owned, operated, or controlled by the City, other than public right-of-way and any privately owned area within the City’s jurisdiction which is not yet but is designated as a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map approved by the City.

Public Right-of-Way. Any public street, public way, public place, or right-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above, or below it, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, owned, operated, and/or controlled by the City or subject to an easement owned by the City and any privately owned area within the City’s jurisdiction which is not yet but is designated as a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map approved by the City.

R District. Any residential zone as shown on the official Zoning Map of the City as it now exists or as may hereafter be amended.

Reclamation. The process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that the mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and creates no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

Recreational Home. Any enclosed mobile structure that can be used as temporary living accommodations, and which contains either built-in cooking facilities or lavatory facilities, and is self-motorized, placed on another vehicle for transport, or towed by another vehicle, including, but not limited to, items such as motor coaches, motor homes, fifth-wheelers, recreational vehicle, campers, or camper trailers.

Recreational Vehicle. As defined by the California Health and Safety Code, a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than 220 square feet, excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, bath and toilet rooms.

Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo). A standard measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. Reference evapotranspiration numbers shall be taken from the most current Evapotranspiration Zones Map developed by the California Department of Water Resources. For geographic areas not covered by the Evapotranspiration Zones Map, data from nearby areas shall be used.

Rehabilitated Landscape. Any re-landscaping of a project that requires a discretionary permit.

Related Equipment. All equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and data by means of radio frequencies for or related to the provision of personal wireless services. Such equipment may include cable, conduit, connectors, equipment pads, equipment shelters, cabinets, buildings, and access ladders.

Residential Accessory Structures. Buildings and structures normally associated with a dwelling, such as detached garages, carports, greenhouses, storage buildings, and swimming pools, but excluding cargo containers.

Residential Property. A parcel of real property which is developed and used either in whole or in part for residential purposes.

Restaurant, Quick-Service. Restaurants where most customers order and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared to leave the premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed and has minimal table-service; also known as a fast-food restaurant.

Restaurant, Table-Service. Restaurants where food and beverage are primarily served in and on reusable containers and dinnerware to customers seated at tables, booths or counters, with chairs, benches or stools, to be consumed on the premises; also known as a casual restaurant or fine dining restaurant. Includes buffet-style restaurants.

Retaining Wall. A structure that holds back soil and rock from a building, structure, or area that helps to prevent erosion and the downward slide of such materials.

Retention/Detention Basins. Ponds designed to reduce the required capacity of downstream drains, laterals, and culverts. This type of water storage system inhibits downstream flooding by reducing the volume of water released into drainage facilities.

Right-of-Way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use.

Right-of-Way Line. The future right-of-way line or plan lines of any highway or street as shown on the current Circulation Plan Roadway System and Sizing Map of the City’s General Plan.

Roofline. The ridge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.

Room, Guest. A room that is designed, used, or intended to be used as temporary sleeping accommodations for any person and which does not contain a bar sink and/or gas, electrical, or water outlets designed, used, or intended to be used for cooking facilities except as otherwise specifically provided for this Title.

Screening. A wall, fence, hedge, informal planting, or berm provided for the purpose of buffering a building or activity from neighboring areas or from the street.

Seed Enhancement. A business operation consisting of the coating of seed with nutrients, fertilizers, and grasses which enhance its germination properties.

Senior Citizen Housing Development. A residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least 35 dwelling units and complies with the requirements of California Civil Code Section 51.3.

Service Station. A business where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold on a retail basis as the principal use of the property. Light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor repairs may also be provided if incidental to such principal use. Service stations do not include premises where retail sales space exceeds 25 percent of the total building area or 500 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less. Service stations do not include premises where automobile painting and body work are conducted; also known as fueling station.

Service Station Minimart. A service station that also offers for sale prepackaged food items and tangible consumer goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer within a retail store of 5,000 square feet or less in gross floor area.

Setback. The minimum distance between by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line.

Setback Line. A line parallel to a specified lot line which defines a required yard area.

Shed, Garden and/or Tool. An accessory structure designed to store tools, lawn and garden care, or maintenance equipment or materials and which is not designed to contain any habitable space.

Shielding. A technique or method of construction which causes light emitted from an outdoor light fixture to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the fixtures.

Side Yard Appurtenances. Any item, whether structural or stand-alone, that extends from or is adjacent to a building structure in the side yard such as fireplaces and air conditioning units.

Sidewalk. A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.

Sign Ordinance. Chapter 17.56 (Signs on City Property) of the Manteca Municipal Code.

Simple Tone Noise. Any noise which is distinctly audible as a single pitch (frequency) or set of pitches as determined by the enforcement officer.

Single Ownership. Holding record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease, by a person, individually, jointly, in common, or in any other manner whereby the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

Site (inclusive of parcel, land, and premises). That portion of the site or building land area actually occupied by the building and/or contiguous improved surfaces. This is not to be construed as including vacant or unimproved land under the same ownership or contiguous to the building site area.

Site Coverage. The percentage of total site area covered by structures, open or enclosed, excluding uncovered steps, uncovered patios, terraces, and swimming pools.

Slope. See Grade.

Solar Energy Device/Equipment. Any solar collector or other solar energy device or any structural design feature of a building of which the primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, or distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, water heating, or the generation of electricity.

Sound Level Meter. An instrument meeting the American National Standard Institute’s Standard S1.4-1983 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.

Special Landscape Area. As identified in the landscape irrigation standards, an area of landscaping dedicated to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, and publicly accessible areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses, where turf provides a playing field or where turf is needed for high traffic activities.

Specialized Services, Multiple Occupancy. A multiple occupancy commercial or light industrial complex containing service business establishments serving a regional market and offering custom or specialized services with no more than 20 percent of the establishment floor space used for retail activity.

Specific Plan. A plan for a defined area that is consistent with the General Plan and with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65450 et seq.

State Geologist. The individual holding office as structured in Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq.

Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building between the floor of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above the ceiling of a basement, garage structure, cellar, or unused under-floor space is more than 6 feet above existing grade at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused under-floor space shall be considered a story. Penthouses used for purposes other than shelter of mechanical equipment or shelter of vertical shaft openings in the roof shall be considered a story.

Street. A public or private thoroughfare which provides principal means of access to abutting lots including, but not limited to, avenue, place, way, manor, drive, circle, lane, court, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley or a path as defined in this Chapter.

Street Banner. A temporary secured banner to be located along or over designated streets or displayed on a utility pole located in a public right-of-way as approved by the City.

Street Line. The boundary between a lot and an adjacent street.

Structural Alteration. Any physical change to or removal of the supporting members of a building, foundation or bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or creation or enlargement of a window or door, or change of a roofline or roof shape, including creating, enlarging, or extending a dormer.

Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. A building is a structure for the purposes of this Chapter.

Structure, Main. A structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use.

Structure Ridgeline. The line along the top of an existing roof or top of a structure, including existing parapets, penthouses, or mechanical equipment screens.

Structure, Temporary. A structure without any foundation or footings and which is intended to be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

Subterranean Structure. A roofed structure constructed underground, with no building stories aboveground, of which the roof does not exceed 3 feet above the pre-existing grade. Such structures are either separated from a building or connected to a building only by means of a passageway or hallway with no openings to finished grade except for a doorway.

Target Unit. A dwelling unit within a qualifying housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, a specific income household or qualifying senior residents.

Temporary Use Permit. A permit issued for a temporary use or a temporary structure.

Traditional Public Forum. The traditional public forum areas in the City of Manteca shall specifically be the area outside of City Hall and the Council Chambers including that portion of West Center Street in front of City Hall. In consultation with the City Attorney, the Community Development Director shall interpret this phrase in light of relevant court decisions.

Usable Space. Any portion of a building or structure which is designed to be or can be used as habitable space, which has finished walls (wallboard or plaster) and/or is heated with any fixed furnace or central heating system, including bathrooms, halls, garages, and laundry rooms. Storage areas with over 6 feet of vertical space shall also be considered usable space.

Utility. An entity which provides water, sewage collection, electricity, natural gas, telephone, cable television, or other public service or good to the public.

Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

Water-Intensive Landscaping. A landscape with a WUCOLS plant factor of 0.7 or greater.

Wheel Stop. A physical barrier sufficient in size and shape to prevent the movement of automobiles or other vehicles over or past such barrier.

Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth of a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

Windmill. A device that converts the kinetic energy of the wind to a usable form of electrical or mechanical energy, usually by means of rotating blades.

WUCOLS. The publication entitled “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species” by the University of California Cooperative Extension (1999 or most current version).

Yard Area, Actual. The actual yard area of a lot is the horizontal area between the property line and a parallel line along the nearest structure located outside of the required setback area. See Figure 17.100.060-4 (Yard Area).

Yard Area, Required. The required yard area (front, interior side, street side, and/or rear) of a lot is the horizontal area between the property line and the minimum setback distance for the respective yard. See Figure 17.100.060-4 (Yard Area).

FIGURE 17.100.060-4: YARD AREA



Yard, Front. That portion of a parcel from between the front property line and any building on the property.

Yard, Rear. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

Yard, Street Side. The side yard of a corner lot that is along the secondary street side of the parcel.

Yard, Side. That portion of a parcel between the primary building structure and the side lot line.

Zoning Code. The Zoning Code of the City of Manteca, being Title 17 of the Manteca Municipal Code, as amended.

Zoning District. A specifically delineated area or district in the city within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. (Ord. O2018-25 § 1; Ord. O2018-11 § 1; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2011)

Title 18 REVISED COMMUNITY GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Chapter 18.04 REVISED COMMUNITY GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Chapter 18.04 REVISED COMMUNITY GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
18.04.010 Findings.
The city council hereby finds and determines as follows:

A.    The Revised Community Growth Management Program (“growth program”) is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers under Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, and is intended to promote the health, safety and general welfare interests of the residents of the city, as specifically set forth herein.

B.     The city council has recently adopted the 2003 General Plan (“general plan”). As updated, the general plan contains growth management and other related goals and policies.

C.     This growth program is consistent with the general plan and has as its purpose the implementation of the growth management goals, policies and other policies contained in the general plan.

D.    The sewer treatment plant expansion for the phase three expansion is scheduled to be completed in 2004. The phase three expansion is forecasted to provide capacity for approximately eight years of growth.

E.     The city council finds it necessary to continue to coordinate phase three sewer treatment capacity with the number of building permits issued for residential, commercial, industrial and other development to ensure that new development does not exceed the amount of available sewer capacity and to distribute a limited resource equitably. To this end, the city council shall adopt, by this growth program for phase three, a sewer allocation system which shall distribute available sewage treatment capacity between residential, commercial, industrial and other development.

F.     Further, while the city has immediate sewage treatment capacity constraints which must be addressed, the city also has short- and long-term general plan goals and policies which must be implemented. To this end, the city must be able to critique and rate development proposals through a “point rating system” to ensure that those projects which best further the goals and policies of the general plan may use the sewage treatment capacity available.

G.    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement and advance the goals and policies of the general plan by establishing a mechanism and approach by which a steady, orderly and balanced rate of annual residential, commercial, industrial and other development growth in the city can be achieved and advancing the housing opportunities of the region in which the city is situated, while balancing that desired growth and new housing need against the existing and projected public service, facility and protection needs of the city’s residents and the existing and projected city fiscal, environmental and public service resources and constraints in an effort to, among other things:

1.     Protect against premature development in the absence of necessary sewage treatment capacity in phase three by ensuring that capacity is available and effectively staged, financed and allocated in a manner which will protect against the overextension of existing facilities;

2.     Protect against premature development in the absence of other necessary services, facilities and protections by ensuring that those services, facilities and protections provided by the city and/or other service agencies operating in the city can be properly and effectively staged and financed in a manner which will protect against the overextension of existing facilities;

3.     Provide quality housing opportunities for all economic sectors of the community and region, and provide incentives to developers to include low- and moderate-income housing in their developments;

4.     Provide a balance between residential, commercial, industrial and other development;

5.     Provide a balance between single and multi-family residential development in order to implement the residential mix goals and policies of the general plan; and

6.     Provide a short- and long-range growth rate commensurate with the city’s historical and projected growth needs.

H.    In 1988, the city council met with and received input from various community individuals and groups regarding future annual growth rates and determined that a longer-range average annual residential growth rate of up to 3.9 percent will best serve the needs and desires of the entire community. The city council, by adopting this growth program, affirms that residential growth rate for phase three sewer capacity, with some exceptions. Those exceptions include:

1.     Infill development as defined as follows:

a.     Residential lots which are legal lots of record, or are part of a major subdivision with no more than four remaining undeveloped lots that meet the criteria of subsection (H)(3) of this section;

b.     Residential lots which are created by a minor subdivision and which minor subdivision as a whole meet all of the criteria of subsection (H)(1)(c) of this section;

c.     Residential development projects that have no more than four units and are surrounded on at least three sides by developed property, one of which may be a street, except in the case of “through lots,” as defined in Title 166, which shall be surrounded on at least two sides by developed property, one of which may be a city street; or

d.     A second unit constructed on the same lot as an existing principal residence.

2.     Affordable Housing. Any residential unit or project that meets the affordable housing criteria as defined in this chapter shall be exempt from the growth cap.

3.     Redistributed Allocations. Allocations are deemed redistributed when approved in one year but not used until subsequent years. In the event an allocation is granted within the 3.9-percent growth cap in any one year, that allocation shall not be calculated against a future year’s 3.9-percent growth cap, since it will have already been counted toward one year’s cap.

4.     High-Density Development as Subject of “Catch-Up” Provision Approved by City Council. In any one year, a single development may exceed the 3.9-percent growth cap if it is for high-density development and approved by the city council to exceed the 3.9-percent growth cap for that year. In the event such a project is approved by the city council, the growth cap shall then be reduced in the following calendar year so that the combined residential sewer allocations for the two years does not exceed an average of 3.9 percent for the two years.

5.     Non-Low-Income Age-Restricted Senior Housing. Any age-restricted senior housing project, as defined in this chapter, that enters into a development agreement with the city shall be entitled to receive a maximum of three hundred project allocations per year beyond the 3.9-percent growth cap. Such project allocations shall come from the age-restricted senior housing category in the land use distribution chart as outlined in this chapter.

I.      The residential growth cap of 3.9 percent shall apply to the provision of project allocations in any one calendar year, unless otherwise provided herein, and not on actual building permits issued. The 3.9 percent shall be calculated in January of each year, multiplying the total number of housing units in the city of Manteca as of December 31st of the previous year by 3.9 percent, providing the total number of project allocations available in the following year. This process provides for an overall average of 3.9 percent residential growth over the life of the phase three wastewater quality control facility treatment expansion.

J.      The general plan and this chapter will not have a substantial adverse effect on the city’s regional fair share (as set forth in the general plan), and is compatible with state housing goals and regional housing needs because:

1.     The annual residential growth rate allowed by this chapter under phase three sewer allocation, coupled with the growth experience of the city prior to the adoption of the first growth program, will cumulatively allow more overall residential development (housing opportunities) than that contemplated for the city of Manteca;

2.     The point rating systems to be established pursuant to this chapter will provide incentives to developers to include low-income housing in their development proposals. Likewise, the exemption of affordable housing projects from the 3.9-percent growth cap shall provide additional incentives for developers to provide such housing;

3.     The general plan contains goals, policies and implementation programs for the provision of housing to meet the needs of all income groups in Manteca.

K.    This growth program presents a reasonable balance and accommodation of the public heath, safety and welfare interests advanced by growth management on the one hand, and the public health, safety and welfare interests advanced by the continued provision of safe, sanitary and affordable regional housing on the other hand, because it advances the interests listed in subsection J of this section.

L.     To the extent this chapter may be determined to reduce the housing opportunities of the region, the findings contained in subsection J of this section as to the public health, safety and welfare interests promoted by the adoption of this chapter, particularly the interests in assuming that adequate sewage capacity is available, are found to justify any such reduction in the housing opportunities of the region.

M.    In order to implement the goals and policies of the general plan and to accomplish the above findings and determinations, which are consistent with those general plan goals and policies, the city must be able to control the rate, distribution and economic level of proposed development on both a year-to-year and long-term basis. To this end, this chapter shall be in effect from and after its effective date through the date that phase three sewage capacities will have been depleted and new sewage capacities will be available. (Ord. 1316 §§ 2, 3, 2005; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the general plan. Those goals and policies contemplate, without limitation, any ordinance and other necessary city acts and regulations which provide a mechanism to control the rate, quality, distribution and, where necessary, economic level of proposed residential, commercial, industrial and other development in the city. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.030 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section unless from the context it is apparent that another meaning is intended.

“Administrative extension” is as defined by Section 18.04.140(A).

“Affordable housing” means any single housing unit that is affordable to low- and very-low income residents as defined by the applicable California Health and Safety Code regulations or a larger residential project that provides a mixture of housing where a minimum of seventy-five percent of the total number of housing units within the project meets the definition of affordable housing. A phasing schedule for development of the project must be approved by the city council and unless the redevelopment agency or other public funds are invested for development of the unit or project, the specific affordability provisions and terms for length of affordability requirements must also be approved by the city council.

“Age-restricted senior housing project” means any residential project that complies with Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code.

“Annual allocation” means the total number of project allocations that are granted for which building permits may be issued in a specified two-year period.

“Bedrooms” is as defined by the Uniform Building Code.

“Building permit” means the final city approval before construction may begin. This is usually the permit issued by the building division of the city. In the case of mobile home parks requiring no other entitlement from the city, it means the use permit for the park.

“City” means the city of Manteca.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Manteca.

“City manager” means the city of Manteca city manager or his or her designated representative.

“Consumer unit” or “CU” is as defined by Section 18.04.080(A).

“Criteria” means the considerations and measures used for reviewing the features of a proposed project. Such criteria shall be incorporated into a “project rating system” to be adopted by city council resolution. The project rating system shall be used by the director to determine point ratings to be assigned to proposed development projects requesting project allocations.

“Department” means the city of Manteca community development department.

“Developer” means a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity who proposes to engage in development.

“Development” means the uses to which the land is put, including without limitation, subdivisions pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.) and any other division of land (except by a public agency), the buildings to be constructed on it and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto.

“Development project” means the whole of any single-use or multiple-use development containing one or more of the following uses: residential, commercial, office, industrial, public and quasi-public or other use requiring sewage treatment capacity. The construction of more than one residential unit at a time within an area approved as a single subdivision or site plan application shall be considered one project, whether or not separate building permits are to be issued for each structure. The independent construction of one or more single units which are coincidentally within the same subdivision shall each be considered a separate project.

“Director” means the city of Manteca community development director or his or her designated representative.

“Infill” is as defined by Section 18.04.010(H)(1).

“Initial point rating” means the recommendation by the director regarding the total number of points achieved by a development project (seeking project allocations) when rated by such director pursuant to the project rating system.

“Low-income dwelling unit” means any residential unit that provides housing that is affordable to low- and very-low income residents as defined by the applicable California Health and Safety Code regulations.

“Nonresidential project allocation term” means the time when a nonresidential project allocation is valid for use, commencing on the date of the last discretionary approval, and expiring either on the date a building permit is issued or one year from the commencement date, whichever is earlier.

“Phase three expansion” of the wastewater quality control facility (WQCF) means the project that increases the treatment capacity from 6.95 MGD (million gallons per day) to approximately 9.87 MGD and that improves effluent quality from secondary effluent to tertiary effluent. The major facilities of the phase three expansion include an influent pump station, sedimentation basins, aeration basins, clarifiers, digester, laboratory, sludge dewatering system, effluent equalization pond, ultraviolet (UV) light disinfection system and tertiary filters.

“Point rating application fee” means that fee that is required to submit an application for point rating for any development project, as further defined by Section 18.04.100.

“Project allocation” means that portion of the annual allocation awarded to a specific development project pursuant to this chapter.

“Project allocation fee” means that fee that is required to secure project allocations once a development project has received a sufficient number of points through the point rating process, as further defined by Section 18.04.110(B).

“Project rating system” means that system composed of a number of general and specific criteria used for assigning and determining initial point ratings and minimum point ratings to a specific proposed development project requesting project allocations. The project rating system shall be established by city council resolution and is further explained in Section 18.04.090 et seq., of this chapter.

“Residential project allocation term” means the time when a residential project allocation is valid for use, commencing on the date of the last discretionary approval and expiring either on the date a building permit is issued or three years from the commencement date, whichever is earlier.

“Residential unit” means an inhabitable unit with its own kitchen.

“Threshold determination” means the minimum qualifying point total which can be achieved by a development project (seeking project allocation) under the project rating system to be eligible for project allocation award. (Ord. 1347 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1316 §4, 2005; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.040 Application.
A.    This chapter applies to all development project(s) within the city and those development projects outside the city seeking sewer capacity that the city council, by special agreement ratified by a city council resolution securing an approving vote of the majority of the entire city council, determines appropriate, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No development project building permits shall be issued by the city unless and until a project allocation has been obtained by the development project in accordance with this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

1.     Development project(s) which solely relate to the replacing of, remodeling of, conversion of or adding to an existing building or structure recently destroyed, provided that no additional sewer (i.e., need in excess of the prior sewer need) is created. To the extent that any additional sewer capacity is needed or deemed needed, the development project shall be subject to this chapter.

2.     Development project(s) which solely relate to the division of land and not to the construction of any building(s) or structure(s) or the commencement of any use(s) which will result in the need for any sewage treatment capacity. To the extent that such a development project will create a need for any sewage treatment capacity, it shall be subject to this chapter. Subsequent development project applications (e.g., building permits, use permits) seeking to construct any building(s) or structure(s) or to commence any use(s) on that previously subdivided land shall be subject to this chapter.

(Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.050 Project allocation system.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all proposed residential, commercial, industrial and other development projects in the city shall first secure a project allocation before a building permit for such development can be issued. Such project allocation shall not be granted until a development project has received approval by the city council of a tentative map, parcel map, site plan, or a development agreement. The project allocation process shall involve both:

A.    The sewer allocation system (as set forth in this chapter and in subsequent city council action) which shall determine the amount of phase three sewage capacity available to each type of development; and

B.     The point rating system, to be established by subsequent city council action, which shall establish a mechanism by which to evaluate specific development project proposals competing for such available sewage capacity. (Ord. 1347 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.060 Phase three sewer allocation system.
The phase three sewer allocation system contained herein is intended to provide a framework within which the director can make judgments regarding the allocation of available phase three sewer capacity to development projects. This sewer allocation system is designed to fairly and equitably allocate available phase three sewer capacity among competing residential, commercial, industrial and other development projects based on the goals and policies of the general plan and this growth program. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.070 Available phase three sewer capacity.
It is estimated that the city’s portion of the phase three sewer treatment plant expansion which can be considered for allocation is approximately 2.49 million gallons per day of sewer treatment capacity. The charts below exhibit the division of the additional 2.49 million gallons per day that will be available from the phase three expansion (as divided among the different categories of development). The amount, criteria and division of phase three sewer capacity shall be determined by Section 18.04.080. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.080 General criteria for phase three sewer allocations.
A.    Consumer Unit. A “consumer unit” (“CU”) means a unit of wastewater discharge consisting of two hundred fifty gallons per day (GPD) of domestic strength sewage residential development with three or more bedrooms, and one hundred seventy-three GPD of domestic strength sewage for residential development with two or fewer bedrooms or age-restricted senior housing projects as defined in this chapter.

B.     Dwelling Unit. A “dwelling unit” (“DU”) means a single, low-density residential dwelling unit that is constructed on a low-density residential lot.

C.     Commercial Coefficients. In order to calculate the gallons per day (GPD) usage for commercial development projects, the city shall utilize the Tri-Valley specific use wastewater coefficients, except in the case where a development project has had water or sewer records for similar projects in other locations and can substantiate them to the city. Allocations for residential units constructed within any commercial zone district shall be through the high-density residential capacity.

D.    Land Use Distribution. The following is the distribution of the city’s total share of the phase three sewer treatment plant capacity according to land use designation:

 

Percentage of Available Phase Three Capacity

 

Residential

67.6 =

42

Low/very low density

12.6

Age-restricted senior housing

9

Medium/high density

3

Affordable housing

1

Infill

Commercial/Industrial

25

 

 

Schools

5

Reserve

2.4

TOTAL

100%

 

(Ord. 1305 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.090 Phase three point rating system.
The city council shall immediately establish by resolution a phase three point rating system for development projects seeking project allocations involving phase three sewer capacity. Development projects seeking such project allocations shall be subject to review and rating in accordance with said point rating system, and must meet the threshold determination in order to qualify for award of project allocations. Development projects with approved development agreements, consistent with Government Code Section 65865 et. seq. shall be subject to this revised point rating system, but shall be exempt from the competitive evaluation system as provided for in Section 18.04.120.

In addition to projects with approved development agreements as of the effective date of this chapter, the following residential projects and their remaining units that do not have sewer allocations or have been issued building permits as of the date of the adoption of this chapter shall be exempt from the revised point rating system, due to the fact these projects have valid, approved final maps, have approved tentative maps and are in the final review stages with the city for their respective final maps, and/or are the subject of a development agreement. These projects shall be first to receive project allocations up to the amounts listed consistent with this chapter:

 

Bella Vista

73 units

Primavera 1-6

143 units

Villa Tuscany

32 units

Villa Ticino #6

12 units

Jasmine Hollow

156 units

Paseo

10 units (low-density)

177 units (high-density)

Woodward West

18 units

Dutra Farms SW/SE

47 units

Morse Estates

22 units

Hunter’s Cove

8 units

Erdman Property

24 units

Gomes Estates

15 units

Primavera #7

6 units

 

Said projects shall only be entitled to project allocations one time and shall not be entitled to receive the same project allocation in the future if they relinquish their project allocations without participating in the competitive evaluation process. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.100 Process.
The procedures and regulations contained in Sections 18.04.110 through 18.04.170 shall apply to project allocation(s) under phase three sewer capacity unless otherwise indicated. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.110 Application process.
A.    Subsequent to receiving approval of a residential, industrial or commercial tentative or parcel map, or site plan, and prior to receipt of a building permit(s), the developer of the proposed development project (not exempt from this chapter) shall apply for, and receive award of, project allocation(s) as set forth in this chapter. Residential project applicants shall submit a project allocation application and pay the point rating application fee. Upon completion of participating in the competitive evaluation process outlined in Section 18.04.120 of this chapter and receiving one or more project allocations, and upon expiration of the ten-day appeal period outlined in Section 18.04.190 of this chapter, the developer shall pay the project allocation fee. Such fee shall be paid within thirty days of the city’s notice of the results of the competitive point rating system. Such notice shall be provided by first class mail. Failure to pay such fee in a timely manner shall result in relinquishment of project allocations for which the fee is not paid. The developer shall then obtain building permits for the approved project allocations, as further outlined in Section 18.04.140 of this chapter. If building permits are not secured, and an administrative extension is not granted for any of the project allocations, such project allocations shall be forfeited to the city to reallocate according to Section 18.04.150 of this chapter, and the developer shall not be entitled to a refund of the project allocation fee paid for such project allocations. In addition, the forfeited project allocations may be reallocated by the city, and such project allocations shall not be subject to the residential growth cap for the year in which it was reallocated. This section shall apply to forfeited project allocations that had been awarded from either the phase two or phase three expansion of the city’s wastewater quality control facility. Nonresidential development projects shall be required to submit a project allocation application and pay the application fee, but shall not be required to participate in the competitive evaluation process outlined in Section 18.04.120 of this chapter.

B.     Any application for a project allocation shall be made on the forms established by the department, shall contain that information determined necessary by the department in order to properly administer this chapter, and shall be filed with the department. The residential point rating applications shall be accompanied by a point rating application fee established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1347 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1316 § 5, 2005; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.120 Competitive evaluation pursuant to point rating system.
A.    Subject to other limitations contained herein, in order for a project to compete for annual allocations, the applicant must properly file its application within the time limits set by this chapter, and must meet the minimum threshold determinations as provided for under the point rating system.

B.     Proposed development projects seeking project allocations shall have their project allocation applications initially considered and evaluated by the director. Applicants for project allocations must submit an application for point rating by the second Friday of each March, to be considered for project allocations for that respective calendar year. Applicants for project allocations for affordable housing projects shall be entitled to submit applications for point rating at any time in the year, and shall not be limited to the March or October dates. The director shall review each such project allocation(s) application and shall assess an initial point rating pursuant to the point rating system established by city council resolution. Each project shall be evaluated based on the totality of the proposed project, and not on the individual phase for which project allocations are being requested in any one year. For example, a project with several phases shall be evaluated based on project amenities within the entire project, and not just the first phase for which project allocations are being sought. Project amenities can be increased in subsequent years when participating in the competitive evaluation process, but cannot be decreased. Allocations shall then be granted by the director, with the development project receiving the highest number of points receiving first priority for project allocations. The development project with the next-highest number of points would receive second priority, and so on. In the event of a tie in the number of points received through the initial point rating process, and not enough project allocations available sufficient to meet the needs of the tying development projects, the director shall evenly divide the remaining project allocations by the number of tied development projects, unless the tied development projects mutually agree to an alternative distribution formula. In the event that a project allocation application passes the threshold determination, but no project allocations are left in that year’s annual allocation, the development project must participate in the competitive evaluation process the following year in order to be considered for project allocations. In the event that sufficient allocations are available within the 3.9 percent annual growth cap, additional applications for project allocations may be submitted for development projects by the second Friday of each October of that year.

C.     In any year where the number of requests for sewer allocations exceeds the 3.9 percent growth cap, no very-low density, low-density or medium-density development project shall receive more than one hundred residential allocations, except as provided for in Section 18.04.010(H), or as provided for in an approved development agreement.

D.    In the event a development project does not receive a sufficient number of points to receive project allocations in any one year, such development project shall be required to resubmit the point rating application in subsequent years to be considered for project allocations in those years, and shall be required to pay a new point rating application fee upon submittal of the new application. (Ord. 1510 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1347 § 5, 2007; Ord. 1308 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.130 Time limit for city action and steps in process.
A.    Each point rating application shall be processed by the department pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.04.110. The point rating application shall be rated by the director within thirty days of the date the point rating application is accepted by the department as complete or deemed complete by operation of law. Notwithstanding the above, failure to so act within such thirty days after the application, if accepted as complete or deemed complete, shall not constitute an award of the requested project allocations.

B.     The overall process for approval of those projects subject to this chapter is likely, although not mandated, to occur in the following steps:

1.     Application for the underlying development project entitlements filed by development project proponent with the department;

2.     Legislative approvals secured, e.g., general plan, specific plan, zoning;

3.     Environmental review initiated and determinations on proposed project completed, e.g., whether to prepare exemption, negative declaration or environmental impact report;

4.     Administrative approvals secured, e.g., tentative map;

5.     Competitive rating or proposed development project pursuant to point rating system for award of project allocation commenced by the director;

6.     Director notifies all applicants of the results of the competitive evaluation system. The ten-day appeal period begins the date the notice is deposited into United States first class mail;

7.     In the event no appeals are submitted within ten days, project allocations are awarded and the director sends notice of availability of project allocations to eligible developers. Developers then have thirty days from the date of such notice in which to pay the project allocation fee;

8.     In the event one or more appeals are filed within ten days, the director shall schedule the matter for the next available city council meeting for a final decision;

9.     Time limit on the life of a project allocation shall begin on the date the final notification is sent by the director;

10.   Ministerial approvals secured, e.g., tentative map;

11.   Building permits issued.

(Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.140 Revocation of project allocations.
A.    Once a development project has been awarded a project allocation, that project allocation shall remain in effect unless:

1.     Expiration of Project Allocations. All development projects receiving a project allocation permit shall obtain building permits within a total of thirty-six months of the date of the final award of the project allocation’s permit or any such project allocation shall automatically expire without notice. Project allocation permits shall be issued at the time of the last discretionary approval for a development project. Project allocation of any development project which fails to obtain a building permit within that twenty-four month period shall expire, unless an administrative extension is granted by the city manager. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city manager in his or her sole discretion, upon receipt of an application for an administrative extension along with payment of an administrative extension application fee as established by city council resolution, may extend the time for obtaining building permits set forth in this section on a one-time basis per project for a period not to exceed ninety days from the forfeiture date. This extension shall only be available for those developers who have submitted complete plans at least sixty days prior to the date on which forfeiture of sewer allocations is due to take place, and all other documents (including but not limited to final map approval, applicable bond documents if any, etc.) at least thirty days prior to the date on which forfeiture of project allocations is due to take place. For purposes of this section, the term “complete plans” means plans that are in such a condition, as determined by the Manteca public works department that either no revisions or only minor revisions are necessary in order to approve said plans. Once building permits have been issued, the project allocation(s) shall be valid for only the life of the building permit and any extension thereof.

2.     Failure to Comply. If it is determined that a development project does not or will not substantially comply with the maps, plans, specifications, schedules or other conditions or representations upon which the project allocation or map approval or planning permit was granted in accordance with state law, any such project allocation shall automatically expire without notice. In addition, in the event relevant characteristics of the project change to the extent that the project would have received fewer points through the point rating system than it originally received, the project allocation for that project shall be automatically relinquished to the city. In the event a project allocation is revoked, forfeited or otherwise no longer in effect, the developer shall not be entitled to reimbursement of the point rating application fee or the project allocation fee. (Ord. 1347 § 6, 2007; Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.150 Reallocation.
If any development project with awarded project allocation loses its project allocation pursuant to Section 18.04.140, such project allocation shall be placed back in the overall capacity of the allocation’s respective category and distributed in the next allocation period, in accordance with Section 18.04.120. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.160 Assurance of project features and development schedule.
In order to assure that projects will be built and made available to occupants as indicated by an applicant when projects are competitively rated, the city may enter into development agreements (pursuant to Government Code Section 65864, et seq.) or annexation agreements, require the posting of bonds or other guarantees, withhold occupancy permits or other entitlements and/or pursue other land use measures/remedies provided for in this and other city regulations and in state and federal law. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.170 Assignment.
All project allocations, when issued, shall run with the land and are not transferable except with the land, subject to the provisions of this chapter relating to the revocation/lapse of project allocations, and the securing of all other necessary approvals. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.180 Appeals, exhaustion and court actions.
The procedures and regulations contained in Sections 18.04.190 through 18.04.210 shall apply to project allocation(s) under phase three sewer capacity unless otherwise indicated. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.190 Appeals.
A.    The project allocation determinations and other determinations and other determinations of the director, pursuant to this chapter, shall be appealable by the applicant or by any other interested party to the city council, provided such appeal is made within ten days following the date of the challenged determination. No project allocations shall be available until all appeals are exhausted.

B.     An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall state specifically the alleged error or abuse of discretion by the director and how his or her decision is not supported by the findings and/or substantial evidence in the record.

C.     Within seven working days of the filing of an appeal, the director shall transmit to the city clerk the project allocation application, the initial point ratings and decision of the director and all other relevant material.

D.    The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing pursuant to the following:

1.     The hearing shall be held in the council chambers of Manteca City Hall or in such other location as the city council shall direct.

2.     The hearing before the city council shall be held not less than fourteen nor more than twenty-five days following receipt by the city clerk of the appeal application.

3.     A hearing before the city council shall be noticed by mailing notices to all property owners within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the property in question, as these property owners are listed on the last equalized assessment role of the county assessor. Such notices shall be mailed out not less than eleven days prior to the date of the hearing.

E.     The city council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the director, provided that the city council acts on the basis of the record of the director’s action (i.e., the record transmitted by the director pursuant to subdivision C above) and such additional evidence received by the city council at its public hearing. The city council shall make written findings supporting its determination regarding the appeal and the point rating score and shall have substantial evidence in the record supporting each of its findings. The city council’s decision on the appeal shall become effective immediately and shall be final. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.200 Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
In any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul a finding, determination or decision of the city council, director and/or any other city agency or employee made pursuant to this chapter at a properly noticed public hearing, the issues raised shall be limited to those raised in the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the city prior to or at the public hearing, except as otherwise provided by law. There shall be included in any public notice issued pursuant to this chapter a notice substantially stating the following:

If you challenge the (nature of proposed action) in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice or in written correspondence delivered to the (city body conducting the hearing) at or prior to the public hearing.

(Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.210 Time limit.
No action or proceeding described in Section 18.04.200 that is brought pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure shall be maintained unless said action of proceeding is commenced and service is made on the applicable city body and/or employee within ninety days after the challenged action. Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil procedure is hereby made applicable to such actions. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

 

18.04.220 Effect of project allocation.
The granting of a project allocation pursuant to the procedures and provisions of this chapter and subsequent city council and/or growth management committee action shall not exempt nor affect the developer’s obligation to obtain all required general plan, specific plan, zoning, environmental, subdivision and/or other land use approvals as are required by statute and/or local ordinance, resolution or other policy and/or regulation as a prerequisite to the application for and receipt of building permits and payment of all other required fees. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2004)

FEE SCHEDULES
I. GENERAL FEES
 

Subject

Fee

Section

ALARM SYSTEMS

Type of Service

 

8.04.060

Alarm user permit

No charge

 

1st response in designated period

No charge

 

2nd response in designated period

No charge

 

3rd response in designated period

$100.00

 

4th response in designated period

$200.00

 

5th response in designated period

$400.00

 

Charge for no alarm permit

$200.00

 

Failure for owner to respond

$100.00

 

(Res. R2009-56)

ANIMALS

See also POTBELLY PIG

6.12.110

Adopted animals

Cats

 

6.16.160

Adoption fee

$20.00

 

Spay/neuter deposit

  75.00

 

Dogs

 

6.16.110

Adoption fee

$20.00

 

Spay/neuter deposit

  75.00

 

Redemption fees

Cats, goats, rabbits, birds, and other small animals

First impound

$20.00 + $10.00/day

6.16.170

Second impound

  30.00 + 10.00/day

 

Three or more impounds

  40.00 +10.00/day

 

Dogs

 

 

First impound

$40.00 + $10.00/day

6.16.140

Second impound

  60.00 + 10.00/day

 

Three or more impounds

  80.00 + 10.00/day

 

Unregistered dogs

  20.00

6.16.130

Out-of-town dogs

  20.00

6.16.140

Large animals

 

 

Impound

$40.00/man hour

6.16.060

Additional daily rate

    10.00 + actual time

 

Registration fees

Dogs

 

 

Unaltered

 

6.08.090

1 year

$  50.00

 

2 years

75.00

 

3 years

100.00

 

(Res. R2010-158)

 

 

Spayed, neutered

 

 

1-year

   $20.00 per year

6.08.140

2-year

   30.00 per year

6.08.140

3-year

   40.00 per year

6.08.140

Late registration penalty

 20.00

6.04.140

Lost tag replacement

 10.00

6.08.130

Miscellaneous fees

Owner surrender fees

Live dogs

Received at shelter

$25.00

 

Picked up from owner

  75.00

 

Deceased dogs

 

 

Pick up

$50.00

 

Received at shelter

25.00

 

Live cats and other small animals

Received at shelter

$25.00

 

Picked up from owner

  50.00

 

Deceased cats and other small animals

Pick up

$50.00

 

Received at shelter

25.00

 

Emergency call charges

Call out between 6 p.m. and 7 a.m.

$150.00

 

Transport to veterinarian

  40.00

 

Identification “chips”

  20.00

 

(Res. R2010-12; Res. 1998-22)

BICYCLE

License

$2.00

10.68.050

Transfer

  0.75

10.68.060

BINGO

License

By resolution

5.20.070

BUDGET, hard copies and cds

$15.00

 

BUILDING PERMIT

 

 

Government building facilities use

Effective Jan. 1, 2015

15.04.120

Very low-density residential

$4,362.53 per unit

 

Low-density residential

  4,362.53 per unit

 

Medium-density residential

  3,638.12 per unit

 

High-density residential

  3,274.19 per unit

 

Commercial mixed-use

  3,274.19 per unit

 

Major equipment purchase

350.00 per unit

15.04.120

Fire facility fee

Effective Feb. 4, 2018

15.04.120

Residential

 

 

Single-family

$0.29 per square foot

 

Multifamily

  0.35 per square foot

 

Nonresidential

 

 

Commercial

  0.21 per square foot

 

Office

  0.28 per square foot

 

Industrial

  0.10 per square foot

 

Assisted living

$2,141.19 per bed

 

Mobile home parks/modular/campsites

$711.36 per unit

 

BUSINESS LICENSES (See II. BUSINESS LICENSES)

CONCEALED WEAPONS PERMIT FEE

$40.00

 

Annual concealed weapons permit renewal fee

40.00

 

Weapons class and qualifying shoot fee

35.00

 

DANCE HALL AND PUBLIC DANCE PERMITS

Dance hall serving alcoholic beverages

$250.00

 

Dance hall not serving alcoholic beverages

 125.00

 

FOG (Fats, Oils and Grease)

FOG collected within the City of Manteca           

$100.00 per 1,000 gallons

13.20.110 - L

All others   

$125.00 per 1,000 gallons

13.20.110 - L

(Ord. 2019-17 § 1; Memo dated 1-2-18; Memo dated 1-7-15; Memo dated 1-22-14; Memo dated 1-2-14; Res. R2010-12; Res. R1995-171)

 

Manteca Park Golf Course

Actual

2018-19

Proposed 2020

Diff.

Comparison Average

Weekday

 

 

 

 

18-hole weekday/resident

$22.00

$25.00

$3.00

na

18-hole weekday/nonresident

$26.00

$29.00

$3.00

$29.00

9-hole weekday

$16.00

$17.00

$1.00

$22.00

Junior weekday

$12.00

$12.00

-

$15.00

Twilight weekday

$18.00

$19.00

$1.00

$21.00

Super twilight weekday

$13.00

$14.00

$1.00

$15.00

Senior rate (Monday—Friday)

$20.00

$21.00

$1.00

$21.00

Active military weekday

$15.00

$15.00

-

na

Weekends

 

 

 

 

18-hole weekend/resident

$25.00

$29.00

$4.00

na

18-hole weekend/nonresident

$33.00

$34.00

$1.00

$38.00

9-hole weekend

$18.00

$19.00

$1.00

$24.00

Junior weekend

$14.00

$14.00

-

$16.00

Twilight weekend

$19.00

$21.00

$1.00

$26.00

Super twilight weekend

$15.00

$16.00

$1.00

$17.00

Active military weekend

$17.00

$17.00

-

na

Pass surcharge

$17.00

$17.00

-

na

Pass Play

 

 

 

 

Adult pass resident

$99.00

$114.00

$15.00

$125.00

Adult pass nonresident

$119.00

$139.00

$20.00

$140.00

Senior pass resident

$84.00

$99.00

$15.00

$140.00

Senior pass nonresident

$99.00

$119.00

$20.00

$125.00

Junior pass

$50.00

$50.00

-

$96.00

Youth on course

$5.00

$5.00

-

$5.00

Disability resident

$84.00

$99.00

$15.00

$125.00

Disability nonresident

$99.00

$119.00

$20.00

$125.00

(Res. R2020-05; Res. R2017-190; Res. R2009-231; Res. R2005-134)

 

Subject

Fee

Section

LATE FEES

 

 

Accounts past due by more than 14 calendar days

$10.00

 

OVERSIZE, OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES

 

 

One-time:

$15.00

 

Annual:

$70.00

 

PARADE, ASSEMBLY, SPECIAL EVENT TRAFFIC CONTROL FEE

Determined by number of officers

12.16.130

 

Park Acquisition and Improvements Fees

Per Unit

Single-Family Dwelling Unit

$4,006.00

Multi-Family Dwelling Unit

$2,797.00

Neighborhood Park-In-Lieu Fee

 

Single-Family Dwelling Unit

$3,648.00

Multi-Family Dwelling Unit

$2,548.00

 

Existing Fee Updated by ENR CCI*

Neighborhood Park Fee Portion

Community Park Fee Portion

Total

Single-Family Dwelling Unit

$1,883.51

$2,058.04

$3,941.55

Multi-Family Dwelling Unit

$1,303.96

$1,424.79

$2,728.75

*       Existing fee updated by the current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index. applies to existing developments that have rights under their existing development agreements, vesting tentative maps or park improvement agreements.

 

(Memo dated 12-18-18; Memo dated 12-24-17; Res. R2016-235; Res. R2003-266; Res. R2000-315; Res. R1999-201; Res. 1997-37)

 

PARKING VIOLATIONS, FINES

 

Description

Penalty

No parking zone

$32.00

72-hour parking

27.00

Displayed for sale

27.00

Vehicle repair in street

27.00

24-minute parking, green zone

17.00

40-minute parking

17.00

1-hour parking

17.00

2-hour parking

17.00

4-hour parking

17.00

Parked out of markings

25.00

No parking 4:00 a.m.—5:00 a.m.

17.00

Loading zone

32.00

Oversized vehicle

32.00

Passenger loading zone

32.00

Parked in alley

32.00

Parked off truck route

50.00

MUSD parking violation

22.00

Parking violations

27.00

Parked in fire lane

37.00

Park parallel

22.00

Fire hydrant

32.00

Parked in handicap zone

275.00*

Blocking access to handicap zone

275.00*

Parked in handicap loading zone

275.00*

Expired registration

100.00*

No license plates

60.00*

Display of tabs

60.00*

Stopping in occupied intersection

50.00

Equipment violation

30.00**

*       Minimum fine set by state law.

**    $10.00 with proof of correction.

 

Late fee    $13.00

(Res. R2003-141:  Res. R1993-159)

 

Subject

Fee

Section

POTBELLY PIG

$25.00 per year

6.12.110

(Res. R1995-107)

 

RESIDENTIAL SOURCE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING

The monthly rate or charge for the implementation of programs required to meet the goals of AB939 and AB1820 as proposed in the city’s adopted source reduction and recycling element from each single-family dwelling or from each unit of a multiple-family dwelling in the city shall be three dollars and fifty-six cents.

If the city’s 96-gallon yardwaste container is returned to the city and the resident does not dispose of yardwaste through the city’s solid waste collection system, the monthly rate is two dollars and six cents.

These rates shall not apply to Manteca low-income senior citizens who qualify for reduced refuse rates. (Res. R1988-79)

 

Subject

Fee

Section

SEPTIC TANK CLEANING

 

 

Discharge

$4.00 per 1000 gallons

13.24.090

SEWER

See III. UTILITIES

 

STREET, ENCROACHMENT, EXCAVATION

By resolution

12.04.210

 

TAXICAB FARES

A.    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with the following rates governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.40 of this code:

 

 

Rates

Base rate (meter drop)

$2.50 first 1/20th

Per mile or fraction thereof

$0.125 per 1/20th

Waiting time or when required to travel less than 10 mph

$25.00 per hour

Trunks

$1.00

Hand baggage, parcels, or packages

$0.10*

*           For any item, parcel or package transported in excess of forty pounds (40 lbs.).

 

B.     No charge shall be made for extra passengers.  This applies only to those passengers whose point of pickup and point of destination are the same. (Res. R2013-168; Res. R1996-200)

 

TOWING SERVICE CHARGES

A.    Towing Charges. Includes the response to the scene, any ordinary work positioning and hooking up the vehicle for towing and return to place of business. It also includes ordinary cleanup at the scene.

1.     All passenger cars and trucks with single rear wheels. Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. *(Hourly rate)

Weekends and holidays and 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays. *(Hourly rate)

2.     All vehicles and unattached trailers factory  rated over 1-1/2 ton. Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to  5:00 p.m. (depending on size of vehicle towed). *(Hourly rate)

Weekends and holidays and 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. weekdays (depending on size of vehicle towed) *(Hourly rate)

3.     The tow operator may accept a fee, or not accept a fee and remain at the top of the rotation list if the tow truck has arrived or any time to the point of being hooked up to a vehicle and the owner arrives and wants his or her car. *(Actual hourly rate—with minimum)

4.     Mileage. To a call for service within the city limits is included in the towing charge. If the vehicle is towed to another location at the request of the owner, mileage in excess of the distance from the business address of the tow service to the scene may be charged at the rate of *(included in hourly rate).

B.     Storage. The first twenty-four hours of the storage charge will begin when the vehicle is deposited in the storage yard and concludes at the same time the following day. Storage charges will be added for each twenty-four hours, or fraction thereof, thereafter.

Outside — (As established in the annual rate by the area Highway Patrol Office)

Inside — (As established in the annual rate by the area Highway Patrol Office)

C.     Miscellaneous.

1.     Dolly. This charge will be used when it is mandatory that the vehicle be placed on dollies, and includes all actions necessary to place the vehicle on dollies and prepare it for towing *(included in hourly rate).

2.     Standby. Should be used when, for whatever the reason, the driver must wait to start his or her work after arrival at the scene. Charges begin after a full fifteen minutes have been spent on standby. That fifteen minutes is chargeable and any portion of fifteen minutes thereafter ... per fifteen minutes *(included in hourly rate).

3.     Winching. This charge may be used only when it is necessary to winch a vehicle from an extraordinary position off the roadway and where accessibility is difficult. Winching is not to be charged for routine positioning of a vehicle for tow hookup. After 15 minutes, additional time may be charged to labor *(included in hourly rate).

*       The hourly rate is computed annually by the California Highway Patrol by adding the hourly rate charged by tow companies on the rotation list, plus 15%, and dividing the total figure by the number of tow companies participating.

 

(Res. R1994-9; Res. R1990-368; Res. R1990-186; Res. R1990-148; Res. R1990-113; Res. R1991-178)

WATER   See III. UTILITIES

 

II. BUSINESS LICENSES
 

A.    GENERALLY

Subject

Fee

Section

ADMINISTRATION

 

 

Duplicate licenses

$5.00

5.04.090

Transfer of license

5.00

5.04.080

ADVERTISING

 

5.12.030

Billboards, illuminated signs, wall signs

$150.00 per year

5.12.030

CHRISTMAS TREES

 

5.12.030

Decorations and miscellaneous Christmas merchandise other than in connection with another business license

$50.00 per year

5.12.030

COMMERCIAL VEHICLES

Fee Per Year

5.12.030

1. For every vehicle used in serving residents or places of business within the city, by:

 

 

a. Person maintaining a fixed place of business outside the city or operating from outside city

$  63.00

 

b. Person maintaining a fixed place of business within the city or operating from within the city

45.00

 

2. For every mobile grocery store, operating within the city

750.00

 

3. For every mobile lunch-wagon used in selling or delivering boxed lunches, confections, refreshments, cigarettes, tobaccos, etc., or offering lunch-counter service, operating within the city

188.00

 

4. For every vehicle used in selling, delivering, or offering for sale to residents, vegetables, fruits and similar commodities, operating within the city

188.00

 

DANCES, PUBLIC

$25.00 per event

5.56.070


CONTRACTORS (Section 5.12.030)

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

9,999.00

45.00

10,000.00

49,999.00

63.00

50,000.00

99,999.00

94.00

100,000.00

149,999.00

156.00

150,000.00

199,999.00

219.00

200,000.00

249,999.00

281.00

250,000.00

299,999.00

344.00

300,000.00

349,999.00

406.00

350,000.00

399,999.00

469.00

400,000.00

449,999.00

531.00

450,000.00

499,999.00

594.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

688.00

600,000.00

699,999.00

813.00

700,000.00

799,999.00

938.00

800,000.00

899,999.00

1,063.00

900,000.00

999,999.00

1,188.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

1,250.00

 

Subject

Fee Per Year

Section

FOOD PROCESSING

 

 

1. Canning, processing or preparing green or dried fruits or vegetables or other food products for shipment or for sale on commission or otherwise

$300.00

5.12.030

2. Creamery, milk or cheese processing or manufacturing plant which makes no retail sales

300.00

5.12.030

3. Packing or preparing for shipment fresh fruit or vegetables where no processing other than washing or trimming is involved

75.00

5.12.030

HOTELS, MOTELS, APARTMENTS AND ROOMINGHOUSES AND AUTO COURTS (5.12.030)

Gross receipts of $5,000.00 or less, $38.00 per year; plus 75¢ for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts up to $100,000; plus 25¢ for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts thereafter

LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY FEED (Section 5.12.030)

 

If annual gross receipts are:

 

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

MANUFACTURING (Section 5.12.030)

 

If annual gross receipts are:

 

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS, TRADE, OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS (Section 5.12.030)

If the annual gross receipts are:

 

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

149,999.00

150.00

150,000.00

249,999.00

250.00

250,000.00 and over

 

313.00

OIL STORAGE TANK STATIONS (5.12.030)

$125.00 per year

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES, PERSONAL SERVICE AND ARTS AND CRAFTS (Section 5.12.030)

If annual gross receipts are:

 

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 999.00

$ 15.00

1,000.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

9,999.00

63.00

10,000.00

19,999.00

94.00

20,000.00

29,999.00

125.00

30,000.00

39,999.00

163.00

40,000.00

49,999.00

200.00

50,000.00 and over

 

250.00

RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION (5.12.030)

Dwelling units constructed in very low density or low density residential zones

$900.00 per dwelling unit

Dwelling units constructed in medium density or high density residential zones

$625.00 per dwelling unit

RETAILING, PRINTING AND PUBLISHING, TRUCKING AND TRANSPORTATION

(Section 5.12.030)

If annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

STREET FAIR AND SPECIAL EVENTS

$5.00 per vendor

TRADING STAMPS (5.12.030)

$125.00 per year or
fractional part thereof

TRUCKING AND TRANSPORTATION (maintained by person maintaining fixed place of business outside of city) (5.12.030)

License, annual

 

$63.00

VENDING MACHINES (Section 5.12.030)

1. Vending machines vending merchandise other than cigarettes where gross receipts are:

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

2. Cigarette vending machines where gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00and over

 

313.00

WHOLESALING AND JOBBING (Section 5.12.030)

 

If annual gross receipts are:

 

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 99,999.00

$ 63.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

94.00

200,000.00

299,999.00

156.00

300,000.00

399,999.00

219.00

400,000.00

499,999.00

281.00

500,000.00

599,999.00

344.00

600,000.00

799,999.00

438.00

800,000.00

999,999.00

563.00

1,000,000.00 and over

 

625.00

 

B.     BUSINESSES REQUIRING CERTIFICATES OR PERMITS

 

Subject

Fee

Section

Businesses requiring certificate of compliance from police chief:

 

Amusement-music boxes if annual gross receipts are:

5.16.020

At Least

But Less Than

License Fee

$ 0.00

$ 499.00

$ 15.00

500.00

4,999.00

30.00

5,000.00

14,999.00

45.00

15,000.00

29,999.00

55.00

30,000.00

44,999.00

63.00

45,000.00

99,999.00

100.00

100,000.00

199,999.00

150.00

200,000.00

399,999.00

200.00

400,000.00

799,999.00

250.00

800,000.00 and over

 

313.00

Canvassers, solicitors, peddlers

$300.00 per year

5.16.020

$13.00 per day

 

Itinerant street vendors, handbill distributors

$375.00 per year

5.16.020

$16.00 per day

 

Klieg lights

$150.00 per year

5.16.020

$13.00 per day

 

Transient house-to-house services

$300.00 per year

5.16.020

$13.00 per day

 

Vehicular street advertising

$450.00 per year

5.16.020

$25.00 per day

 

Businesses requiring permit from the planning commission:

Animal hospitals, kennels, and boarding stables; bathhouses, massage parlors, etc.; pawnbrokers; watchman, private police and detective agencies

Gross receipts of $3,000.00 or less, $60.00 per year, plus $1.25 for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts

5.16.020

Bowling alleys, pool and billiard halls, amusement arcades, commercial amusements, ice or roller skating rinks

$250.00 per year

5.16.020

Cardrooms, public

$375.00 per quarter plus $250.00 per quarter for each additional table in excess of three tables

5.16.020

Hospitals, sanitariums, resthomes, mortuaries and funeral parlors:

Gross receipts of $5,000.00 or less, $63.00 per year, plus 75 cents for each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts

5.16.020

Junk dealers or collectors; secondhand dealers; automobile wrecking yards

$125.00 per year

5.16.020

Mobile home parks

$63.00 per year, plus $2.50 per $1,000.00 of annual gross receipts

5.16.020

Theaters maintaining a fixed place of business in city

$688.00 per year

5.16.020

Businesses requiring permit from director of community development:

Automobile parking lots

$25.00 per year, plus $2.50 for each 1000 sq. ft. of rental space

5.16.020

Carnivals, tent theaters, animal shows, temporary entertainment under tent or temporary structure

$375.00 for the first day, $125.00 per day for each additional day

5.16.020

Circuses:

 

5.16.020

Where seating capacity is 4,000 persons or less

$500.00 for the first day and $375.00 per day for each additional day

 

Where seating capacity is more than 4,000 persons

$750.00 for the first day and $250.00 per day for each additional day

 

Rummage sales

$300.00 per year, or, at option of licensee, $100.00 per quarter, or $13.00 per day

5.16.020

Taxicab and ambulance service

$63.00 per year for each vehicle or, at the option of the licensee, $6.25 per quarter

5.16.020

Businesses requiring permit from police chief:

Fortunetelling

$375.00 per year

5.16.020

Private police and detective agencies

Gross receipts of $3,000.00 or less, $60.00 per year, plus $1.25 each additional $1,000.00 of gross receipts

5.16.020

(Res. R2004-503)

 

III. UTILITIES
 

Subject

Fee

Section

SEWER CONNECTION

 

Residential

 

13.12.055

Very low density

$3,961.00 per unit

 

Low density

3,961.00 per unit

 

Medium density

3,301.00 per unit

 

High density

3,301.00 per unit

 

Commercial

 

13.12.055

Office professional

$1,493.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Neighborhood/community commercial

1,640.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Business/visitor services

1,640.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

General commercial

1,640.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Commercial recreation

1,640.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Light industrial

1,692.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Heavy industrial

1,692.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

WQCF PHASE 3 COMPLETION CHARGE

13.12.057

Residential

 

Very low density

$2,003.00 per unit

 

Low density

2,003.00 per unit

 

Medium density

1,802.00 per unit

 

High density

1,802.00 per unit

 

Commercial

 

Office professional

$815.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Neighborhood/community commercial

895.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Business/visitor services

895.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

General commercial

895.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Commercial recreation

895.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Light industrial

924.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Heavy industrial

924.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

SEWER SYSTEM MONTHLY RATE (Jan. 1, 2013 and Thereafter)

13.16.010

Residential and equivalents

$43.30 per unit

 

Trailer park

36.57 per 1,000 CF

 

Rooming houses

27.70 per 1,000 CF

 

Commercial/retail

30.96 per 1,000 CF

 

Hotel/motel

33.81 per 1,000 CF

 

Hotel/motel w/kitchen

61.89 per 1,000 CF

 

Car washes/laundromats

24.53 per 1,000 CF

 

Service stations (metered)

34.04 per 1,000 CF

 

Office/light industrial

25.35 per 1,000 CF

 

Restaurants

72.42 per 1,000 CF

 

Markets

75.45 per 1,000 CF

 

Mortuaries

75.45 per 1,000 CF

 

Hospitals

32.69 per 1,000 CF

 

Elementary schools

24.06 per 1,000 CF

 

Secondary schools

24.06 per 1,000 CF

 

Churches

28.71 per 1,000 CF

 

Nonprofit

27.82 per 1,000 CF

 

Commercial/mixed use

40.23 per 1,000 CF

 

Industrial

Flow

4,946.55 per million gallons

 

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)

0.375 per 1,000 pounds

 

Suspended solids (SS)

0.711 per 1,000 pounds

 

Nitrogen (N)

0.023 per 1,000 pounds

 

Septage

165.16 per 1,000 gallons

 

City of Lathrop

per contract

 

Raymus Village

per contract

 

(Res. R2011-221)

 

WATER WORKS SYSTEM:

Meter Size

2019 Meter Installation Fee

2019 Water Debt Fee

2019 Surface Water Capital Fee

5/8″ & 3/4″

$    335.00

$   4,275.00

$   133.00

1″

472.00

7,312.00

223.00

1-1/2″

818.00

14,580.00

443.00

2″

953.00

23,335.00

710.00

3″

4,506.00

43,783.00

1,330.00

4″

5,462.00

72,983.00

2,218.00

6″

15,452.00

145,924.00

4,435.00

8″

19,928.00

233,487.00

7,099.00

 

Monthly Water Rate Schedule: See Section 13.04.060(A)(1)(a)

Water Use Rates: See Section 13.04.060(A)(1)(b)

 

(Memo dated 12-18-18; Memo dated 12-29-17)

 

Subject

Fee

Section

Water Service Reconnection Charges*

13.04.130

Regular Time:

 

 

48-hour notices

$   2.00

 

Routine turn on

25.00

 

Lock turn on

19.00

 

Meter turn on

52.00*

 

*       Plus cost of damaged equipment

A $15.00 charge will be assessed for all returned checks.

 

Subject

Fee

Section

Overtime Turn On

13.04.130

Lock turn on

$ 52.00

 

Meter turn on

71.00

 

 

TEMPORARY SERVICE FEE (13.04.150)

Meter Size

Deposit*

Monthly Rental Charge

Water Consumption Charge per Hundred Cubic Feet Used

Sept. 1, 2018 and thereafter

Sept. 1, 2018 and thereafter

Sept. 1, 2018 and thereafter

1″

$1,500.00

$26.50

$3.76

3″

$5,000.00

$142.70

$3.76

*       The deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon return of the water meter/backflow prevention assembly provided it is returned in the same condition as furnished.

 

(Ord. O2018-21 § 1, 2018; Memo dated 1-3-17; Memo dated 12-21-15; amended during 3/15 supplement; amended during 12/12 supplement; amended during 2009 republication; amended during 2/01 supplement; Res R1997-61; Res. R1997-6; Res. R1994-116; amended during 6/94 supplementation; Res. R1993-227; amended during 8/92 supplementation; Ord. 916 § 1, 1991; Res. R1991-177; Ord. 887 § 1, 1990)

 

SOLID WASTE

 

Residential Charges:

The monthly charges for collection of solid waste from each single-family dwelling or from each unit of a multiple-family dwelling using the City’s carts shall be as follows:

 

 

Feb. 16, 2017 through Dec. 31, 2017

Jan. 1, 2018 through Dec. 31, 2018

Jan. 1, 2019 through Dec. 31, 2019

Jan. 1, 2020 through Dec. 31, 2020

Jan. 1, 2021 and Thereafter

Low-income Senior*

$15.26

$18.32

$18.96

$19.34

$19.72

Small refuse cart (35 – 46 gallon)

$23.74

$28.48

$29.48

$30.07

$30.67

Medium refuse cart (65 – 70 gallon)

$27.78

$30.28

$31.34

$31.97

$32.61

Large refuse cart (95 – 100 gallon)

$30.98

$31.97

$33.00

$33.66

$34.33

Each Additional 65-gallon refuse cart

$12.00

$12.31

$12.63

$12.96

$13.29

Each Additional 95-gallon refuse cart

$18.00

$18.47

$18.94

$19.43

$19.93

Extra Dump

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

*       The City may provide a discount charge for customers 60 years of age or older with an income lower than the very low income level published by HUD for the County of San Joaquin.

 

Customers that reside in the Stonegate and Westwood Apartments shall be charged a monthly fee that is pro-rata share of the monthly cost of providing solid waste service to those apartments.

Extra Collection Charges

The City will provide collection of bulky items and other waste based on pricing below:

 

Individual Items

Solid Waste Staff may Retrieve a Residential sized refrigerator for $35.00 plus Time and Materials.

There is No Charge for Electronic Waste Delivered to the Solid Waste Office or Special Collection Events. Solid Waste Staff May Retrieve Electronic Waste at the Residents on a Time and Materials Basis.

Cleaning of Bins will be on a Time and Materials Basis.

Replacement of Damaged Bins will be $65.00 plus time to assemble and deliver (Time and Materials).

Miscellaneous Bulky Items (couch, chair, etc.) will be charged the Low Income Senior monthly rate at the time of service, plus Time and Materials.

Extra Bags (no more than 3 – 35 Gallon) placed at curb beside Brown Bin will be charged a fee equal to the 35-Gallon monthly rate at the time of service.

Locking Bar Installation (one time charge): $50.00

Vacation Suspended Service: $120

Other Tasks will be Charged on a Time and Materials Basis

 

Special Pick-Ups (A Portion of Time and Material Rates)

Level of Labor

Cost per Hour/Year

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021*

Truck and one worker

$101.53

$103.56

$105.63

$107.75

$109.90

Truck and two workers

$171.85

$175.29

$178.80

$182.37

$186.02

Truck and three workers

$242.17

$247.02

$251.96

$257.00

$262.14

Loading equipment

$48.79

$49.77

$50.76

$51.78

$52.81

*       Rates are for January 1, 2021 and Thereafter

         ½ Hour Minimum Charge

 

Short Term Rental

Commercial containers are available to residence and businesses for Short Term rentals based on the following rates:

 

Short Term Collection Bin 2017

Container Size

3-Yard

4-Yard

6-Yard

Roll Off

Charge for up to 14 days container rental*

$249.57

$252.55

$258.51

$462.55

Rental rate per day over 14-days

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$50.00

Extra Dump

$169.36

$172.34

$178.30

$308.37

Rates are for February 16, 2017 to December 31, 2017

*       Charge includes one disposal; Roll Off Boxes will require a $600 deposit

 

Short Term Collection Bin 2018

Container Size

3-Yard

4-Yard

6-Yard

Roll Off

Charge for up to 14 days container rental*

$256.12

$259.16

$265.24

$474.78

Rental rate per day over 14-days

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$50.00

Extra Dump

$173.79

$176.83

$182.91

$316.52

Rates are for January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018

*       Charge includes one disposal; Roll Off Boxes will require a $600 deposit

 

Short Term Collection Bin 2019

Container Size

3-Yard

4-Yard

6-Yard

Roll Off

Charge for up to 14 days container rental*

$261.24

$264.34

$270.55

$484.27

Rental rate per day over 14-days

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$50.00

Extra Dump

$177.26

$180.36

$186.57

$322.85

Rates are for January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019

*       Charge includes one disposal; Roll Off Boxes will require a $600 deposit

 

Short Term Collection Bin 2020

Container Size

3-Yard

4-Yard

6-Yard

Roll Off

Charge for up to 14 days container rental*

$263.22

$266.38

$272.69

$487.75

Rental rate per day over 14-days

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$50.00

Extra Dump

$178.64

$181.80

$188.11

$325.17

Rates are for January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020

*       Charge includes one disposal, Roll Off Boxes will require a $600 deposit

 

Short Term Collection Bin 2021

Container Size

3-Yard

4-Yard

6-Yard

Roll Off

Charge for up to 14 days container rental*

$265.85

$269.04

$275.42

$492.63

Rental rate per day over 14-days

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$50.00

Extra Dump

$180.42

$183.61

$189.99

$328.42

Rates are for January 1, 2021 and Thereafter

*       Charge includes one disposal; Roll Off Boxes will require a $600 deposit

 

Commercial Rates:

The monthly charge for the collection of garbage from businesses in the City furnished containers shall be as follows.

 

Cart Capacity

Feb. 16, 2017 through

Dec. 31, 2017

Jan. 1, 2018 through

Dec. 31, 2018

Jan. 1, 2019 through

Dec. 31, 2019

Jan. 1, 2020 through

Dec. 31, 2020

Jan. 1, 2021 and Thereafter

Small

$23.74

$28.48

$29.48

$30.07

$30.67

Medium

$27.78

$30.28

$31.34

$31.97

$32.61

Large

$30.98

$31.97

$33.00

$33.66

$34.33

Each Additional

Medium Cart

$12.00

$12.31

$12.63

$12.96

$13.29

Each Additional

Large Cart

$18.00

$18.47

$18.94

$19.43

$19.93

Extra Dump

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

$25.00

 

 

Commercial Bins Garbage 2017

Size

Collection Times per Week $/Month

Extra Dump

1

2

3

4

5

6

1 Yard

$119.80

$239.60

$359.40

$479.20

$599.00

$718.80

$163.40

2 Yard

$132.71

$265.42

$398.13

$530.84

$663.55

$796.26

$166.38

3 Yard

$145.62

$291.24

$436.85

$582.47

$728.09

$873.71

$169.36

4 Yard

$158.53

$317.05

$475.58

$634.11

$792.63

$951.16

$172.34

6 Yard

$184.34

$368.69

$553.03

$737.38

$921.72

$1,106.06

$178.30

Rates are for February 16, 2017 to December 31, 2017

 

Commercial Bins Garbage 2018

Size

Collection Times per Week $/Month

Extra Dump

1

2

3

4

5

6

1 Yard

$122.90

$245.79

$368.69

$491.58

$614.48

$737.37

$167.71

2 Yard

$136.07

$272.14

$408.21

$544.29

$680.36

$816.43

$170.75

3 Yard

$149.25

$298.49

$447.74

$596.99

$746.24

$895.48

$173.79

4 Yard

$162.42

$324.85

$487.27

$649.69

$812.11

$974.54

$176.83

6 Yard

$188.77

$377.55

$566.32

$755.10

$943.87

$1,132.64

$182.91

Rates are for January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018

 

Commercial Bins Garbage 2019

Size

Collection Times per Week $/Month

Extra Dump

1

2

3

4

5

6

1 Yard

$125.35

$250.70

$376.05

$501.40

$626.75

$752.10

$171.06

2 Yard

$138.79

$277.58

$416.37

$555.16

$693.95

$832.74

$174.16

3 Yard

$152.23

$304.46

$456.69

$608.92

$761.15

$913.38

$177.26

4 Yard

$165.67

$331.34

$497.01

$662.68

$828.35

$994.02

$180.36

6 Yard

$192.54

$385.08

$577.62

$770.16

$962.70

$1,155.24

$186.57

Rates are for January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019

 

Commercial Bins Garbage 2020

Size

Collection Times per Week $/Month

Extra Dump

1

2

3

4

5

6

1 Yard

$126.40

$252.80

$379.20

$505.60

$632.00

$758.40

$172.32

2 Yard

$140.09

$280.18

$420.27

$560.36

$700.45

$840.54

$175.48

3 Yard

$153.77

$307.54

$461.31

$615.08

$768.85

$922.62

$178.64

4 Yard

$167.45

$334.90

$502.35

$669.80

$837.25

$1,004.70

$181.80

6 Yard

$194.82

$389.64

$584.46

$779.28

$974.10

$1,168.92

$188.11

Rates are for January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020

Commercial Bins Garbage 2021

Size

Collection Times per Week $/Month

Extra Dump

1

2

3

4

5

6

1 Yard

$127.66

$255.33

$382.99

$510.66

$638.32

$765.98

$174.04

2 Yard

$141.49

$282.98

$424.47

$565.96

$707.45

$848.95

$177.23

3 Yard

$155.31

$310.62

$465.92

$621.23

$776.54

$931.85

$180.43

4 Yard

$169.12

$338.25

$507.37

$676.50

$845.62

$1,014.75

$183.61

6 Yard

$196.77

$393.54

$590.30

$787.07

$983.84

$1,180.61

$189.99

Rates are for January 1, 2021 and Thereafter

 

Roll off boxes include both drop boxes and compactors. Roll off charges will consist of a service fee and tipping fees. Actual tipping fees incurred to dispose of waste contained in the box will be added to a service fee each time that the box is dumped. Service fees will include rental for drop boxes as long as the box is serviced at least once every two weeks. Compactors are customer furnished. The City will not service overweight boxes. Drop boxes not serviced every two weeks will incur a $50.00 daily rental fee for every day in excess of 14 days.

 

Commercial Roll Off Boxes (All Materials)

Size

Monthly on call rate

Monthly on-call rate includes 2 pulls. Tip fees are in addition.

Tip fees are the actual charges at the receiving facility

Pull Fee (Tipping is added to fee)

All

Year

Fee

Year

Fee

2017

$616.74

2017

$308.37

2018

$633.04

2018

$316.52

2019

$645.70

2019

$322.85

2020

$650.34

2020

$325.17

2021

$656.84

2021

$328.42

Tip fees are in addition to pull fees and monthly on call rate.

Any excess deposit will be refunded and any balance due will be invoiced.

Pull fees include roll off box rental, as long as the box is serviced a minimum of once every two weeks.

 

Commercial Food Waste

Rates for collection of commercial food waste will be as follows:

 

Commercial Food Waste 2017

Volume and disposition

Pulls Per Week $/Month

1

2

3

4

5

35-Gallon, clean food

$33.18

$66.35

$99.53

$132.71

$165.89

35-Gallon, dirty food

$59.72

$119.44

$179.16

$238.88

$298.60

2-Yard, clean food

$66.35

$132.71

$199.06

$265.42

$331.77

2-Yard, dirty food

$119.44

$238.88

$358.32

$477.75

$597.19

Rates are for February 16, 2017 to December 31, 2017

Commercial Food Waste 2018

Volume and disposition

Pulls Per Week $/Month

1

2

3

4

5

35-Gallon, clean food

$34.02

$68.04

$102.05

$136.07

$170.09

35-Gallon, dirty food

$61.23

$122.46

$183.70

$244.93

$306.16

2-Yard, clean food

$68.04

$136.07

$204.11

$272.14

$340.18

2-Yard, dirty food

$122.46

$244.93

$367.39

$489.86

$612.32

Rates are for January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018

 

Commercial Food Waste 2019

Volume and disposition

Pulls Per Week $/Month

1

2

3

4

5

35-Gallon, clean food

$34.70

$69.40

$104.09

$138.79

$173.49

35-Gallon, dirty food

$62.46

$124.91

$187.37

$249.82

$312.28

2-Yard, clean food

$69.40

$138.79

$208.19

$277.58

$346.98

2-Yard, dirty food

$124.91

$249.82

$374.74

$499.65

$624.56

Rates are for January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019

 

Commercial Food Waste 2020

Volume and disposition

Pulls Per Week $/Month

1

2

3

4

5

35-Gallon, clean food

$35.02

$70.04

$105.06

$140.09

$175.11

35-Gallon, dirty food

$63.04

$126.08

$189.12

$252.15

$315.19

2-Yard, clean food

$70.04

$140.09

$210.13

$280.17

$350.21

2-Yard, dirty food

$126.08

$252.15

$378.23

$504.31

$630.38

Rates are for January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020

 

Commercial Food Waste 2021

Volume and disposition

Pulls Per Week $/Month

1

2

3

4

5

35-Gallon, clean food

$35.37

$70.74

$106.11

$141.49

$176.86

35-Gallon, dirty food

$63.67

$127.34

$191.01

$254.68

$318.34

2-Yard, clean food

$70.74

$141.49

$212.23

$282.97

$353.72

2-Yard, dirty food

$127.34

$254.68

$382.01

$509.35

$636.69

Rates are for January 1, 2021 and Thereafter

 

Commercial Roll Off Boxes (Food Waste)

Size

Monthly on call rate

Monthly on-call rate includes 2 pulls. Tip fees are in addition.

Tip fees are the actual charges at the receiving facility

Pull Fee (Tipping is added to fee)

All

Year

Fee

Year

Fee

2017

$616.74

2017

$308.37

2018

$633.04

2018

$316.52

2019

$645.70

2019

$322.85

2020

$650.34

2020

$325.17

2021

$656.84

2021

$328.42

Tip fees are in addition to pull fees and monthly on call rate.

Any excess deposit will be refunded and any balance due will be invoiced.

Pull fees include roll off box rental, as long as the box is serviced a minimum of once every two weeks.

Clean food waste will not be charged a tip fee.

 

Dirty food waste will be charged a tip fee of $25.00/ton.

For collection of waste not covered by this schedule, collection will be charged on a time and material basis.

 

SOLID WASTE SERVICE INITIATION AND COST RECOVERY CHARGE

 

Feb. 16, 2017 through

Dec. 31, 2017

Jan. 1, 2018 through Dec. 31, 2018

Jan. 1, 2019 through Dec. 31, 2019

Jan. 1, 2020 through Dec. 31, 2020

Jan. 1, 2021 and Thereafter

Residential1

$420.00

$428.40

$436.97

$445.71

$454.62

Commercial2

Time and materials to purchase, assemble, and deliver carts/bins/boxes to businesses occupying newly constructed space.

1       For residential new homes, the cost recovery charge is collected with the issuance of the building permit.

2       For new commercial facilities, the cost recovery charge is collected at the commencement of service to new construction that has not been previously occupied.

(Ord. 1600; Res. R2016-237; Res. R2004-201)

 

IV. POLICE DEPARTMENT FEE SCHEDULE
 

 

Fee

Accident report copies

 

(first page)

$1.00

(each additional page)

0.10

Arrest clearance letter

20.00

Card dealer permit

45.00

Card dealer permit (renewal)

45.00

Crime report copies

 

(first  page)

1.00

(each additional page)

0.10

Citation sign-off—Other agency

20.00

Citation copy

20.00

Concealed weapons permit

40.00

CCW, renewal

40.00

Escort service permit

80.00

Fingerprinting (Live Scan)

30.00

Food vending permit

40.00

Inspections

Taxi

30.00

Tow truck

60.00

Tow yard

40.00

Massage clinic permit

400.00

Renewal

60.00

Merchant patrol permit

40.00

MPD shoulder patches

10.00

Photographs, per case

10.00

Solicitor permit, all

80.00

Subpoena duces tecum

50.00

Taxi operators permit

60.00

Tow truck driver permit

60.00

Towed vehicle release (to include state impound fee of $25.00)

225.00

VIN verification

20.00

Pawn broker/second hand dealer

80.00

All other business permit clearances

40.00

All other permit renewals

60.00

Audiotapes (person may no longer provide own tape)

10.00

Videotapes/DVD (person may no longer provide own tape/DVD)

10.00

(Res. R2010-12)

 

V. RESERVED
 

VI. DEVELOPMENT FEES
 

WATER FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE

 

Water Fees by Meter Size, All Land Uses

 

Meter Size

Groundwater Supply Fee

Peaking Facility Fee

Distribution System Fee

Total PFIP Water Fee

5/8″

$  1,155

$ 1,774

$  747

$  3,676

1″

1,927

2,964

1,248

6,139

1½″

3,843

5,910

2,486

12,239

2″

6,150

9,461

3,978

19,589

3″

11,540

17,753

7,463

36,756

4″

19,236

29,592

12,444

61,272

6″

38,462

59,166

24,880

122,508

8″

61,542

94,669

39,809

196,020

(Memo dated 12-20-18; Memo dated 12-29-17; Memo dated 1-1-17; Memo dated 12-21-15; Memo dated 12-23-14; Memo dated 12-17-13; Res. R2013-31 (Exh. A); Res. R2006-325 (Exh. A); Res. R2003-316 (Exh. A); Res. R1993-227)

 

SEWER FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEES

 

Residential Sewer Collection System Fees

Land Use3

Fee Per Dwelling Unit

Zone 21

Zone 22

Zone 24

Zone 24(A) Overlay1, 2

Zone 25

Zone 26

VLDR

$320

$2,043

$1,557

$515.72

$370

$1,271

LDR

330

2,043

1,557

515.72

370

1,271

MDR

241

1,495

1,138

356.01

270

930

HDR

241

1,495

1,138

356.01

270

930

 

Land Use3

Zone 24(A) Overlay1, 2

Office Professional

$160.62

Neighborhood/Community Commercial

176.26

Business/Visitor Services

176.26

General Commercial

176.26

Commercial Recreation

176.26

Light Industrial

366.46

Heavy Industrial

366.46

1       Fees are per dwelling unit for residential land uses and per 1,000 square feet of building for commercial and industrial land uses.

2       Zone 24 in this schedule refers to Sewer Financing Zone 24 set forth in the PFIP Report. Zone 24(A) Overlay in this schedule refers to those development projects within Zone 24 that use any portion of the interim sewer facilities.

3       The impact fee applicable to a land use located in a Planned Employment Center (PEC) is the same as the impact fee for that land use elsewhere in the same financing zone.

 

Nonresidential Sewer Collection System Fees

Land Use

$ Per Gallon Per Day

Zone 21

Zone 22

Zone 24

Zone 25

Zone 26

All Nonresidential

$2.06

$12.78

$9.73

$2.31

$7.95

 

(Memo dated 12-20-18; Memo dated 12-29-17; Memo dated 1-1-17; Memo dated 12-21-15; Memo dated 12-23-14; Memo dated 2-19-14; Memo dated 12-17-13; Memo dated 2-27-13; Res. R2013-31 (Exh. B); Memo dated 3-3-12; Memo dated 2-17-11; Memo dated 2-17-10; Res. 2009-12; Memo dated 2-24-09; Memo dated 1-18-08; Res. R2001-14)

 

STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE

 

Residential Storm Drainage Fees

Land Use

Fee Per Dwelling Unit

Zone 30

Zone 32

Zone 34

Zone 36

Zone 39

VLDR

$141

$1,702

$1,069

$2,608

$1,072

LDR

56

680

429

1,043

429

 

MDR, HDR, and Nonresidential Storm Drainage Fees

Land Use

Fee Per Acre

Zone 30

Zone 32

Zone 34

Zone 36

Zone 39

MDR

$470

$5,675

$3,570

$  8,698

$3,571

HDR

612

7,379

4,639

11,305

4,642

BP

844

10,216

6,425

15,654

6,427

CMU

844

10,216

6,425

15,654

6,427

GC

844

10,216

6,425

15,654

6,427

NC

844

10,216

6,425

15,654

6,427

HI

656

7,946

4,997

12,176

4,999

LI

656

7,946

4,997

12,176

4,999

BIP

656

7,946

4,997

12,176

4,999

 

(Memo dated 12-20-18; Memo dated 12-29-17; Memo dated 1-1-17; Memo dated 12-21-15; Memo dated 12-23-14; Memo dated 12-17-13; Res. R2013-31 (Exh. C); Res. R2006-325 (Exh. C): Res. R2003-316 (Exh. C); Res. R1993-227)

 

SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES

Transportation Financing Plan

Land Use

Zone 1 1, 2

Zone 2 1, 2

Zone 3 1, 2

Zone 4 1, 2

Zone 5 1, 2

Very Low Density Residential

$ 2,038.00

$ 2,665.00

$ 2,723.00

$ 1,468.00

$ 2,366.00

Low Density Residential

2,038.00

2,665.00

2,723.00

1,468.00

2,366.00

Medium Density Residential

998.00

1,952.00

1,996.00

1,069.00

1,725.00

High Density Residential

826.00

1,597.00

1,639.00

884.00

1,425.00

Office Professional

3,093.00

6,043.00

6,186.00

3,307.00

5,373.00

Neighborhood/Community Commercial

$  3,891.00

$  7,625.00

$  7,796.00

$  4,162.00

$  6,770.00

Business/Visitor Services

3,549.00

6,955.00

7,113.00

3,805.00

6,172.00

General Commercial

3,392.00

6,642.00

6,785.00

3,635.00

5,886.00

Commercial Recreational

32,227.00

63,156.00

64,582.00

34,521.00

56,058.00

Light Industrial

1,126.00

2,195.00

2,238.00

1,197.00

1,939.00

Heavy Industrial

2,038.00

2,665.00

2,723.00

1,468.00

2,366.00

1       Fees are per dwelling unit for residential land uses, per net acre for commercial recreation land uses and per one thousand square feet of building for other nonresidential land uses.

2       The zones listed in the resolution codified in this table refer to transportation facilities financing zones set forth in the PFIP report.

 

(Res. R2006-325 (Exh. D):  Res. R2003-316 (Exh. D); Res. R1993-227)

 

COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE REDUCTION. All commercial or industrial development projects in the city of Manteca with a complete and adequate application for a building permit submitted after October 4, 1999 are eligible to have their PFIP fees reduced. The amount of the fee reduction is determined from a series of matrices and tables corresponding to the ratio of jobs created per one thousand square feet of building, the average annual wage/salary with benefits, the direct tax revenue generated by the project, and the amenity rating approved by the city council. The amount of fee reduction is hereby established in the amounts set forth in Exhibit E of the resolution codified in this paragraph. The amount of the fee reduction cannot exceed the amount of the PFIP fee. The fee reduction program is limited to the amount of Manteca redevelopment agency funds designated for fee reductions. Commercial or industrial development projects that are “wet” industries, as determined by the director of public works on a case-by-case basis based on their demand on the wastewater quality control facility, are not eligible to have their “sewer connection” portion of the fees reduced. (Res. R1999-210; Res. R1993-227)

 

STANDARD DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT FEE

 

Per Unit

Amount

1—50 Project Allocations Per Year

$  7,725.00

51—99 Project Allocations Per Year

9,375.00

100 and over Project Allocations Per Year

12,375.00

(Res. R2004-530; Res. R2005-163; Res. R2005-43)

 

San Joaquin County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation and Open Space Plan Development Fees*

Habitat Type

Category A

Category B

Category C

Total Fee

Rounded Fee

Open Space

$4,425.00

$1,864.00

$411.41

$6,700.41

$6,700

AG/Natural

$8,850.00

$3,727.00

$821.75

$13,398.75

$13,399

Vernal Pool (grasslands)

$37,259.00

$14,814.00

$2,503.33

$54,576.33

$54,576

Vernal Pool (wetted)

$36,581.00

$61,994.00

$2,457.61

$101,032.61

$101,033

*         Effective January 1, 2019—December 31, 2019.

 

(Res. R2018-173; Res. R2017-146; Res. R2016-217)

2018 Endowment Fees with In-Lieu Land**

Type of Preserve

Enhancement Cost/acre

Land Management Cost/acre

Total Per Acre Endowment

Agricultural Habitat Lands

$3,547.00

$790.90

$4,337.90

Natural Lands

$3,547.00

$790.90

$4,337.90

Vernal Pool Habitat

 

 

 

Vernal Pool Grasslands

$14,261.00

$2,409.36

$16,670.36

Vernal Pool Wetted

$59,669.00

$2,365.36

$62,034.36

** Effective January 1, 2018—December 31, 2018. In-lieu fees to be used as the endowment for the dedicated land preserves (Category B + C)

 

(Res. R2017-146)

 

VELB Mitigation

A special fee category shall apply when removal of the Valley Elderberry Long-Horned Beatle (VELB) habitat of elderberry shrubs occurs. The fee shall be paid to SJCOG, Inc. or a VELB mitigation bank approved by the Permitting Agencies. The current fee, as established in the VELB Conservation Fund Account managed by the Center for Natural Lands Management, and approved by the USFWS, is $1,800.00 per VELB Unit (one unit = one stem over 1″ in diameter at ground level which is removed). Fees shall be established by the JPA during preconstruction surveys (i.e., counts of stems to be removed with and without exit holes shall be completed during preconstruction surveys) and shall be paid to the JPA prior to ground disturbance or stem removal, whichever comes first.

(Res. R2017-146; Res. R2013-175; Res. R2012-143; Res. R2011-170; Res. R2009-344; Res. R2007-504)

 

Agriculture Mitigation Fee

Agriculture Mitigation Fee*

$2,909.65

*       The new fees are effective on March 1, 2019.

 

(Memo dated 2-25-19; Memo dated 2-28-18; Memo dated 6-14-17; Memo dated 2-27-16; Memo dated 2-27-15; Memo dated 2-19-14; Memo dated 3-1-12; Memo dated 2-16-11; Memo dated 2-11-10; Memo dated 2-24-09; Memo dated 3-07-08; Res. 2005-473)

 

Strong Motion Instrumentation Program (SMIP): State Earthquake Fee

Residential

0.00010 x building valuation

Commercial

0.00021 x building valuation

California Building Standards Commission (CBSC) Green Building Fund Fee

(rates effective 1/1/09 per State Bill 1473)

Valuation

Fee

$1 to $25,000

 $1.00

$25,001 to $50,000

 $2.00

$50,001 to $75,000

 $3.00

$75,001 to $100,000

 $4.00

$100,001 and up

add $1.00 for each additional $25,000 or fraction thereof

 

PFIP TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE

 

Land Use

Fee

Single Family Residential

$8,551

per dwelling unit

Multi-Family Residential (Apartments)

$5,976

per dwelling unit

 

General Office / Business Professional

$2,246

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Medical Office Building

$7,341

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Community Commercial

$6,748

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Regional Commercial

$10,251

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Church

$1,116

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Clubhouse

$10,276

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Hotel

$1,540

per room

 

Business Industrial Park

Subject to Community Development Review

Industrial Park / R&D

$1,540

per 1000 s.f. bldg

Distribution / High Cube Warehousing

$819

per 1000 s.f. bldg

 

Note: This information is based on a Citywide DUE fee.

 

Total PFIP cost of $215,807,783.12.

 

[a]    If a parking garage is to serve a specific Land Use Category then the PFIP fee would be included in the number of dwelling units or square footage for the project that the parking garage would serve.

[b]    If the clubhouse is part of a master planned community, than the PFIP fee would be included in the number of dwelling units and would not be charged separately.

[c]    Business Industrial Park fee subject to Community Development Review.

(Memo dated 1-20-18; Res. R2017-143)

 

Government Building Facilities Fee

 

Nonresidential

 

General Commercial

$ 1.38 per sq. ft.

Neighborhood Commercial

   1.38 per sq. ft.

Commercial Mixed-Use

   1.38 per sq. ft.

Heavy Industrial

   0.53 per sq. ft.

Light Industrial

   0.72 per sq. ft.

Business Park Industrial

   1.38 per sq. ft.

Business Professional

   1.81 per sq. ft.

Major Equipment Purchase Fee

Commercial

 

Retail stores

$ 0.10 per sq. ft.

Hotels, motels

   0.09 per sq. ft.

Markets

   0.11 per sq. ft.

Professional offices

   0.08 per sq. ft.

Restaurants

   0.12 per sq. ft.

Other commercial use (auto, steam cleaners, car wash, mortuaries, and others)

   0.12 per sq. ft.

Institutions—This category includes hospitals, care homes, schools and churches

   0.07 per sq. ft.

Industrial—This category includes utility companies, such as PG&E, telephone companies, etc.

   0.07 per sq. ft.

Government Building Facilities Use

Permit Fees

Very low-density residential

$4,737.81

Low density residential

4,737.81

Medium density residential

3,951.08

High density residential

3,555.85

Commercial mixed use

3,555.85

Major Equipment Purchase

350.00

(Memo dated 12-18-18; Memo dated 12-13-17)

 

Manteca Unified School District Residential/Commercial Property Developer Fee

Residential

Mello Roos Districts (Level I)

 $2.96 per s.f. bldg.

This fee is paid directly to the School District—call 209-825-3200, ext. 50858 for more information.

Non-Mello Roos Districts (Level II)

 2.96 per s.f. bldg.

Non-Mello Roos Districts (Level III)

 2.96 per s.f. bldg.

Commercial/Industrial

 0.47 per s.f. bldg.

San Joaquin County Facilities Fee

This is a County fee collected by the City of Manteca; call the County at 209-468-3216 for more information.

Residential

Single-Family

 $1,826.00 per dwelling unit

Multiple-Family

 1,564.00 per dwelling unit

Nonresidential

Retail

0.42 per s.f. bldg.

Office

 0.38 per s.f. bldg.

Industrial

 0.21 per s.f. bldg.

(Memo dated 1-7-15; Memo dated 1-2-14; Memo dated 6-11-12; Res. R2011-170; Res. R2010-205; Res. 2009-344; Res. R2008-489)

 

VII. REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE (RTIF)
 

Below are the revised fees for the regional transportation impact fee (RTIF), referenced in MMC Section 13.46.040:

 

Annual RTIF Programmatic Fee Adjustment FY 2018/2019

Land Use Type

Current Fee Schedule

Annual Change @ 2.86%

FY 17/18 RTIF Schedule

Residential (single-family DUE)

$3,311.64

$94.71

$3,406.35

Residential (multifamily DUE)

$1,986.98

$56.83

$2,043.81

Retail (sq. ft.)

$1.32

$0.04

$1.36

Office (sq. ft.)

$1.66

$0.05

$1.71

Commercial/industrial (sq. ft.)

$1.00

$0.03

$1.03

Warehouse (sq. ft.)

$0.42

$0.01

$0.43

*Other (per trip)

$102.12

$2.92

$105.04

*       Alternative fee calculation method for projects not otherwise adequately represented in the six land-use categories; typically projects with minimal or no building area that would nonetheless generate impacts to the transportation network. Examples include mining, intermodal and recreational facilities.

 

Section 13.46.040(B) states the fee shall be automatically adjusted on an annual basis beginning of each fiscal year (July 1st) based on the Engineering News Record California Construction Code Index. The new fees are effective on July 1, 2018.

(Staff report dated 5-18; Staff report dated 5-17; Memo dated 6-20-15; Memo dated 7-3-14; Memo dated 5-3-12; Memo dated 6-18-10; Staff report dated 5-09; Memo dated 6-26-07)

 

VIII. VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
 

The following fees are for the violation of the administrative enforcement provisions. These fees shall become effective upon the city council adopting Ordinance No. 1457 establishing Sections 1.10.010 through 1.10.510 of the Manteca Municipal Code.

1.

First citation

$100.00

2.

Second citation for the same violation

$200.00

3.

Third and subsequent citations for the same violation

$500.00

1.10.060

Assessment of Fees

Recovery of actual cost not less than $25.00 and not to exceed $1,100.00.

 

1.10.450

Hearing Fee

Recovery of actual costs not to exceed $2,000.00. (This amount to be placed on deposit with the city at the time of application for appeal. Those monies in excess of the appeal costs to be returned to applicant after completion of the appeal process.)

 

(Res. R2010-219; Res. R2010-24)

 

IX. BUILDING SAFETY FEE SCHEDULE
 

Fee Description

Fee Code

Unit

Fee

TOTAL VALUATION-BUILDING PERMIT FEES

 

 

 

Residential & Commercial New Construction and Additions (Permit Fee)

New Const Permit

Permit Fee

0.47% of valuation

Residential & Commercial New Construction and Additions (Plan Review Fee)

New Const PC

Plan review Fee

85% of permit fee

Residential Remodels and Commercial TI’s (Permit Fee)

Remodel Permit

Permit Fee

0.43% of valuation

Residential Remodels and Commercial TI’s (Plan Review Fee)

Remodel PC

Plan review Fee

80% of permit fee

Permit Administration Fee

Permit Admin

Flat

$70

Minimum Permit Fee

-

Flat

$560

SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING FEES

 

 

 

Single Family Production Repeat

SFD Prod Repeat

Permit

0.47% of valuation

Production Repeat Single Family Dwelling Administrative Fee

SFD Repeat Admin

Flat

$305

MWELO Landscape Fee - Residential

MWELO Residential

MWELO Fee

11% of permit fee

Plot Plan Revision

Plot Plan Rev

Per app

$70

Master Plan Check Fees (SFD Track Housing)

Master Plan PC

Plan Check

1.41% of valuation

RESIDENTIAL FLAT FEES

 

 

 

Bathroom Remodel Or Repair

Bathroom Remodel

Per app

$255

CMU Wall (First 100 Lf)

CMU Wall Res

Per app

$395

CMU Wall (Each Additional 100 Lf)

Per app

$128

Electrical Appliances

Electrical App

Per app

$79

Electrical Circuits (First)

Electrical Circ

Per app

$100

Electrical Circuits (Each Additional)

Per app

$12

Electrical Panels

Elec Panel Res

Per app

$112

EV Charging Station

EV Charg Station

Per app

$336

Fence

Fence

Per app

$205

Fireplace Insert

Fireplace Insert

Per app

$138

Flag Pole

Flag Pole Res

Per app

$314

Gas Piping System

Gas Piping

Per app

$152

Grading Permit Fee (Building Admin Department)

Grading Permit

Per app

$35

Hot Tub / Spa Portable

Spa/Hot Tub Port

Per app

$75

HVAC System Replacement

HVAC Residential

Per app

$75

Kitchen Remodel Or Repair (W/O Structural Modifications)

Kitchen Remodel

Per app

$292

Misc. Inspection

Misc Insp Res

Per app

$110

Misc. Each Additional Inspection

Per app

$75

Patio Covers & Gazebos

Patio Cover

Per app

$357

Patio Covers & Gazebos (ICC/IAPMO Approved)

Patio Cover ICC

Per app

$165

Plumbing Fixture

Plumbing Fixture

Per app

$38

Re-Roof Residential

Reroof Resident

Per app

$112

Sewer Repair

Sewer Repair

Per app

$75

Shed

Shed

Per app

$509

Shower / Bathtub Replacement

Shower/Bath Rep

Per app

$120

Solar Photovoltaic - Residential (Rooftop)

Solar PV Resid

Per app

$383

Solar Pool Heating System

Solar Pool Heat

Per app

$117

Stucco or Siding

Stucco / Siding

Per app

$112

Swimming Pool (No Master Plan)

Swimming Pool

Per app

$576

Swimming Pool Master Plan

Swimming Pool MP

Per app

$246

Swimming Pool With Approved Master Plan

Swim Pool w/ MP

Per app

$331

Temp Power Pole

Temp Power Pole

Per app

$39

Ventilation Fan

Ventilation Fan

Per app

$75

Water Heater Replacement - (Like For Like)

Water Heater

Per app

$75

Water Piping System

Water Piping Sys

Per app

$152

Water Softener

Water Softener

Per app

$75

Window Replacements (First 5 Windows)

Window Replace

Per app

$55

Window Replacements (Each Additional Window)

Per app

$12

Permit Administration Fee

Permit Admin

Flat

$70

COMMERCIAL FLAT FEES

 

 

 

Awning (First)

Awning

Per app

$215

Awning (Each Additional)

Per app

$60

Cell Tower

Cell Tower

Per app

$726

CMU Wall (First 100 Lf)

CMU Wall Com

Per app

$469

CMU Wall (Each Additional 100 Lf)

Per app

$224

Commercial Coach

Commercial Coach

Per app

$490

Electrical Panel

Electric Pan Com

Per app

$199

Flag Pole

Flag Pole Com

Per app

$327

HVAC System Replacement

HVAC Commercial

Per app

$75

HVAC Replacement - Each Additional

Per app

$45

Misc. Inspection (1 Stop)

Misc Insp Com

Per app

$116

Misc. Inspection (Each Additional Inspection)

Per app

$75

Photovoltaic System - Up To 50 Kw.

Solar PV Com

Per app

$950

Photovoltaic System - Each Additional 25 Kw.

Per app

$175

Reroof - First 10 Squares

Reroof Com

Per app

$112

Reroof - Each Additional 10 Squares

Per app

$38

Sewer Repair

Sewer Repair

Per app

$75

Sign - Free Standing / Pole

Sign - Free/Pole

Per app

$285

Sign (Illuminated)

Sign - Illumin

Per app

$280

Sign (Non-Illuminated)

Sign - Non Illum

Per app

$180

Storage Racking (First Rack per type)

Storage Racking

Per app

$314

Storage Racking (Each additional 5 racks per type)

Per app

$157

Swimming Pool - Less Than 1000 Sf

Swim Pool Com <

Per app

$909

Swimming Pool - Over 1000 Sf

Swim Pool Com >

Per app

$1,132

Tank Installation

Tank Install

Per app

$180

Temp Power Pole

Temp Power Pole

Per app

$38

Water Heater Replacement - (Like For Like)

Water Heater

Per app

$75

Permit Administration Fee

Permit Admin

Flat

$70

OTHER/MISCELLANEOUS FEES

 

 

 

Board Of Appeals Application Fee

Board Appeals Ap

Per app

$1,487

Business License Inspection

Bus Lic Inspect

Per app

$90

Credit Card Processing Fee

Credit Card Proc

Per app

3% of all fees

Fee Deferral

Fee Deferral

Per app

$441

Fee For Additional Plan Checking And For Plan Revisions: (Actual Cost)

Add Plan Check

Per hour

$246

Misc. Inspection (Hourly Rate)

Misc Insp hr

Per hour

$149

Misc. Plan Check (Hourly Rate)

Misc PC hr

Per hour

$211

Permit Reissuance (Permits expired less than 1 Year with no changes to plans)

Permit Reissue

Per app

$327

Permit Extension / Application Extension (Subject to approval of Building Official)

Permit/App Exten

Per app

$63

Plan Retention / Technology Fee

Plan Retention

Per app

5% of permit fees

Reinspection Fee

Reinspection

Per unit

$110

Service Requested Outside Of Regular Working Hours (3 Hour Min)

Outside Reg Hour

Per app

$670

Special Inspection Application (For City List)

Spec Insp App

Per app

$211

For services required but not listed above (at the applicable hourly rate)

-

 

Hourly Rate

DEMOLITION PERMIT FEES

 

 

 

Small Residential (i.e. Patio Cover, Shed, etc.)

Small Res Demo

Per app

$50

Single Family Dwelling

Single Fam Demo

Per app

$110

Commercial Demolition

Commercial Demo

Per app

$320

Demolition Permits for Removal Of Underground Tanks

Demo Tank

Per app

$149

Multifamily Demolition

Multi Fam Demo

Per app

$2,925

HOURLY RATES BY POSITION

 

 

 

Chief Building Official

Hour by Position

 

$249

Senior Plan Check Engineer

 

$211

Building Inspector (I/II/Senior)

 

$149

Development Services Technician

 

$140

PLANNING DIVISION FEES APPLICABLE TO BUILDING PERMITS

 

 

 

Commercial, Multi-Family, Mixed

Plan Com M-F/Mix

Per app

$962

Commercial (Tenant Infill - Occupancy)

Plan Com TI-Occ

Per app

$210

Residential (Addition - Minor)

Plan Res Add

Per app

$93

Single Family Dwelling (Tract - Plot Plan)

Plan SFD Plot Pl

Per app

$43

Signs

Plan Signs

Per app

$140

Residential Master Plan - Plan Review

Plan MP Review

Per app

$392

Long Range Planning Surcharge (per square foot, all new construction)

Plan Long Range

Per Sq. Ft.

$0.20

MWELO Landscape Fee - Residential (if applicable)

MWELO Resi

MWELO Fee

11% of permit fee

MWELO Landscape Fee - Commercial (if applicable)

MWELO Com

MWELO Fee

5% of permit fee

ENGINEERING DIVISION FEES APPLICABLE TO BUILDING PERMITS

 

 

 

MS-4 Commercial - Per Acre

MS-4 Commercial

Per app

$2,918

MS-4 Residential - Per Lot

MS-4 Residential

Per app

$260

(Res. R2017-118; Res. R2016-196; Res. 2013-201; Res. R2012-181; Res. R2011-54; Res. 2010-149)

 

X. ENGINEERING FEE SCHEDULE
 

Fee Description

Fee

PLAN CHECK:

 

Plan Check 0-$500,000 Eng. Cost Est. (or 3% whichever is less)

$5,413

Plan Check $500,000 or greater (Engineers Cost Estimate)

1.02% of Engineers Cost Estimate

(Plan check after 3rd Submittal)

Hourly Rate

Final Parcel Map Processing Fee (Manteca Admin fee on top of County fee)

$479

Legal Description (easements, dedications, etc)

$638

Due diligence meeting (engineering support to entitled projects) (hourly - first hour/ no charge)

$197

Master Plans (per acre)

$95

CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:

 

Inspection 0-$500,000 Eng. Cost Est. (or 6% whichever is less)

$13,609

Inspection $500,000 or greater (Engineers Cost Estimate)

1.81% of Engineers Cost Estimate

Encroachment Permit (without traffic control)

$159

Encroachment Permit with Traffic Control Plan (one day of work)

$305

Encroachment Permit with Traffic Control Plan (each additional day)

$89

Driveway

$89

Curb/Gutter/Sidewalk - replace / repair (per 20 L.F. or portion thereof)

$29

Trench Cut (each) - per 25 L.F. or portion thereof (based on longest cut dimension), 5 ft depth max

$148

Trench Cut (each) - per 25 L.F. or portion thereof (based on longest cut dimension), >5 ft depth

$267

Temporary water permit

 

Transportation Permit - single

State Sets

Transportation Permit - annual

State Sets

Survey monument preservation (per Corner Record)

$102

Elevation Certificate Review

$303

Encroachment Permit (Special)

Deposit Required Based On Engineering Est.

PLANNING APPLICATION REVIEW:

 

Environmental Impact Report

$1,182

Planned Development

$472

SITE PLAN REVIEW:

 

Preliminary Staff Review (amount credited to project application)

$497

Site Plan Review - Res. 2-4 units

$1,273

Site Plan Review - Res. 5 or more units

$1,273

Site Plan Review - Non Residential - 5 acres or less

$1,273

Site Plan Review - Non-Residential. - Greater than 5 acres

$1,916

Minor Plan Modification/Minor Site Plan

$409

SPECIFIC PLANS:

 

Specific Plan/Master Plan Amendment Major

$3,244

Specific Plan/Master Plan Amendment Minor

$1,770

Specific Plan/Master Plan Prep. Processing & Review (Staff admin. Fee Only. Does not include consultant cost)

$11,399

SUBDIVISIONS:

 

Tentative Parcel Map

$788

Tentative Map 5-50 lots

$944

Tentative Map Greater than 50 lots

$1,068

USE PERMITS:

 

Conditional Use Permit

$267

Minor Use Permit

$267

Temporary Use Permit

$164

Lot line adjustment/Merger

$1,231

Certificate of Compliance

$886

MS - 4 Commercial - Per Acre

$3,016

MS - 4 Residential - Per Lot

$268

ENGINEERING PRODUCTIVE HOURLY RATES BY POSITION:

 

City Engineer

$197

Engineering Tech

$94

Assist Engineer

$124

Construction Inspector

$120

(Res. R2017-118; Res. R2016-196; Res. R2011-54; Res. 2010-149)

 

XI. FIRE PREVENTION FEES
 

Fee Description

Fee

Fire Prevention Plan Review

0.6%

Fire Prevention Inspection

0.6%

Fire Prevention Plan Review and Inspection (new commercial construction)

0.2% of new construction valuation

FIRE ITEMS INTAKE AND PROCESSING (Fire Fee):

 

Fire Alarm Systems (new or TI) (plan check & inspection):

 

1 - 50 Devices

$260

> 50 Devices

$371

Fire Suppression / Protection Sys.:

 

Residential - Custom

$60

Residential - Master Plan

$250

Fire Suppression / Protection Sys. - Commercial - New:

 

1 - 100 Fire sprinklers (plus any outside consultant fee)

$492

101 - 300 Fire sprinklers (plus any outside consultant fee)

$660

301 - 700 Fire sprinklers (plus any outside consultant fee)

$820

> 701 Fire sprinklers (plus any outside consultant fee)

$1,028

Fire Suppression / Protection Sys. - Commercial - TI:

 

1 - 10 Sprinklers

$141

11 - 50

$244

51 - 100

$315

> 100

$473

Automatic Fire Extinguishing System (Halon/Cleaning Agent, Hood and Duct, etc.)

$166

Fire Pump

$363

Tank Installation / Removal:

 

Underground Install

$92

Underground Remove

$72

Aboveground Install

$124

Aboveground Remove

$107

Solar Power Systems

 

Commercial

$50

OPERATIONAL PERMITS (* denotes a renewable permit):

 

Aerosol Products*

$87

Aircraft Refueling Vehicle*

$141

Aircraft Repair Hanger*

$141

Amusement Buildings

$101

Auto Wrecking Yard*

$117

Aviation Facilities*

$173

Battery Systems*

$45

Special events in assembly areas

$109

Carnivals / Fairs / Circus

$141

Combustible Dust Operations

$109

Combustible Materials Storage*

$77

Commercial Rubbish Handling Operation*

$77

Compressed Gases*

$60

Cryogenic Fluids*

$77

Cutting & Welding*

$69

Dry Cleaning Plants*

$205

Dust Producing Operation*

$109

Exhibits & Trade Shows

$109

Explosives or Blasting Agents*

$369

Fire Hydrants & Valves (flow tests)

$77

Fireworks Displays (4-hour min)

$744

Fireworks Pyrotechnic Special Effects (Theatrical/Movies) (4-hour min)

$1,502

Flammable & Combustible Liquids - Containers/Tanks*

$109

Flammable & Combustible Liquids - Underground Tanks*

$109

Flammable & Combustible Liquids*

$109

Fumigation or Thermal Insecticide Fogging

$13

Hazardous Materials (storage/use)*

$112

High-Piled Storage*

$77

Hot Work, Cutting & Grinding Operations

$45

Impairments (planned) - Fire Protection Systems

$211

Knox Box - Residential*

$28

Liquefied Petroleum Gases (store, use, handle, dispense)*

$156

Lumber Yards*

$78

Misc. Combustible Storage > 2,500 cf*

$77

Motor Vehicle Fuel Dispensing Station*

$77

Open Fires - (includes recreational & bonfires)

$92

Organic Coatings*

$124

Parade Floats

$13

Private Fire Hydrants 1-10 hydrants

$77

Private Fire Hydrants each additional

$10

Refrigeration Equipment*

$77

Repair Garages*

$45

Spraying or Dipping*

$77

Tents, Canopies or Membrane Structures < 400 square feet

$34

Tents, Canopies or Membrane Structures > 400 square feet

$45

Tire Storage*

$141

Waste Handling Facilities*

$141

Welding / Cutting Operations*

$45

Wood Products*

$60

Operating without required permit (x2 permit fee)

 

Operational Fees (Annual):

 

State Mandated Inspections

 

Apartment/Hotels/Motels

 

5 - 25 (units)

$71

26 - 50

$92

51 - 100

$135

101 - 200

$167

201 or more

$199

Day Care - Commercial (I-4/E)

$99

Day Care - Residential (R-3)

$99

Medical Facility (I-2.1)

$154

Schools (E)

$338

Hospitals (I-2)

$803

Senior Housing Facility/Elderly Care/Residential Care (R-4)

 

9 - 49 (occupants)

$138

50 or above

$170

Halfway Houses (I-1)

 

Less than 25 (occupants)

$74

26 or more

$106

Places of Assembly- (A-3)

 

50 - 300 (Occupants)

$109

301 - 1,000

$130

1,001 or more

$173

Special Hazard*

 

Liquid Petroleum Gas (More than 500 liquid gallons)

$156

Motor Vehicle Fuel Dispensing Station

$77

Refrigeration Materials

$77

User Fees:

 

Carnival and Fairs

$141

Christmas Tree Lots

$74

Hydrant Flow/Hydraulic Testing per hydrant

$77

Productive Hourly Rates by Position:

 

Fire Marshal (sworn)

$248

Fire Inspector (civilian)

$128

Admin

$38

Fire Inspector / Plan Checker (civilian)

$158

(Res. R2016-196; Res. 2013-201; Res. R2011-54; Res. 2010-149)

 

XII. PARKS AND RECREATION REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
 

Fee Description

Fee

PLAN CHECK:

 

Plan Check 0 - $500,000 Eng Cost Est

$1,138

Plan Check $500,001 - $1,000,000 Eng Cost Est

$2,065

Plan Check $1,000,001 and greater Eng Cost Est

$3,969

(Plan check assumes 3 submittals, additional submittals will be charged hourly)

CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:

 

Inspection 0 - $500,000 Eng Cost Est

$669

Inspection $500,001 - $1,000,000 Eng Cost Est

$1,072

Inspection $1,000,001 and greater Eng Cost Est

$1,774

SITE PLAN REVIEW:

 

Preliminary Site Plan Review

$370

Site Plan Review - Res. 2 - 4 units

$300

Site Plan Review - Res. 5 - 15 units

$300

Site Plan Review - Res. 16 or more units

$300

Site Plan Review - Comm./Ind. One acre or less

$300

Site Plan Review - Comm./Ind. 1.1 - 12 acres

$300

Site Plan Review - Comm./Ind. 12.1 acres or more

$300

Minor Plan Modification

$300

SUBDIVISIONS:

 

Tentative Parcel Map

$499

Tentative Map 5 - 50 lots

$499

Tentative Map 51 - 100 lots

$499

Tentative Map 101 lots or more

$499

(Res. R2016-196; Res. 2010-149)

 

XIII. PLANNING FEE SCHEDULE
 

Fee Description

Fee

ANNEXATION:

 

Annexation

$10,300

LAFCO Fees — ref. LAFCO fee schedule

 

Prezone/Rezone 0-5 acres

$9,295

Prezone/Rezone greater than 5 acres

$15,605

APPEALS:

 

Appeal (applicant or non-applicant)

$3,083

BUILDING PLAN CHECK & INSPECTION:

 

Commercial, Multi-Family, Mixed

$1,038

Commercial (TI - Occupancy)

$249

Residential (Addition - Minor)

$111

Single Family Dwelling (Tract - Plot Plan)

$48

Residential Master Plan

$408

DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:

 

Development Agreement

$3,383

DA Amendment (Administrative Review)

$1,973

DA Amendment (Legislative Review)

$2,821

DA Annual Review

$1,973

ENVIRONMENTAL:

 

Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program - EIR Only

$4,775

Environmental Impact Report (Staff admin fee only. Does not include Consultant cost)

$22,532

Initial Study-Negative Declaration (Staff admin fee only. Does not include Consultant cost)

$14,489

Initial Study-Negative Declaration (Staff prepared. Does not include Consultant cost of supporting studies)

$21,737

Environmental Determination

$557

GENERAL PLAN:

 

General Plan Amendment

$13,172

MISC:

 

Business License Planning Review Fee

$73

Certificate of Compliance

$532

Condo Conversion

$9,836

Home Occupation Permit

$109

Lot Line Adjustment/Reversion to Acreage

$2,200

Williamson Act Cancellation

$13,724

Large Family Daycare

$146

PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:

 

Planned Development 0-10 Acres

$12,525

Planned Development greater than 10 acres

$14,184

PD Amendment (Administrative Decision)

$3,927

PD Amendment (Legislative Decision)

$7,834

LONG RANGE PLANNING:

 

Long Range Planning Surcharge (Per SF, New Construction)

$0.20

Long Range Planning Surcharge (Per SF, Commercial New Construction)

$0.20

SEWER ALLOCATION:

 

Point Rating Application Residential

$1,022

SIGN PERMITS:

 

Subdivision Temporary Sign Permit

$312

Master Sign Program

$1,630

Major Sign Permit

$166

Temporary Sign Permit

$85

Portable Sign Permit

$85

SITE PLAN REVIEW:

 

Preliminary Staff Review (amount credited to project application)

$1,011

Site Plan Review - Residential 2-4 units

$5,423

Site Plan Review - Residential 5 or more units

$9,863

Site Plan Review - Non-Residential 5 acres or less

$7,320

Site Plan Review - Non-Residential greater than 5 acres

$11,991

Minor Plan Modification / Minor Site Plan

$3,792

SPECIFIC PLANS:

 

Specific Plan / Master Plan Amendment Major

$8,481

Specific Plan / Master Plan Amendment Minor

$5,683

Specific Plan / Master Plan (Staff admin. fee only. Does not include Consultant cost)

$34,056

STORAGE CONTAINERS PERMITS:

 

Permanent Storage Container Permit

$166

Temporary Storage Container Permit

$85

SUBDIVISIONS:

 

Tentative Parcel Map

$5,420

Tentative Subdivision Map 5-50 lots

$12,181

Tentative Subdivision Map greater than 50 lots

$14,592

Tentative Map Extension

$3,521

USE PERMITS:

 

Conditional Use Permit

$9,247

Minor Use Permit

$3,507

Temporary Use Permit

$404

ZONING:

 

Minor Zone Modification

$2,708

Variance

$10,726

Zoning Text Amendment

$11,573

Zoning Research Letter

$219

ENGINEERING PLAN CHECK AND INSPECTION:

 

Final map/improvement plan review

$930

For services required but not listed above (at the applicable hourly rate)

 

Consultant fees at cost plus 15% admin fee

 

PLANNING PRODUCTIVE HOURLY RATES BY POSITION:

 

CD Director

 

Planning Manager

$271

Senior Planner

$240

Associate Planner

$224

Assistant Planner

$166

Admin Assistant III

$146

(Ord. O2018-11 § 1; Res. R2017-118; Res. R2016-196; Res. R2011-54; Res. 2004-538)